


INTRODUCTION
Not too long ago it was common to meet the view expressed by Western
intellectuals that: “*The oriental mind is quite different from ours.
The oriental mind has no sense of critical rationalism, no sense of
reality* .”[^1] These are the words of E. F. Gautier, professor at the
University of Algiers and a leading ideologue of colonialism who
promoted historical untruths and racist arguments in order to justify
and legitimate France’s empire in North Africa. Gautier went so far as
to denigrate Ibn Khaldu\>n, the founder of the science of history, by
denying him any intellectual originality, since Arabs could not have any
critical sense of history: “*This oriental had a sharp, critical mind.
In other words, he had a western sense of history* .”[^2]

At the present time such discredited untruths have been replaced by
another false dichotomy intended to divide cultures and perpetuate the
division between West and East: one that tells us that whereas the
western world is disposed towards rational logical thought and
materialism, the East is disposed towards intuitive forms of knowledge
and spirituality. This misperception only recycles the 19th century
dogma voiced by European historical criticism of religions that the
Oriental or Semitic mind is incapable of the higher reaches of rational
thinking exemplified by Hellenic and Western civilization. These views
are rooted in the inversion of a deeper reality: that over the past
several centuries the West cultivates the expansion of
Knowledge-information severed from any encompassing metaphysical
worldview, while the East cultivates Understanding and Being within the
frame of permanent Values and transcendent truth.

But even this reality is changing beyond recognition in today’s
globalizing era that universalizes Western cultural preferences and
forces particular religious traditions to find legitimization from
within the dominant Western framework of values and terms of reference.
The fact that material and power exchanges in political and economic
arenas are increasingly being displaced by symbolic exchanges—we
mean***value-based relationships*** —is of the utmost significance
especially for religion. Consumerist globalizing forces seek to remove
the ‘irrational’ influence of religion upon society by denying or
marginalizing the relevance of the spiritual, by disrupting the
solidarity of families and communities, and above all by eroding the
hierarchical values of revealed knowledge systems. Certainly the
supposed ‘rational / intuitive’ divide represents a significant element
in this process of inverting values.

So the question of***the actual role and place of reason and rationality
within the religion of Islam*** becomes ever more pressing for our world
today. This is true not merely because Muslim societies and governments
are seeking to acquire the methodologies, technology and science of the
West and its particular ‘culture-of-knowledge’, in a catch-up
development race they can never win. Nor has this question simply become
a ‘hot issue’ in the wake of the so-called “martyrdom operation” on
September 11th 2001 sparking the ‘Global War on Terrorism’ and the
projection of U.S. hegemony as the world’s rogue super-state, with Islam
and Muslims portrayed as fanatic and irrational. But the urgency and
seriousness of the question concerning***the authentic Islamic
understanding of reason*** now

assumes the critical mass of a vital central issue between Muslims
themselves in the form of an internal dilemma or contradiction.


