


DEFORMIST THINKING
The reason for this dilemma is that a strong trend rejecting critical
methods of analysis, contextual thinking, and rational modes of
discourse has spread within many Muslim societies today. This trend
promotes an**anti-intellectual minimalism** , and is now often referred
to by the label “Salafi” or “Salifist”—yet it may fairly be described as
the ‘**Deformist** ’ trend. [The venerable term*Salafi\>* [^3] should
properly be reserved to refer to Muslims advocating social and
intellectual reform and renewal, not intellectual stagnation and
reactionary imitation.] The Deformers’ response to the plight of modern
Muslims is reactive and politicized, rather than rational and critical,
and receives financial and ideological backing from several Muslim
regimes. They privilege doctrinal conformity and uniformity of thought,
for their worldview and way of speaking and thinking is rooted in a very
narrowly defined traditionalist past. They are uncompromising in
condemning the diversity of views, broad range of thinking and differing
levels of rational discourse found in the wide variety of intellectual
Islamic disciplines cultivated in the past.

The intent of the Deformists is to monopolize and control the thinking
of Muslims through a dogmatic tyranny that is in reality a serious abuse
of authority. The single most distinctive feature of this mindset is
their ignorance of the essential Islamic insight taught by the Qur’a\>n
concerning the***hierarchical*** ***scale of knowledge*** that varies in
degree of certainty and grasp of truth. Corresponding with this vertical
scale of knowledge is the***hierarchy of human knowers*** differentiated
by their increasing capacity of attainment and intensity of
understanding.[^4] Instead, the Deformists actively work to undermine
the legitimate authority of Islam’s intellectual heritage and to
trivialize its potential to provide guidance for thoughtful Muslims.
They impoverish thinking Muslims by stripping them of a powerful weapon
for combating the inverted values of secular materialism and pervasive
effects of globalizing culture.

It is as if these intellectual minimalists were telling us:*The Muslim
mind has no need of critical rationalism!* This internal deformation
across a broad range of Muslim societies is the most important factor,
coupled with the passivity and heedlessness of most Muslims, for forcing
the issue of***the concept and the role of reason and rationality within
Islam*** onto the forefront of Muslim concerns. Indeed, the question of
Islam and rationality has the greatest significance for re-constructing
and reforming Islamic civilization in order to ensure its future
relevance and viability as a world force for peace, stability and
material and spiritual growth. But here we face a subtle and often
overlooked point: Islamic teachings and thinkers conceived of
‘rationality’ in ways that vary from the present western conception,
employing modes of conceptualization and discourse that at times depart
radically from those now accepted by the West. The great irony is that
almost all Muslims today have forgotten this and unconsciously adopt the
prevailing western conception of ‘reason’ as their conceptual default or
format, oblivious of their own legacy and teachings on this central
feature of human existence.

There are many causes for this failure to cultivate and nourish the
critical traditions of Islamic rationality among today’s political and
religious elites within Muslim societies, some internal and others
external. One important factor involves the unthinking reception of
types of Islamic discourse among a semi-educated constituency of Muslims
heedless of the abuse of Islamic authority operated by religious or
educational leaders uprooted from any recognizable historical
intellectual tradition. More pervasive in Muslim popular culture is the
manifestation and acceptance of the stifling authoritarian Deformist
discourse that seeks to enforce a type of narrow ‘intellectual
despotism’ and consciously attempts to strangle any recourse to the
intellectual legacy of Islamic rationalist disciplines.

Furthermore, the fragile and still marginalized attempts among certain
circles and isolated efforts by individuals to promote a critical
understanding facilitating an authentic re-appropriation and
transformation of Islam’s legacy of faith-rationality and rational
spirituality, still awaits the achievement of a critical mass with
enough leverage to affect the popular culture of Muslim societies in all
their varieties of social, educational, economic and political
conditions. Nor can such attempts be said to enjoy truly effective
financial and institutional support from the governments of leading
Muslim states, the few existing exceptions only serving to prove the
rule.[^5] More often than not, nurturing these efforts institutionally
falls prey to co-optation by state powers and cliques (the paymasters),
while they also tend to suffer deflection towards the prevailing
cultural limitations of specific social identities or parochial ethnic
preferences having a tenuous connection with Islam. Nevertheless, there
are some promising signs with the increasing appearance of intellectual
projects among Muslim intellectuals in the western diaspora, including
recent journals such as *Islam and Science* in Canada, and *Transcendent
Philosophy* in the UK.


