


REASON AND RATIIONALISM
T here are several views on how to understand or define ‘reason’ and
‘rationalism’. In the ancient and medieval worlds whether in Asia or
Europe, ‘reason’ was often defined in practical terms as an innate trait
or faculty of the person; or in a more theoretical vein as a non-spatial
‘substance’ belonging to the immaterial realm of existence, while at the
same time forming part of the human**soul** with the capacity for
perceiving knowledge and exercising cognition. As***an*** ***avenue for
knowledge and a cognitive function*** , reason involves the distinction
between innate ideas or conceptions (either as ‘intuition’, or as inborn
direct necessary knowledge)**,** and that of acquired or demonstrative
knowledge—including both sensory experience, revealed guidance, as well
as formal rational procedures for ascertaining truth. Furthermore,
reason was always intimately linked with the affective and intentional
reality of ethical action at the level of conscience and will; and it
was deemed central to self-awareness, personhood, and consciousness.

In contemporary understanding ‘reason’ is most often defined as a
‘**mental faculty** ’, namely a faculty of the human ‘mind’ having a
distinct**capacity for knowledge** —in contrast to sense experience.
This ‘mental faculty’ conception of reason is at the root of the
opposition between Rationalism and Empiricism, since the latter gives
priority to sensory data. ‘Science’ proceeds from empirical observation
and measurement, while its truth claims are generally seen to adhere to
a canon of formal rational procedures yielding probability in most
cases. Current notions of reason and mind almost always embrace
a**physicalistic** ‘**brain** ’**conception** ,[^6] as in the science of
cognitive psychology based on empirical bio-genetic and
neurophysiological studies. One major trend in current cognitive
psychology stresses the biological basis of cognition by studying the
neurophysiology of meaning-perception in knowing beings.[^7]

It needs to be emphasized that these current notions of reason derive
from the period of the Enlightenment and from Continental Rationalism,
and they reflect a confidence in the unbridled powers of the human
intellect (viewed in terms of ‘brain-mind’) as a source of knowledge.
Intellect was then conceived of in opposition to ‘faith’ and uncritical
acceptance of traditional revealed authority, as well as to superstition
and magic. The Eighteenth-century European thinkers of the Enlightenment
opposed the traditional Christianity of the institutionalized Church by
rejecting ‘non-rational’ factors of traditional spiritual authority and
faith, and they viewed reason as contrasted with ‘feeling’ or ‘emotion’.
Modern notions of reason and of rationalism arose out of this spirit of
anti-supernaturalism, being an anti-religious and anti-clerical movement
of utilitarian outlook stressing historical and scientific arguments
against theism. Thus, the notion of ‘**soul** ’ is now considered
problematic due to its spiritualistic connotations, and the term
‘**mind** ’ has replaced ‘soul’ in current western discourse.Presently
the term ‘rationalism’ appears on the way to being replaced by
‘humanism’; while the term ‘irrational’ conveys a (negative) connotation
of ‘spiritual’ or ‘supernatural’ being linked to transcendent Values.


