


FAITH-IN-REASON
In contrast, classical Islamic notions of ‘intelligence’ or ‘reason’
embraced the faith-induced dimension of knowledge yielding conviction
and moral-volition in the operation of human intelligence, being
intimately joined with its**cognitive** or perceiving-knowing dimension.
This ‘**practical** ’ ethico-religious dimension of reason has a close
connection with ethical endeavor and moral-volition, namely the faculty
of**conation** . Ethics is the domain of Practical Reason or
‘prudential-mind’ (*‘aql amali\>* ), involving the faculty or power
of**conation** (volition, will-power): the impulse or striving to change
one’s behavior and act in accordance with the directives of both inner
conscience and outer guidance or divinely revealed imperatives. The
centrality of ‘intelligence-reason’ (*al-‘aql* ) for Islamic Ethics
(*akhla\>q* ) unfolds out of the fundamental insight that the human
volitional impulse arises within us prompted by our own understanding,
and directed by the reception of divine guidance from without. As one of
its most basic functions, ‘intelligence-reason’ energizes the efficacy
of ‘**conscience** ’, thereby possessing a**conative** or exertive force
since without the native intelligence created in us by God no ethical
response is possible. This crucial insight is ultimately responsible for
the great emphasis placed on**reason** as the condition for ‘moral
obligation’ (*takli\>f* ) among the Mu‘tazili\> and Ash‘ari\>
theologians.

Even more significantly, the human reception of divine guidance mediated
by revelation depends ultimately upon the efficacy and integrity of our
reasoning-principle or intelligence. Without their**divine provision of
reason** , humans would be incapable of comprehending and properly
responding to God’s guidance. And the**more abundant is an individual’s
native endowment of reason** , then the greater is the possibility for
the individual to attain a larger magnitude of understanding and thereby
realize a**higher level of response** . The unfolding of the manifold
dimensions of Islamic meditations on the role of reason in religious and
spiritual thought and experience flow in one way or another from this
master idea.

This practical ethico-religious dimension was harmoniously integrated in
the Muslim mind with the ‘**theoretical** ’ domain of reason, where the
employment of a variety of cogitative processes of mentation and both
informal and formal reasoning techniques were normatively accepted as
valid and necessary methods of attaining true knowledge (whether certain
or probable) as well as for ascertaining proper doctrinal conviction,
upright conduct and authoritative binding practice. The prevailing
normative view in Islamic civilization was always that
of**faith-in-reason** , while also simultaneously recognizing
the**limits-of-reason** . Significantly, the very term for
‘reason-intelligence’ in Arabic,*al-‘aql* , has at the core of its basic
meaning the practical idea of ‘restraining’ and ‘binding’—of holding
one’s self back from blameworthy conduct—being an interior self-imposed
limit.

The widespread misconception that the conflict between ‘Reason and
Revelation’ or between Science and Faith-based traditional authority
experienced by Western-European and the subsequent contemporary Western
civilization, must also have been experienced within the preceding
Islamic civilization, should be laid to rest.[^15] (We may add that the
very same

misconception is behind Western puzzlement over why Muslims have not
become more secularized.) This unwarranted assumption has in the past
led to patently wrong assessments of Muslim thought and experience, and
continues to foster genuine misunderstanding concerning the real nature
of Islamic religious and intellectual traditions. This miscomprehension
arose partly from the Euro-centric worldview of Western imperialism
inherited by post-colonial globalizing culture, and partly out of
entrenched ignorance and explicit hostility.

It is no exaggeration to assert that the most significant force today
consciously opposing the all-pervading flow of secular values diffused
by materialist global culture, now mediated in particular by the
crescendo of United States’ military and mercantile hegemony, is that of
Islam. Three recent United States-led wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, and
the ongoing ‘Global War on Terrorism’ amply testify to this. However,
this ignorance is not unique to Westerners, for the majority of Muslims
today are woefully heedless of the depth and scope of authentic Islamic
teachings on the hierarchical scale and authoritative validity of
reason. It is imperative that thinking Muslims work to reclaim their
precious legacy of rational and spiritual experience and teachings, and
express it in conceptually adequate language capable of meeting the
demands of their contemporary social realities.


