80. Sins
========

Allah, the Wise, has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَكُلاًّ أَخَذْنَا بِذَنبِه‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So each We punished for his sin”***[^1]

Imam Sadiq (peace be upon him) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ليس من عرق يضرب و لا نكبة و لا صداع و لا مرض الا بذنب
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“No vein is cut, nor is there (any affliction by means of) adversity,
headache or sickness except as a result of sins”***[^2]

Short Explanation
-----------------

Committing sins is a disease, but ignorance with respect to faults that
result in sins is graver than the sins themselves.

Considering sins to be trivial and insignificant is one of the greatest
sins. If an offence is related to God like one, who does not offer his
prayers, it is God, Who shall deal with this person as per His
discretion. But if it is related to the people, things can become really
difficult. This is because if forgiveness is not procured from the
offended one, things shall become all the more difficult on the Day of
Judgment.

The treatment of a sin commences by means of repentance and seeking of
forgiveness and concludes by resolving not to commit it again.

If the Shaitaan happens to tempt a person into committing a sin, he
should immediately repent and resolve to refrain from such acts in the
future in order that the effects of that sin do not get imprinted in his
heart.

1) The Banishment of the Sinners
--------------------------------

There lived in the tribe of Bani Israel a licentious and sinning person,
whose sinning and evil ways had left the people disturbed and
exasperated as a result of which they turned to God to help them. God
revealed to Prophet Musa to banish the youth from the city in order that
the inhabitants of the city do not get caught in the punishment ordained
for him.

When Prophet Musa banished him from the city, he proceeded to another
city. It was ordered that he should be removed from that city too. This
time, he sought refuge in a cave and fell sick with none to care for him
in his state of sickness.

Prostrating before God, he wept in repentance of his sins and loneliness
and beseeched: *O’ God! Forgive me! Had my wife and children been here,
they would have wept at my wretchedness and desolation. O’ God! You, Who
have separated me from my father, mother and wife, do not burn me in
Your fire (as a punishment) for my sins.*

Subsequent to this supplication, God created angels in the form of his
father, mother, wife and children and sent them to him. The youth was
delighted to see his near ones near him in the grave and eventually
died.

God revealed to Prophet Musa: *Our friend has died in such and such
place. Go, give him ablutions and bury him.* When Musa reached the
place, he found the person to be the same corrupt youth and so said to
God: *O’ Lord! Is he not the same sinning youth whom You had* *ordered
me to expel from the city?*

God revealed: *O’ Musa! I exhibited Mercy towards him. Due to his
weeping, lamentations, sickness, separation from his land and relatives,
confession of his sins and seeking forgiveness, I have forgiven
him.*[^3]

2) Prophet Isa and Praying for the Rains
----------------------------------------

Prophet Isa (peace be upon him) and his companions came out of the city
and into the deserts to pray for the rains. There he (peace be upon him)
said to them: *Those of yo, who have committed sins should return to the
city.* Hearing this instruction all of them returned back except one
person. Turning to him, Isa (peace be upon him) said: *Have you not
committed any sin?* He replied: *I don’t remember having committed any
except for one instance when, as I stood engaged in prayers, a lady
passed by before me. I looked at her and my eyes continued to follow
her. But as soon as she had left, I had thrust my finger into the eyes
and, pulling it out, had thrown it in the direction where the lady had
gone.*

Isa (peace be upon him) said: *Pray and I shall say Aameen.* He prayed
and the rains began to pour.[^4]

3) The Reason for this Sin
--------------------------

Regarding this sin, i.e. female infanticide in the Arabian Peninsula, it
has been recorded that:

Once, during the reign of a king, one of the tribes rose up in revolt
against him. In order to crush the rebellion, he dispatched an army. The
army marched upon them, plundering their property and taking their
ladies as captives, while the males fled from the scene of carnage.

When the ladies were brought before the king he ordered his soldiers to
take one of them for themselves.

Meanwhile, the men of the tribe who had taken to flight regretted their
action and said to their poets: *Go before the king and recite verses,
which indicate our repentance and speak of our apologies.*

The poets, arriving before the king, conveyed their message to him and
requested him to return the ladies to the tribe.

The king said: *We have distributed the ladies amongst the men. We have
left the choice upon them whether or not they wish to return with you.
If they desire, they can return and if they desire, they can remain
here.*

Qais Ibn A’asim had a sister, who had been given to a strong and
handsome youth. She refused to return saying: *I shall not return to my
tribe.*

However much Qais, who was one of the elders of the tribe, pleaded and
requested, she refused to give in, whereupon he blurted: *Daughters do
not have loyalty in them. From now on, whoever gives birth to a daughter
should bury her alive*. It was from this time on that this act turned
into a custom.[^5]

4) The Expiation of Sins
------------------------

One of the Prophets of Bani Israel happened to pass by a person, who had
died under a collapsed wall and who was in a state such that half of his
body that lay protruding from under the wall had been torn apart by the
wild beasts.

The Prophet passed that city and entered another one. There he witnessed
that one of the elders of that city had died; shrouded with a brocaded
cloth, with incense and amber imparting a beautiful fragrance, his
lifeless body was placed in an expensive coffin and a large crowd had
turned up to attend his funeral procession!

The Prophet said: *O’ Lord! You are the Just and Wise, and never approve
of injustice. Why is it* *that the person, who had never been tainted
with polytheism, should die in that manner while this person, who had
never worshipped You, should die in this fashion?*

God revealed to him: *It is just as you have stated, I am the Wise and
never approve of injustice. However, that servant had some sins in his
name and I desired that this death should serve as expiation for his
sins so that he comes before Me, purified. As for that person, he had
some good deeds in his account and I desired to reward him in this world
so that when he comes before Me, he should not have any good deeds with
him.*[^6]

5) Hameed Ibn Qahtabah Taai
---------------------------

Abdullah Ibn Bazzaaz narrates:

Hameed and I were known to each other. One day at the time of Dhuhr of
the month of Ramadhan and dressed to travel, I went to his place. When
he was informed that I had come to meet him, he asked someone to bring
me before him.

Entering the house, I found him inside. Greeting him, I seated myself,
whereupon food was brought before me. He washed his hands and ordered me
to do likewise so that we could have our food. I thought to myself: *I
am in a state of fast.*

He said to me: *Eat the food.*

I said: *O’ Chief! It is the month of Ramadhan and I am not sick (so as
to be exempted from fasting).* Hearing this, he began to weep and
proceeded to eat his food.

When he had finished, I enquired: *Why did you weep while eating your
food?*

He explained:

One night during the time when Haroon al-Rashid, the Abbasid Caliph,
ruled over the city of Toos, he summoned me. When I had arrived before
him, he raised his head and looking at me, said: *“In what measure do
you obey the Caliph?”* I said: *“I obey him with my life and wealth”.*
He then lowered his head and permitted me to return.

Hardly had I returned to my house when the Caliph’s messenger arrived
and said: *The Caliph wants to see you.*

I thought to myself: *“Perhaps he has decided to kill me”* and so
recited: *Inna Lillahi Wa Inna Ilaihi Raajiu’n.*

When I had presented myself before him, he raised his head and asked:
*How much is your obedience to your Caliph?*

I replied: *With my life, wealth, wife and children.*

Hearing this he smiled and granted me permission to return home. I had
hardly returned home before the Caliph’s messenger arrived once again
and said: *The Caliph summons you.*

This time when I came before him, he asked: *How much do you obey your
king?*

I replied: *By my life, wealth, wife, children and religion!*

This time the Caliph laughed and said: *Take this sword and comply with
what this slave has to tell you.*

The slave led me to a house whose door was locked. He opened the door
and I entered inside with him. Looking around I witnessed that it
contained three rooms, which were locked, and one well which lay in the
middle of the courtyard.

When the slave opened one of the rooms, I observed that it contained
twenty people of the *saadaat* (descendants of the Holy Prophet (peace
be upon him and his holy progeny)), young and old, fettered and in
chains.

The slaved instructed: *Kill them.*

As per his instruction, I killed all of them – the *saadaat* and the
children of Ali (peace be upon him) and Fatimah (peace be upon her).

When I had killed them, the slave pushed all their bodies into the well.
He then opened the door to the second room and brought out another
twenty *saadaat* to the mouth of the well and I killed them too.

Then opening the third room, he brought another group of twenty and I
began to sever their heads from their bodies. I had severed the heads of
nineteen persons from this group, when the last person, an old man with
overgrown hair (due to his protracted stay in prison) said to me: *O’
Evil one! May you be accursed! What pretext would you have on the Day of
Judgment when you shall stand before our grandfather the Holy Prophet
(peace be upon him and his holy progeny) after having killed sixty of
his children.*

Hearing this, a sudden tremor ran through my arms and body. The slave
looked at me and said: *Kill him.* I killed him and the slave hurled his
body into the well.

O’ Abdullah! After having killed sixty persons from the descendants of
the Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his holy progeny) how can
prayers and fasts ever be of any benefit to me? I am certain that my
abode is the fire of Hell.[^7]

[^1]: Holy Qur'an, ch. Al-A’nkabut (29), vs. 40.

[^2]: Jaame' al-Sa'adaat, vol. 3, pg. 47.

[^3]: U’nwaan al-Kalaam, pg. 87; Jaame’ al-Akhbaar.

[^4]: Shanidani-ha-e-Taareekh, pg. 22; Mahajjah al-Baidhaa, vol. 1, pg.
299.

[^5]: Jaame’ al-Nurain, pg. 78.

[^6]: Namunah-e-Ma’arif, vol. 5, pg. 299; Al-Kafi, vol. 2, pg. 288.

[^7]: Kaifar-e-Kirdaar, vol. 1, pg. 302; U’yoon Akhbaar al-Ridha, vol.
1, pg. 109.


