Verse 159 - 160
===============

33

(159) إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَكْتُمُونَ مَا أَنزَلْنَا مِنَ الْبَيِّنَاتِ
وَالْهُدَى مِن بَعْدِ مَا بَيَّنَّاهُ لِلنَّاسِ فِي الْكِتَابِ أُولَئِكَ
يَلعَنُهُمُ اللّهُ وَيَلْعَنُهُمُ اللَّاعِنُونَ

(160) إِلاَّ الَّذِينَ تَابُواْ وَأَصْلَحُواْ وَبَيَّنُواْ فَأُوْلَئِكَ
أَتُوبُ عَلَيْهِمْ وَأَنَا التَّوَّابُ الرَّحِيمُ

159. " Verily, those who conceal what We have revealed of the clear
evidence and the guidance, after We made it clear for mankind in the
Book; they are those that Allah does curse them and (also) curse them
(all) those who curse (such ones) ." 160." Except those who repent, and
amend (themselves) and make manifest (the truth) . These it is unto whom
I turn (mercifully; and I am the Oft-Returning (to mercy) , the Merciful
(to people) ."

**Occasion of Revelation:**

Jalal-id-Din Suyuty has narrated in his book, 'Asbab-un-Nuzul, from
Ibn-Abbas that several Muslim people, such as Ma'ath-ibn-Jabal,
Sa'd-ibn-Ma'ath, and Kharijat-ibn-Ziyd asked scholars of the Jews
several questions about some subjects in the Torah (which concerned the
advent of the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) ) . They concealed the reality of the
subject and, (in their answers) , did not refer to the main idea. The
above verse was revealed about them.(1)

**Commentary:**

In the occasion of revelation it was mentioned that the addressees in
this verse were the scholars of the Jews, but the meaning is general and
never limits the concept of the verse to them only. It covers all
whosoever that conceal the truth.

This holy verse intensively blames such people, saying:

(1) Lubab-un-Nuqul fi 'Asbab-in-Nuzul, p. 22

34

" Verily, those who conceal what We have revealed of the clear evidence
and the guidance, after We made it clear for mankind in the Book; they
are those that Allah does curse them and (also) curse them (all) those
who curse (such ones) ." By this verse, we realize that both Allah and
the servants of Allah and angels totally hate this action. In other
words, concealing the fact is an action that stimulates the wrath of all
adherents of truth from jinn, mankind, and angels.

What a treachery is greater than that the scholars, for the sake of
their personal interest, hide the Messages and evidences of Allah, which
are His deposits, and cause people to go astray. The phrase: " after We
made it clear for mankind in the Book;" indicates that such persons, in
fact, attempt to spoil the struggles of prophets and the devotions of
the godly people alongside the path of the propagation of the Messages
of Allah. This action is really a great sin so that none can ignore.

\* \* \* \*

The Qur'an, as a book of guidance, never blocks up the way of return
and does not shut the windows of hope to people. It never makes people
despair for the Mercy of Allah, however much they are sinful. Hence, in
the next verse, it shows the way of repentance of this great sin, thus:
" Except those who repent, and amend (themselves) and make manifest (the
truth) . These it is unto whom I turn (mercifully) ; and I am the
Oft-Returning (to mercy) , the Merciful (to people) ."

The phrase: " and I am the Oft-Returning (to mercy) , the Merciful (to
people) ," regarding that it has occurred next to the phrase: " These it
is unto whom I turn (mercifully) " refers to the particular affection
and kindness of Allah unto the repentant ones. It says if they return,
Allah will return, too. If they return to the obedience and servitude,
and reveal the fact, Allah will return to Mercy and again shower over
them the blessings He had ceased.

35

(161) إِنَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا وَمَاتُوا وَهُمْ كُفَّارٌ أُولَئِكَ
عَلَيْهِمْ لَعْنَةُ اللّهِ وَالْمَلآئِكَةِ وَالنَّاسِ أَجْمَعِينَ

(162) خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا لاَ يُخَفَّفُ عَنْهُمُ الْعَذَابُ وَلاَ هُمْ
يُنظَرُونَ

(163) وَإِلَهُكُمْ إِلَهٌ وَاحِدٌ لاَّ إِلَهَ إِلاَّ هُوَ الرَّحْمَنُ
الرَّحِيمُ

161. " Verily those who reject faith, and die while they are infidels,
upon them shall be the curse of Allah, (of) the angels, and (of) mankind
all together."

162. " Abiding therein forever, the torment shall not be lightened for
them nor shall they be given respite."

163. " And your God is One God. There is no god but He; He is the
Beneficent, the Merciful."

**Commentary:**

It was described in the former verses that if the people who conceal
the fact repent and express the reality, they will be involved in the
mercy and grace of Allah. But in this verse they are warned that if they
do not repent and remain in the state of infidelity until they die, they
will be in the same situation that Allah, angels and all people curse
them. Of course, the repentance that occurs before death is accepted,
but the repentance at the moment of death is not helpful.

At first, it says:

" Verily those who reject faith, and die while they are infidels, upon
them shall be the curse of Allah, (of) the angels, and (of) mankind all
together." This group of infidels, similar to the aforementioned group,
are involved in the curse of Allah, angels, and people, too. The
difference is that this group, because of their continuous insistence on
being faithless, can not have a way to return to the right path.

36

\* \* \* \*

Then, it adds:

" Abiding therein forever, the torment shall not be lightened for them
nor shall they be given respite."

\* \* \* \*

Since the principle of the Faith in theism can put an end to all these
misfortunes, in the last verse of this group of verses, it says:

" And your God is One God. ..."

Again, to emphasize more, it says:

"... There is no god but He;..."

Then, at the end of the verse, as the reason for that statement, it
adds: "...He is the Beneficent, the Merciful."

Yes, only the One, Whose general mercy encompasses all creatures, on
one side, and on the other side, Whose specific Mercy reaches the true
believers, deserves servitude, and no one else.

37


**Section 20, Unity of Allah, Fate of the Polytheists**

(164) إِنَّ فِي خَلْقِ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأَرْضِ وَاخْتِلاَفِ اللَّيْلِ
وَالنَّهَارِ وَالْفُلْكِ الَّتِي تَجْرِي فِي الْبَحْرِ بِمَا يَنفَعُ
النَّاسَ وَمَا أَنزَلَ اللّهُ مِنَ السَّمَاء مِن مَّاء فَأَحْيَا بِهِ
الأرْضَ بَعْدَ مَوْتِهَا وَبَثَّ فِيهَا مِن كُلِّ دَآبَّةٍ وَتَصْرِيفِ
الرِّيَاحِ وَالسَّحَابِ الْمُسَخِّرِ بَيْنَ السَّمَاء وَالأَرْضِ لآيَاتٍ
لِّقَوْمٍ يَعْقِلُونَ

164. " Surely in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the
alternation of night and day, and (in) the ships that sail on the sea
with what profits mankind, and (in) the water which Allah sends down
from heaven and enlivens therewith the earth after its death, and
spreads in it all kinds of animal, and in the change of the winds and
the clouds controlled (for service) between the sky and the earth;
surely there are signs for a people having understanding."

**Commentary:**

The previous verse spoke about the Oneness of the Lord. Then, here in
this verse, there is the reason and evidence to prove the existence of
the Providence and that there is only One God, the Glorious. He, the
Almighty, is the cause of all causes and the source of knowledge, power,
order, and regularity.

Primarily, we attract attention to the fact that uniformity and order,
in general, are signs for the existence of intelligence and knowledge,
where harmony is a reason for the being of unity. Based on this
principle, the explanation of which has been stated in the books of
theism, when we deal with the various aspects of ' order ' in the world
of

38

existence, we come to the harmony and the unity of action in the
regular working of the universe, on one side, and on the other side, we
encounter with a single source of knowledge and power that all these
glorious effects originate from.

So, the native uniformity and the perfect and the never disturbed
harmony in the working of the universe, loudly and most eloquently
suggests and clearly manifests the Unity of the Creator and the
unchallengeable or unquestionable supremacy of its Single Master or
Lord. Man is exhorted to reflect over the creation and realize the
divine unity in the midst of the diversity and the manifoldness of the
innumerable objects in the heavens and the earth and in the forces of
nature and the perfectly harmonious working of the natural phenomena.
The uniformity and the harmony in the objects and the working of the
universe is constantly referred to in the Holy Qur'an as a sign of the
Unity of the Maker.

Taking this short introductory explanation into consideration, we
continue explaining the commentary of the verse again.

In this verse, there are six aspects of the indication of regularity in
the world of existence, each of which is a symbol for the unity of that
Infinite Essence or an indication to the Eternal One, the pure Essence,
the Supreme Being.

1. The first symbol, which refers to the Unity of the Creator, is the
creation of the heavens and the earth:

" Surely in the creation of the heavens and the earth..."

Yes, this glorious universe with all its stars and planets, including
millions and millions of illuminating suns, some of which meaningfully
twinkle at us when we look at the sky at night or show themselves far
from behind some great telescopes, all in all are the signs and means of
reflection of His Power, Knowledge,and Unity.

It is surprising that the more the knowledge of the human race
increases, the clearer the greatness and vastness of this universe is
recognized, and it is not evident that how large and up to when this
scientifical expansion of the recognition of the still secrets of the
universe will continue.

Today, scientists and astronomers infrom us that there are thousands
and thousands of galaxies in the universe where our solar

39

system is only a part of one of them. In our galaxy alone, there are
hundreds million suns and bright stars among which, according to the
scientists' data, there can be found some millions of inhabitable
planets. What a Splendour! What a Power. In addition to the tradition
narrated from the holy Prophet (p.b.u.h.) (1) and Ahlul-Bayt (a.s.)
about some of the verses of the Qur'an confirming the existence of the
living creatures in the Heaven and other planets (earths) besides our
dwelling earth, there have been written many scientific books on this
subject by a lot of Islamic and non-Islamic scholars that the followings
are a few examples out of hundreds of similar examples:

a) The Earth, the Sky and the Stars from the View of the Qur'an; by Dr.
Muhammad Sadiqi.

b) The Qur'an and the Modern Science; by: 'Abdul-Qani- Al-Khat¤ib;
translated by: Dr. Asadullah Mubashshiri.

c) Jahan 'Afarin; by: Husayn Nuri, one of the esteemed scholars in the
Religious Teaching Center of Qum.

d) The Earth and the Sky; by: A. Welkuf; translated by: Ali
Dukhaniyati.

e) Galaxies and Quasars; by: William J. Kaufmann, Ié (Department of
Physics, Sandiego, State University) .

It should be noted that the life found on other planets may be, of
course, rather in a different form from what exists on our globe.
Therefore, in investigations of the matter, we must not consider only
the kind of the life on the earth as a standard, because those globes
have their own life-conditions for themselves which are certainly
different from the circumstances of the life on the earth, so that, in a
great deal of cases such as temperature, water, air and light, they are
incomparable with that of the earth.

2. The second indication is seen in the constant change of the day and
the night, where it says: "...and the alternation of night and
day,..."

Yes, the constant change of night and day, the absence of

(1) Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 58, p. 102,106

40

darkness and the presence of light, with that regularity that they
have, and, that one ceaselessly becomes shorter and the other one
becomes longer, that as a result of which the four seasons come into
being, when trees, plants, and animals obtain their evolutions under
these gradual changes, are totally the signs of His Exalted Essence and
Attributes. If these gradual changes were not, or they happened without
order, or they were always either day or night alone, there would be no
life throughout the world at all.

3. Then, it points to the ships which move on the water of the seas for
the benefit of Man: "... and (in) the ships that sail on the sea with
what profits mankind,..."

Man travels long voyages over the seas and oceans by small and large
ships towards different points of the world to perform his purposes.
This kind of transportation over sea-water can be afforded by employing
some factors, particularly when it is done by a sailor. The first factor
is the regular winds that blow from the surface of the seas towards the
land and vice versa, including the ceaseless winds blowing from the
North Pole and South Pole called ' Arctic winds and Antarctic winds ',
or the regional winds which blows in their own proper times and let the
ships utilize this natural force gratuitously setting forth to their
destinations.

Another factor is the natural property of wood against the special
pressure of water which causes that it floats over water.

Again, there is the two invariable magnetic poles of the earth which
fix the hands of a compass. The arrangement of the stars in the sky,
which lead people to their destinations, is also counted a factor.

Yes, it is with the combination of all these arrangements that the
application of ships, with their abundant benefits alongside the help of
men, can be made possible. Thus, all these processes are indications of
His Pure Essence. Concerning the sailing ships, it is surprising that
today, with the invention of the force of powerful engines used in the
ships, not only this meaning has not lost its importance but it has also
gotten a higher position in this respect, because the great gigantic
ships are still among

41

the best means of transportation and communication between people of
different spots. Some kinds of modern ships are as large as a town,
having arenas, pleasure centers, playgrounds, and even a market-place
for shopping. Or, in some particular ships, there are airports where
several aeroplanes can land on or take off from.

4. Now, the rain, the life-giving water which is sent down from the sky
to the earth, is pointed out. It says: "...and (in) the water which
Allah sends down from heaven and enlivens therewith the earth after its
death, and spreads in it all kinds of animal,..." Yes, wherever the pure
life-giving drops of rain fall down, thereby, life, freshness, blessing,
abundancy, and movement may appear therein. This lifeless but splendid
water, which falls down with special order, and waters all those plants
and living creatures continually, is the harbinger of His Power and
Grandeur.

5. Then, for the useful currents and regular and irregular blowing of
the winds, it says: "...and in the change of the winds..."

The winds blow not only over the seas and oceans and cause ships to
move about, but also over the surface of lands, mountains, valleys, and
plains. They sometimes take the male pollen from stamens and pollinate
the pistil and help their pollination in order to yield us fruits. They
also scatter seeds in different spots of the land to grow. They, at a
time, frequently move the waves of the seas to stir them and make the
conditions conducive for the living creatures.

With transferring the hot weather of the warm regions to the cold
regions, and transferring the cold weather of the cold regions to the
warm regions, the winds are effective in making the climate of the globe
moderate. Sometimes, the winds push the polluted and poisonous air of
the cities, which has not enough oxygen, out into the deserts and
forests and cause the fresh air, full of oxygen, to come unto the reach
of human beings and other living creatures.

Yes, the wind, that blows and gifts man with benefits and blessings, is
another sign of His Infinite Grace and Wisdom.

6. The last indication, mentioned in this verse, is clouds which, as

42

servants, in spite of the gravity, are suspending between the sky and
the earth to be moved here and there, carrying millions of tons of water
easily with them without posing the least danger for anybody. Hence,
they are counted as a sign of the Greatness of the Creator, where He
says: "...and the clouds controlled (for service) between the sky and
the earth;..."

However, if there were not the management of the irrigation of the
clouds, there would not be any water throughout the world for man to
drink, nor any spring or stream for plants to grow and, everywhere, the
lands would be dry and dead. Therefore, this is also another trace of
the Knowledge and Might of Allah. "... surely there are signs for a
people having understanding."

Yes, all of the above mentioned indications are the evidence of the
existence of that Pure Essence, but for the people who understand and
contemplate, not for the unaware ones and the people of little wisdom
who have eyes but have not eyesight, or have ears but are deaf.

43

(165) وَمِنَ النَّاسِ مَن يَتَّخِذُ مِن دُونِ اللّهِ أَندَاداً
يُحِبُّونَهُمْ كَحُبِّ اللّهِ وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ أَشَدُّ حُبًّا
لِّلّهِ وَلَوْ يَرَى الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُواْ إِذْ يَرَوْنَ الْعَذَابَ أَنَّ
الْقُوَّةَ لِلّهِ جَمِيعاً وَأَنَّ اللّهَ شَدِيدُ الْعَذَابِ

165. "And yet, of men, there are some who take unto themselves (for
worship) objects other than Allah, and love them as the love due to
Allah; but for those who have faith, their love of Allah is more
intensive. And if only those who are unjust could see (what they will
realize) when they behold the punishment, that the Power is wholly
Allah's, and that Allah is severe in (enforcing) the Penalty."

**Commentary:**

Disbelievers have gone astray. Their affection to things other than
Allah, is like the wish and desire of a sick person unto eating the food
which is harmful for his sickness but the patient ignorantly persists on
having it. In contrast with them are the believers. So those who have
Faith surely love Allah very intensively and more than anything or
anybody else.

The pagans, who have done unjustly to themselves, will see their
miserable destination on the Day of Reckoning, when they will recognize
their wrong thought and their deviation. On that Day they will
understand fully that the entire Power belongs to Allah and that they
had gone a wrong way when they had referred to other than Him. The
intensive punishment of Allah, on that Day, will be upon those who,
thoughtlessly and unreasonably, had left out the attachment to Allah and
clung to some vain and chaffy imaginations.

Then, it is so that in Sura 'An'am, No. 6, verse 102, to guide them,
Allah warns them thus:

" That is Allah, your Lord, there is no god but He; the Creator of all
things,

44

therefore serve Him, and He has charge of all things." By the way, it
is narrated by Muhammad-ibn-Muslim that Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) and
Had¤rat Sadiq (a.s.) , speaking about the phrase: "...but for those who
have faith, their love is more intensive " had said: " They are the
progeny of Muhammad (p.b.u.h.) ".(1)

(1) Tafsir-i-Burhan, vol. 1, p. 172


