Verses 174-175-176
==================

57

(174) إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَكْتُمُونَ مَا أَنزَلَ اللّهُ مِنَ الْكِتَابِ
وَيَشْتَرُونَ بِهِ ثَمَنًا قَلِيلاً أُولَئِكَ مَا يَأْكُلُونَ فِي
بُطُونِهِمْ إِلاَّ النَّارَ وَلاَ يُكَلِّمُهُمُ اللّهُ يَوْمَ
الْقِيَامَةِ وَلاَ يُزَكِّيهِمْ وَلَهُمْ عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ

(175) أُولَئِكَ الَّذِينَ اشْتَرَوُاْ الضَّلاَلَةَ بِالْهُدَى
وَالْعَذَابَ بِالْمَغْفِرَةِ فَمَآ أَصْبَرَهُمْ عَلَى النَّارِ

(176) ذَلِكَ بِأَنَّ اللّهَ نَزَّلَ الْكِتَابَ بِالْحَقِّ وَإِنَّ
الَّذِينَ اخْتَلَفُواْ فِي الْكِتَابِ لَفِي شِقَاقٍ بَعِيدٍ

174. " Surely those who conceal any part of the Book which Allah has
sent down (to them) , and sell it for a small price ِ they shall eat
naught but Fire into their bellies, and Allah will not speak to them on
the Day of Resurrection, nor will He purify them, and theirs will be a
painful punishment."

175. " Those are they who have bought error for guidance and punishment
for forgiveness; how they shall endure the Fire! "

176. " This is because Allah has sent down the Book with the Truth; and
surely those who differ in the Book are in flagrant schism."

**Commentary:**

Before the advent of the holy Prophet of Islam (p.b.u.h.) , the Jewish
scholars used to tell their people about that happy advent and described
the signs of that promised Prophet for them from the Torah. But as soon
as the Prophet of Islam (p.b.u.h.) was divinely appointed and announced
his Call, they did not confess the prophethood of Muhammad (p.b.u.h.)
for they thought they would lose their position, wealth, etc. It was why
they neglected every thing and concealed the

58

Truth. Such people, by concealing the fact, might remain in their
position receiving some presents and gifts for a length of time but this
is a little price comparing to that great sin of theirs.

" Surely those who conceal any part of the Book which Allah has sent
down (to them) , and sell it for a small price- ..." What they take and
eat in this bargain is naught, indeed, but Fire. This meaning is similar
to the content of the verse where eating the wealth of orphans is
likened to Fire, too, as if they ate Fire in their bellies. (1) So, it
says:

"...they shall eat naught but Fire into their bellies, ..."

On the Day of Resurrection, Allah will not speak to these people
mercifully, while the believers can speak with Him then. This talk, of
course, may be either through some waves created in the space, or by
inspiration and the mute tongue of the heart. On that Day all believing
people can become interlocutors of Allah.

Those persons, who tried to bar the influence of the sound of truth
from reaching the ears of people, have shut, in fact, the way of the
speech of Allah on the Reckoning Day to themselves. They will not hear a
word of kindness, but hear the word of wrath in Hell, being addressed
with words such as:

" Go away into it and speak not (to Me) ...". (2) Allah will not purify
them from their sins then, because there will be a painful punishment
prepared for them as a result of their evil actions in this world.

"...and Allah will not speak to them on the Day of Resurrection, nor
will He purify them, and theirs will be a painful punishment."

**Explanations:**

1. Selling Faith, in any case and rate, is a loss and the obtained
price is a little: "...and sell it for a small price-".

2. The unlawful food or drinks of this world will incarnate in the

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(1) Sura An-Nisa', No. 4, verse 10
(2) Sura Al-Mu'minun, No. 23, verse 108

59

form of Fire in the Hereafter, "...but Fire ...". 3. Punishment should
be appropriate to the crime. Those who bar the way of reaching the word
of Allah for people to hearken in this world, must be deprived from the
pleasure of hearing the speech of Allah in the next world.

4. Concealing the truth is not only about the holy Prophet (p.b.u.h.) .
Those who conceal the truth about the true successors of Prophet
Muhammad (p.b.u.h.) , receive the same punishment, too. That is, those
who have hidden the announcement of the Messenger of Allah in
Qadir-i-Khum and obliterated it from their history and commentary books
and perverted the process of the verses of the Qur'an with their own
justifications in order to mislead Muslims towards some particular ones
other than the immaculate Imams, have concealed the Truth, too.

\* \* \* \*

Those who conceal the Truth are some persons who exchange misguidance
for guidance and punishment for forgiveness.

" Those are they who have bought error for guidance and punishment for
forgiveness, ..." Do they not know that they somehow share with the
corruption and aberration of mankind throughout history by their action
when they conceal the Truth? Do they think that they are able to bear
the punishment of Allah ?

"... how they shall endure the Fire! " It is narrated in a tradition
that the holy Prophet (p.b.u.h.) , speaking with Ali-ibn-Abi-Talib
(a.s.) , said: " The worst of men is he who sells his coming world for
his present life, and more evil than this is the one who sells his
coming world for the present life of someone else." (1)

\* \* \* \*

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(1) Man La Yahduruhul-Faghih, vol. 4, p. 253

60

The people who conceal the Truth are severely warned and threatened
with Divine punishments, because Allah has sent down the Book so clearly
and reasonably that no doubt or ambiguity remains for anyone. " This is
because Allah has sent down the Book with the Truth; ..."

Yet, there are some people who, to protect their personal interests,
take action in justification and falsification of the concepts of the
revealed Book and cause people to differ in it. In this way, they intend
to gain some profits without any due, or unlawfully. Then, Allah,
introducing them, says:

"...and surely those who differ in the Book are in flagrant schism."

\* \* \* \*


61

**Section 22,Genuine Righteousness, Retaliation & Bequest**

(177) لَّيْسَ الْبِرَّ أَن تُوَلُّواْ وُجُوهَكُمْ قِبَلَ الْمَشْرِقِ
وَالْمَغْرِبِ وَلَكِنَّ الْبِرَّ مَنْ آمَنَ بِاللّهِ وَالْيَوْمِ الآخِرِ
وَالْمَلآئِكَةِ وَالْكِتَابِ وَالنَّبِيِّينَ وَآتَى الْمَالَ عَلَى
حُبِّهِ ذَوِي الْقُرْبَى وَالْيَتَامَى وَالْمَسَاكِينَ وَابْنَ
السَّبِيلِ وَالسَّآئِلِينَ وَفِي الرِّقَابِ وَأَقَامَ الصَّلوةَ وَآتَى
الزَّكَوةَ وَالْمُوفُونَ بِعَهْدِهِمْ إِذَا عَاهَدُواْ وَالصَّابِرِينَ
فِي الْبَأْسَاء والضَّرَّاء وَحِينَ الْبَأْسِ أُولَئِكَ الَّذِينَ
صَدَقُوا وَأُولَئِكَ هُمُ الْمُتَّقُونَ

177. " It is not righteousness that you turn your faces towards the
East and the West, but righteous is he who believes in Allah, the Last
Day, the angels, the Book, and the Apostles, and for the love of Him
gives (of) his wealth, although he likes it, to the kindred, the
orphans, the needy, the travellers, beggars and for the (emancipation
of) slaves, and keeps up the prayer, and pays the poor-rates (zakat) ;
and those who fulfil their promise whenever they make a promise, and are
patient in distress, adversity, and in the time of war, these are they
who are the truthful (in Faith verbally and actually) and these are the
pious ones."

**Commentary:**

The Faith of a person in Allah causes him to be humble before Him and
to stand firm, with no obedience, before tyrants; where the Faith in
Resurrection creates eyesight and magnanimity; and Faith in

62

angels refers to the existence of belief in the processes of
supernatural including the Faith in revelation, Providence, etc. Faith
in prophets is a belief in a straight way and true guidance existing
throughout history. It is an evidence leading to the fact that Man has
never been aimless and absolutely free in this world. " It is not
righteousness that you turn your faces towards the East and the West,
but righteous is he who believes in Allah, the Last Day, the angels, the
Book, and the Apostles, ..."

The Qur'anic phrases: " gives (of) his wealth " indicates the
assistance and humanity of believers; " keep up the prayer " refers to
the direct link with Allah; " pay the poor-rates (zakat) " leads to
planning the social life for solving the problem of different layers of
the society; " Those who fulfil their promise whenever they make a
promise " strengthens the coherence and connection between people; and
the concept of " are patient " is an active factor in Man to become
persevering and stable.

"... and for the love of Him gives (of) his wealth, although he likes
it, to the kindred, the orphans, the needy, the travellers, beggars and
for the (emancipation of) slaves, and keeps up the prayer, and pays the
poor-rates (zakat) ; and those who fulfil their promise whenever they
make a promise, and are patient in distress, adversity, and in the time
of war, these are they who are the truthful (in Faith verbally and
actually) and these are the pious ones."

**Explanations:**

1- This verse is one of the most consistent verses of the Qur'an. It is
cited in Al-Mizan, Commentary, that the Messenger of Allah said in a
tradition that everyone who acts according to this verse has a complete
Faith. (1)
2-We should heed the content and essence of the religion rather than to
go after the mere mottoes, which hold us back from the main

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

(1) Al-Mizan, vol. 1, p. 615 (Persian version)

63

godly aims.

3- The number of those who claim Faith is very large, but the true
believers, who follow all the details of this verse, are a particular
small group: " These are they who ...".

4- Belief in Allah, Resurrection and revealed Book is mentioned before
the fulfilment of the righteous deeds.

5- In this verse, the act of attachment to Allah " Faith in Allah ",
and connecting with the poor and deprived people, and also social aids
upon accidents and afflictions have been stated together, one after
another, in the verse.

6- For reaching a true piety, donation in both obligatory and
non-obligatory forms are necessary. There are some people who sometimes
help the poor while they do not pay their religious obligatory payments.
There are also some other believing people who pay their obligatory
payments but are often indifferent to the poor and the deprived. Here ,
in this verse, the true pious believers are introduced as those who pay
both their obligatory alms and recommended donations; as well.

"... and for the love of Him gives (of) his wealth ". Regarding this
meaning, that is why that some Islamic narrations say that in the wealth
of the rich, besides the poor-rates, there is a portion for the deprived
and the poor. (1)

And also, the one who goes to bed while he is satiated but someone in
his neighbourhood is hungry, has faith neither in Allah nor in the
Hereafter. (2)

Therefore, to feel responsibility for the hungry people, is a duty on
us, whether we have paid the obligatory alms or not.

7- It is necessary to show patience and perseverance in all the
followings:

Being patient and firm in facing with poverty and afflictions.

To show patience and endurance in having ailments.

To be patient in battle and at the time of Holy War.

However, patience is the cause of all virtues. So, the Qur'an

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

(2) Tafsir-il-Qurtubi, vol. 2, p. 242

(3) Usul-i-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 660

64

introduces patience as one of the factors for entering Heaven, where it
says: " These shall be rewarded with high places because they were
patient, ..." (1) These are given high positions as a reward for the
patience they had, while some others are honoured by angels in Heaven
with these words: " Peace be on you because you were constant, ..." (2)
And, one of the conditions of obtaining the position of Imamate is to be
patient, as the Qur'an says: " And We made of them Imams to guide by Our
command when they were patient, ..." (3)

8- The application of the term /birr/ (righteous) is similar to the
application of honey. Whoever or whatever is very sweet and wholesome is
likened to honey. Then, whosoever is very good and benevolent is called
' righteous '; viz. , such a one is absolutely a right-doer.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

(1) Sura Furqan, No. 24, verse 75

(2) Sura Ar-Ra'd No. 13, verse 24

(3) Sura As-Sajdah, No. 72, verse 24

65

(178) يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ كُتِبَ عَلَيْكُمُ الْقِصَاصُ فِي
الْقَتْلَى الْحُرُّ بِالْحُرِّ وَالْعَبْدُ بِالْعَبْدِ وَالأُنثَى
بِالأُنثَى فَمَنْ عُفِيَ لَهُ مِنْ أَخِيهِ شَيْءٌ فَاتِّبَاعٌ
بِالْمَعْرُوفِ وَأَدَاء إِلَيْهِ بِإِحْسَانٍ ذَلِكَ تَخْفِيفٌ مِّن
رَّبِّكُمْ وَرَحْمَةٌ فَمَنِ اعْتَدَى بَعْدَ ذَلِكَ فَلَهُ عَذَابٌ
أَلِيمٌ

(179) وَلَكُمْ فِي الْقِصَاصِ حَيَاةٌ يَاْ أُولِيْ الأَلْبَابِ
لَعَلَّكُمْ تَتَّقُونَ

178. " O' you who have Faith! Retaliation (Qisas) is prescribed for you
in the matter of the (unlawfully) murdered: the freeman for the
freeman,the slave for the slave,the female for the female. But for him
who is forgiven somewhat by his (aggrieved religious) brother, then
prosecution (for blood-wit) should be made according to a fair manner
(ma'ruf) and let the payment be made to him with kindliness. This is an
alleviation from your Lord, and a mercy; so whoever transgresses the
limits after this, he shall have a painful punishment." 179. " And in
(the law of) retaliation there is (saving of) life for you, O' people of
understanding, so that you may guard yourselves (against evil) ."

**Occasion of Revelation:**

The custom in the Age of Ignorance among some Arabs was so that when an
individual was murdered from their tribe, they would decide to kill as
many members from the murderer's tribe as they could. That thought was
so harsh that they were ready to destroy even the entire people of the
murderer's tribe for only a single murder. Then, the above verse was
sent down and announced the just law of retaliation, (Qisas) .

This Islamic decree was, indeed, a medial status between the two
different injunctions which were current at that time. Before the

66

revelation of this ordinance of Islam, some people considered
retaliation necessary, with no changes, so that nothing else was
permissible to substitute it, while some other groups believed that only
the rule of blood-wit should be followed. So, Islam decreed the law of
retaliation in the case of the discontent of the heirs of the murdered,
and blood-wit when both parties agree upon it.

**Commentary:
Saving of Life in Retaliation:**

From this verse on, in the current Sura, a series of decrees and
ordinances of Islam are stated and completed. At first, it begins with
the protection of the value of blood which is an extraordinary important
problem in social connections. Through this verse, Islam makes all the
concerning old customs invalid. The Qur'an, addressing the believers,
says: " O' you who have Faith! Retaliation (Qisas) is prescribed for you
in the matter of the (unlawfully) murdered: ..."

The Holy Qur'an, in the case of some indispensible commands, sometimes
makes use of the phrase: " It is prescribed for you " to state the
matter. The above verse, for example, is an instance of this application
where the coming verses, which speak about ' making bequest ' and '
fasting ', are other ones. In any case, this particular phrase makes the
importance and emphasis of the theme clear, because those matters are
always written that, from any point of view, have reached to the state
of positiveness, and are earnest.

As it was pointed out in the occasion of revelation, these verses, with
the application of the term retaliation and in order to moderate the
intemperances which the Age of Ignorance fulfilled about murder, show
that the heirs of the murdered are rightful to accomplish, against the
murderer, exactly the same that that person has committed upon the
murdered.

But the Qur'an does not suffice only to this amount. In this very
verse, it exposes the problem of equality to discussion with a
particular explicitness where it continues saying:

67

"...the freeman for the freeman, the slave for the slave, the female
for the female. ..." Allah willing, we will explain that this idea is
not an evidence, as some have considered, for the superiority of the
male-blood to the female-blood, and that a male murderer, under certain
conditions, can be punished by the law of retaliated for the murder of a
woman. Then, to make it clear that the subject of retaliation is merely
a right for the heirs of the murdered and it is not a convincing
ordinance for them when they can simply forgive the murderer, if they
wish, and take a blood-wit, or even, they can take no blood-wit at all,
it immediately adds:

"... But for him who is forgiven somewhat by his (aggrieved religious)
brother, then prosecution (for blood-wit) should be made according to a
fair manner (ma'ruf) and let the payment be made to him with kindliness.
..." Thus, on one hand, the avengers of blood are advised not to be
immoderate in taking a blood-price if they dispense with retaliation,
and take the blood-wit with a fair price and according to what Islam has
appointed and also by installments so that the party be able to pay
it.

And, on the other hand, through the sentence: "...let the payment be
made to him with kindness ", it recommends the murderer to pay the
blood-price in a right style and without any negligence so that his debt
be entirely paid on time. Therefore, the Qur'an has defined the duty of
each party and how they should treat to each other. At the end of the
verse, for emphasis and to attract the attentions to the fact that
transgressing the limits of Allah, from the side of whoever it may be,
deserves a severe punishment, it says:

"... This is an alleviation from your Lord, and a mercy; so whoever
transgresses the limits after this, he shall have a painful punishment."
This equitable command for ' retaliation ' and ' forgiveness ', which
makes up a quite, logical manly assemblage, condemns, on one hand, the
wrong method of the Ignorance Age which considered no equality in
retaliation and, similar to the tyrants of this very age of space,
sometimes killed hundreds of people in excuse of the murder of

68

one person.

And, on the other hand, it does not shut the door of pardon to people.
In the meantime, it does not lower the respect of blood, and does not
allow murderers to become bold and presumptuous. And also, thirdly, it
announces that neither of the two parties are permitted to transgress
the limits after accepting the principle of pardon and blood-wit. This
command was issued in spite of the old custom of the Ignorant tribes
where the heirs of the murdered might kill the murderer even after
forgiving him and taking the blood-wit.

\* \* \* \*

The next verse, in a short but very expressive sentence, answers a
great deal of questions in regards to the problem of retaliation. It
says " And in (the law of) retaliation there is (saving of) life for
you, O' people of understanding, so that you may guard yourselves
(against evil) ." This verse, which in the Qur'anic text consists of ten
particles, is expressed in utmost eloquence and clarity. It is so
interesting that its first phrase has become as an Islamic motto used by
common Muslim people. It clearly shows that Islamic law of retaliation
is not for revenging at all, but it is a door-way to life for men to let
them continue living.

Retaliation, on one hand, guards the safety of the life of the society,
because if the ordinance of retaliation were not in any form at all, the
hard-hearted persons would feel security and, consequently, the lives of
people would be in danger. The evidence for this is the countries
wherein the law of retaliation has been nullified and the number of
murders and crime has incredibly increased.

On the other hand, the law of retaliation causes the life of a
homicidal person be saved since it prevents him considerably from the
thought of murder and brings him under control. For the sake of the
necessity of equality and order, the law of retaliation is a hinder
against the frequent slaughters and puts an end to the customs of some
Ignorant tribes in which a single murder has been the pretext of several
murders and the latter, in turn, has been the cause

69

of further slaughters, too. By this way, the law of retaliation has
also stopped some of those homicides and caused a few societies continue
to live peacefully.

Regarding the fact that it is only in the absence of pardon that the
ordinance of retaliation can be executed, the existence of the Islamic
law of retaliation, in general, is also another phase opened to life and
living. The concluding phrase which says: "... so that you may guard
yourselves (against evil) " completes this wise ordinance of Islam. This
meaning is also considered as a warning which halts or retards any
oppression and transgression.


**Retaliation & Pardon, a Complete Assemblage**

Islam, in all respects, follows the problems inclusively and with their
proper practical aspects. It has stated the right perfect idea about the
proposition of unlawfully murdered, far from any injustice or excessive
progressiveness. This Islamic law is similar neither to the perverted
Jewish law, which emphasizes only on mere retaliation, nor to the
present Christianity, which advises its followers to pave only the way
of either pardon or compensation; because the latter causes to embolden
the homicides and the former can become a factor of harsh vengeance and
brutality.

Suppose that the murdered and the murderer be two brothers, or they
have some background of friendship or social connections. In this case,
bonding to retaliation, may produce a new additional grievance for the
family of the murdered, especially when the concerning people are full
of human love and affection, then, forcing them to execute the act of
retaliation, itself, can be considered another grief and torture upon
them. On the other hand, limiting the law to pardon and compensation
alone, also makes the corruptive people bolder.

This is why Islam has decreed the law of retaliation as the main
ordinance and, to moderate it, has added the ordinance of pardon beside
it and along with it.

In other words, the heirs of the murdered are rightful to choose one of
the following varieties:

1- The execution of retaliation

70

2- To pardon without taking any blood-wit.

3- To pardon with taking the blood-wit. (In this case, of course, the
consent of the murderer is also necessarily considered.)

**Explanations:**

It is possible that some groups object that the command in the verses
of retaliation is that a ' man ' should not be killed for the murder of
a ' woman ', then, what is the difference between the life of a man and
that of a woman? Why should a male not be killed under the punishment of
the law of retaliation for the slaughter of an innocent female, ِ a
gender (i.e. the feminine gender) that forms half of the population over
the earth ? The answer to this question is that: the verse does not mean
a ' male ' should not be retaliated against by capital punishment for a
' female '. But according to what is detailed in the books of Islamic
jurisprudence, the heirs of the murdered woman can punish the
male-murderer by the law of retaliation (i.e. capital punishment) on
condition that they pay half of the blood-price.

In other words, the purpose of the lack of retaliation (Qisas) of a '
man ' for the slaughter of a ' woman ' is a retaliation without any
condition; but his killing is permissible, of course, when half of the
blood-price is paid.

No explanation is necessary here that the payment of the aforementioned
sum for the execution of the punishment under the law of retaliation
does not mean that a woman, from the point of philanthropy, is lower
than a man, or a female is less dear than a male. This is, indeed,
absolutely a wrong and illogical imagination. The apparent form of the
term ' blood-price ' may have been the origin of the appearance of this
imagination. The act of the payment of the half sum of blood-price is
only for the compensation of the loss that the man's family members
suffer from his capital punishment by the law of retaliation.

The expansion of the explanation is that: males are usually the
effective financial factor of their families. It is often men, in
families, who earn a living and pay money for the expenditures, in
general, and

71

run the economical affairs therein. Therefore, the difference between a
man and a woman, from the point of economy and finance in their own
family, is quite clear to everybody. If this difference be not observed,
the remaining family members and the innocent children of the murdered
man have surely to suffer an amount of unreasonable financial damage.
Hence, Islam, with the rule of the payment of half of the blood-wit for
the punishment of a ' man ' by the law of retaliation, has considered
the rights of all members, and prevented the unforgivable injury and
stroke that a family may be given. Islam never lets the rights of some
individuals, such as the children of the person who has been punished by
the law of retaliation, be trod under the pretext of the term ' equality
'.

It is possible, of course, that some women earn a living in their own
family better than men there. But we know that a law or an ordinance
does not turn around the pivot of an individual, and we must compare the
totality of men with the totality of women.

Another point that attracts the attention, and is understood from the
phrase " by his brother ", is that Islam strengthens the relation of
brotherhood between its followers so firm that even after the
illegitimate shedding of blood it is still valid. So, to encourage the
heirs of the murderer to forgiveness and moderation, and also to put
their affection in motion, Islam introduces them as the brothers of the
murderer. And, this meaning is both surprising and interesting. The
mentioned situation, of course, is about those murderers who have taken
action in this great heinous sin under the force of emotion, wrath, and
the like of them, and the murderers have also become regretful and
repented of their wrong action. But, the murderers who are proud of
their crime and, with no regret or repentance, boast about it, are
neither worthy of the appellation of ' bretheren ' nor are they eligible
for pardon.

72

(180) كُتِبَ عَلَيْكُمْ إِذَا حَضَرَ أَحَدَكُمُ الْمَوْتُ إِن تَرَكَ
خَيْرًا الْوَصِيَّةُ لِلْوَالِدَيْنِ وَالأقْرَبِينَ بِالْمَعْرُوفِ
حَقًّا عَلَى الْمُتَّقِينَ

(181) فَمَن بَدَّلَهُ بَعْدَمَا سَمِعَهُ فَإِنَّمَا إِثْمُهُ عَلَى
الَّذِينَ يُبَدِّلُونَهُ إِنَّ اللّهَ سَمِيعٌ عَلِيمٌ

(182) فَمَنْ خَافَ مِن مُّوصٍ جَنَفًا أَوْ إِثْمًا فَأَصْلَحَ
بَيْنَهُمْ فَلاَ إِثْمَ عَلَيْهِ إِنَّ اللّهَ غَفُورٌ رَّحِيمٌ

180. " It is prescribed for you, when death approaches (any) one of
you, and if he leaves behind wealth for parents and near relatives that
he makes a bequest in a fair manner (this is) a duty (incumbent) on the
pious ones."

181. " Whoever then changes it (the bequest) after he has heard it, the
sin thereof shall be on those who change it. Surely Allah is
All-Hearing, All-Knowing."

182. " But if any one fears injustice or sin on the part of a testator,
and establishes agreement among them (the parties concerned) , then
there is no sin upon him; surely Allah is Forgiving, Merciful."

**Commentary:
Bequest in a Fair Manner**

The speech in former verses was about problems such as life, murder,
murdered, and retaliation, while in these verses a part of the
ordinances of bequest in relation with the financial affairs is referred
to, where it says: " It is prescribed for you, when death approaches
(any) one of you, and if he leaves behind wealth for parents and near
relatives that he makes

73

a bequest in a fair manner - ..." Then, at the end of the verse, it
adds: "... (this is) a duty (incumbent) on the pious ones."

Bequest should not be considered as a bad omen. Some persons think that
bequest is a sign of death or passing away soon, while bequest is a kind
of providence and farsightedness. So, if the verse tells us to leave a
bequest at the presence of death by saying: " When death approaches
(any) one of you, ...", it is for the reason that those moments are the
last occasions; else, an individual can lay down a bequest years before
the time of death.

Some Islamic groups have considered the bequest an obligatory
ordinance, but as it is understood from the phrase "...(this is) a duty
on the pious ones " this action is voluntary, otherwise it would say:
this is a duty on the believers. According to the attitudes of the
Islamic commentators and jurisprudents, leaving a bequest is, of course,
incumbent when the one is in debt to people or there is a religious duty
upon the one which must be fulfilled. These duties may be such as: one
fifth levy (khums) , poor-tax (zakat) , performance of pilgrimage (Hajj)
, etc., and in other ordinary cases, similar to them, leaving a bequest
is emphatically praiseworthy.

By the way, in this verse, the Arabic term ' khayr ' has been applied
for ' wealth ' to make it manifest that Islam knows wealth a good thing
and a blessing from Allah when it has been earned in a lawful way and is
spent alongside the path of the help and benefit of people. This idea
nullifies the wrong attitudes of those who think of wealth substantially
as a bad thing. Islam hates those deviated pretenders to piety who have
not recognized the spirit of Islam and think of Islamic piety as a
quality equivalent to poverty. The wrong thought and behaviour of such
apparent believers cause the stagnation of some Islamic societies and,
consequently, the development of the exploiters.

In the meanwhile, this very meaning of the verse is a slight hint to
the idea that the logical abundance of wealth is lawful in Islam. The
evidence is that the unlawful wealth that a person leaves behind in
this

74

world is not ' fair ', but it is adversity and evil.

Some Islamic traditions indicate that the word 'khayr', here, refers to
the considerable wealth that needs being bequeathed. Therefore the
inconsiderable properties, which the heirs can divide between themselves
according to the canonical law of heritage, need not be bequeathed. In
other words, a small amount of wealth is not something that one
separates one third of it to leave a bequest for.(1) The phrase:
"...when death approaches (any) one of you," is for the statement of the
last opportunity available for leaving down a bequest so that if it be
postponded, it may be missed. At any rate, it is fairly appropriate that
we, having forethought and utilizing our opportunity, prepare ourselves
by writing down our bequest. This manner, as it is understood from the
Islamic literature, not only is good but also quite admirable.

The Messenger of Allah said: " Whosoever dies and has left a bequest,
has died as a martyr." (2) This meaning is considerably mentioned in
some other traditions, too. Then, it is from improvidence of a person
who imagines that leaving a bequest is a bad omen through which a person
pushes his death forward. But, bequeathing is a kind of undeniable
factual farsightedness which, although it might not prolong the
longevity, will surely never shorten the life time.

Bequest restricted with the term / bil ma'ruf / (in a fair manner)
shows that a bequest must be reasonable in all respects. It should be
done in a fair manner both from the point of amount of wealth and in
respect of the person to whom the bequest is addressed, so that
customary law and common-sense know it rationally a good action; not a
sort of unjust discrimination which usually causes conflicts and
deviation from the limits of justice and truth.

\* \* \* \*

When a bequest contains all the abovementioned qualities, it is
respectable and sacred in all aspects. Hence, any change or conversion
in it is forbidden and is counted unlawful (haram) , as the verse
itself

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(1) Tafsir-i-Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, vol. 1, p. 159
(2) Wasa'il-ush-Shi'ah, vol. 13, p. 352

75

says:

" Whoever then changes it (the bequest) after he has heard it, the sin
thereof shall be on those who change it. ..." And, if they imagine that
Allah does not know their plots, they are intensively in err, as it
says: "...Surely Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing." This verse may also
point to this fact that the wrong actions committed by the executor of
testament never nullifies the reward of the testator. When such an evil
happens, the sin is only upon the executor of testament who has changed
something from the quality or quantity of the testament or has
interfered with the fundamentals of the testament itself. Yet, the
testator will obtain his own concerned godly reward whether the
testament that he has left be changed later, in any form, or not.

Another probability has also been cited in the commentary of the verse.
It says that the purpose is: when the property of the dead, as the
result of the wrong actions of the executor of testament intentionally
is given to some ones who are not deserving of it, (and they are not
aware of that wrong action) , there is no sin on them. So the sin is
only on the executor of testament who deliberately has committed such a
wrong. It should be also noted that there is no contradiction between
these two commentaries, and both can be gathered from the meaning of the
verse.

\* \* \* \*

So far, concerning this Islamic decree, it has become quite clear that
any change, of any kind and of any amount, in testaments is a sin. But,
since there may be exceptions in a law or ordinance, then, in the last
verse of this group of verses, it says: " But if any one fears injustice
or sin on the part of a testator, and establishes agreement among them
(the parties concerned) , then there is no sin upon him; surely Allah is
Forgiving, Merciful."

Thus, the exception is only due to the instances where the testament
has not been arranged properly. It is only in this status that a

76

change made by the executor of testament is permissible. Then, if the
testator is still alive, the executor must notify him/her of that
intention to change the testament, but if the testator has passed away,
the executor takes action on changing it himself. This situation, from
the point of the Islamic jurisprudence, is restricted to the following
cases: 1. When the testator has bequeathed more than one third of his
total wealth. According to the Islamic literature based on the
traditions narrated from the holy Prophet (p.b.u.h.) and the Immaculate
Imams (Ahlul-Bayt) (a.s.) , a person can make a bequest on his wealth
only up to one third of it, since more than that is not religiously
permissible in Islam.(3)

Therefore, making bequest over the entire property benevolently for
good intentions, which is common among some unaware people, is,
regarding the Islamic laws, perfectly wrong. So, the duty is upon the
executor of the bequest to decrease it up to one third of the remaining
wealth. 2. If the testator has bequeathed something of sin,
transgression, and evil to be performed, it is upto the executor to
change it. For example, when the testator makes bequest that a part of
his wealth be spent on the spread and development of some mischievous
centers, or, also, when the bequest causes a necessary duty to be
abandoned unreasonably, the executor is allowed to change it.

3. When something of the bequest brings about means of conflict,
corruption, or blood shedding, in this case, the circumstance should be
adjusted under the direction of the Islamic judge. By the way, the
Arabic term /janaf/, which means a deviation from the path of Justice
and a unilateral inclination, hints to the deviations that seize the
testator unconsciously; while the term /'ithm/ (sin) refers to the
intended deviations.

The final phrase of the verse which says: "... Surely Allah is
Forgiving, Merciful " may point to the fact that if the executor of
testament effectively removes or improves the wrong that the testator
has done and returns him to the right way, Allah forgives him, too.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(1) Wasa'il-ush-Shi'ah, vol. 13, p. 361

77

**Explanation:
The Philosophy of Testament:**

Regarding the law of heritage, only a particular group of relatives,
and with a definite portion, inherit the wealth. This situation may be
in the case that some other near and far relatives, or some of the close
friends and local people, are in dire need of some financial aid. In
addition to that, sometimes it happens that the religiously ordained
portion, ordained concerning the amount of heritage, is not sufficient
to supply the needs of some heirs.

The inclusiveness of the Islamic laws does not let these gaps be left
unfilled. So, it has issued the law of testament alongside the law of
heritage. It lets Muslims decide on one third of their wealth to be
spent after their death in a manner they like. Besides that, sometimes a
person wishes to do some good actions, but during his life-time he is
not able to perform them, because of some financial necessities that he
has. The logic of intellect demands that he decides on a part of the
wealth, that he has suffered to earn during his life, to be spent on
these good affairs after his death, at least, and not to be deprived of
them. All these circumstances have caused that the law of testament be
decreed in Islam, and it has been emphasized with the phrase: " (this is
a duty on the pious ones."

Testament is not restricted only to the above mentioned aspects, of
course, but a person should explain all his debts to people, the
deposits that others have given him to charge of, and the like of them
in the testament so clearly that there may remain no ambiguous subject
concerning the rights of men or the rights of Allah which have been upon
him. In Islamic literature, testament is frequently emphasized on. For
example, a tradition narrated from the holy Prophet (p.b.u.h.) says: "
It is not appropriate for a Muslim believer to sleep at night except
that his

78

testament is under his head."(1) The phrase ' under his head ',
mentioned in the above tradition, is, of course, for emphasis and the
purpose is that he must always be prepared in this respect.

**Justice in Testament**

Taking the abovementioned explanation about the lack of transgression
in testament in mind, there are many traces in Islamic traditions
emphasizing upon the lack of ' transgression ' and ' damage ' in
testament which, on the whole, indicate that as much as making a
testament is a good and worthy deed, the same quality transgression in
it is blameworthy and counted among grievous sins. Imam Muhammad Baqir
(a.s.) , in a tradition, says: " He who regards justice in his testament
is like the person who has given the same amount as charity (in the way
of Allah) during his own life; but the one who treats unfair in his
testament will meet Allah on the Day of Judgement while He will have
turned away His Grace from him."(2)

Transgression, treating unfair, and damage in testament is that a
person bequeathes more than one third of his wealth and deprives the
heirs from their religiously lawful rights. Or, he may make some undue
distinctions for the sake of his unreasonable loves and hatreds. In the
cases that the heirs are in dire need, even, the recommendation is that
bequeathing one third of the wealth be decreased to a quarter or one
fifth of the wealth. (3)

When we study the Islamic narrations and the statements of the leaders
of Islam in relation to the subject, we understand the emphasis and
importance that they have considered for the existence of Justice in
testament. The following tradition is one of the concerning instances:
Once at the time of revelation, one of the men from the Ansar tribe
passed away. He had some little children, but he had spent his wealth on
the path of Allah in a manner that there remained no more

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(1) Wasa'il-ush-Shi'ah, vol. 13, p. 352
(2) Wasa'il-ush-Shi'ah, vol. 13, p. 359
(3) Ibid, p. 360

79

property from him. When the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) became aware of it, he
asked: " What did you do with that man? " Then, the people thereby
answered that they had buried him. The holy Prophet (p.b.u.h.) said: "If
I had been informed of it before, I would not have permitted you to bury
him in the graveyard of Muslims, because he has left his little children
reduced to beggary."

**Bequest, Obligatory or Recommended**

As it was said before, making testament, in essence, is among the
emphatically recommended actions, but sometimes it becomes obligatory
for some people. For instance, when a person has neglected or failed to
pay the godly obligatory rights, or there are some things with him
belonging to people, (formerly deposited to him) , and the one thinks
that their rights may be transgressed if he does not bequeath, then
bequeathing is obligatory. More important than that is when the position
of a person in a society is so that if he does not make a bequest it is
probable that the safe system of that society or their religion be
inflicted an irreparable severe blow upon. So, in all of these
circumstances, it is obligatory to bequeath.

**Bequest, is Changeable During the Life**

The testator is not restricted by Islam to what he has bequeathed
himself. A person is allowed to review the amount, the manner, and the
executor of the bequest as long as he is alive, because when the time
passes, circumstances may vary and his attitudes upon the aforementioned
subjects change, too.

This point is also necessary to be mentioned that we must make use of
bequest as a means of repairing our former shortcomings, in a manner
that even if some of our relatives had shown unkindness to us, we
dispaly affection to them by the way of testament. It is cited in some
Islamic narrations that the leaders of Islam bequeathed some money
especially for those relatives who were not kind to them in order to
attract their affection again.


