Verses 204-205-206
==================

152

(204) وَمِنَ النَّاسِ مَن يُعْجِبُكَ قَوْلُهُ فِي الْحَيوةِ الدُّنْيَا
وَيُشْهِدُ اللّهَ عَلَى مَا فِي قَلْبِهِ وَهُوَ أَلَدُّ الْخِصَامِ

(205) وَإِذَا تَوَلَّى سَعَى فِي الأَرْضِ لِيُفْسِدَ فِيِهَا وَيُهْلِكَ
الْحَرْثَ وَالنَّسْلَ وَاللّهُ لاَ يُحِبُّ الفَسَادَ

(206) وَإِذَا قِيلَ لَهُ اتَّقِ اللّهَ أَخَذَتْهُ الْعِزَّةُ بِالإِثْمِ
فَحَسْبُهُ جَهَنَّمُ وَلَبِئْسَ الْمِهَادُ

204. " And among people is he whose speech in the life of this world
causes you to wonder, and he calls on Allah to witness as to what is in
his heart, yet he is the most violent of adversaries."

205. " And when he turns back, he strives to cause mischief on the
earth, and to destroy the tilth and the stock. But Allah does not love
mischief."

206. " And when it is said to him, ' Fear Allah ', pride drives him
towards sin. So Hell shall be sufficient for him and it is an evil abode
indeed."

**Occasion of Revelation:**

These verses were revealed about a man by the name of
'Ukhnos-ibn-Shariq. He was a handsome man and of attractive speech. He
pretended to the friendship of the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) and showed himself
a Muslim. Whenever he went to the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) , he expressed his
Faith to him and, though he was a hypocrite, he took an oath that he
loved the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) and had believed in God. The Messenger of
Allah spoke with him warmly and treated him with his kindness and
affection.

When there came a conflict between the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) and the
members of the Thaqif Tribe, that man took Muslims by surprise and
killed their beasts. He burnt their farming crops.

some other commentators have said that he passed by a farm belonging to
Muslims and set its agricultural crops on fire. He

153

hamstringed their beasts, too, and, thereby, made his hidden hypocrisy
manifest. Then, the above verses were revealed.

**Commentary:**

As mentioned in the occasion of revelation, the verse points to the
hypocrisy of some mischief-makers and warns the Messenger of Allah
(p.b.u.h.) against them. It says:

" And among people is he whose speech in the life of this world causes
you to wonder, and he calls on Allah to witness as to what is in his
heart, yet he is the most violent of adversaries." There are some people
who, with their smooth tongue, express Faith and indulge in plausible
talk with many oaths. But, the same persons are the most harmful enemies
and hostile ones against Islam; and, hiddenly they stir up quarrels and
cause all sorts of mischief: they spoil the crops of the farms, strive
to waste and defame the believing men and the religion of the Truth.

\* \* \* \*

Allah uncovers their tricks and makes their interiors manifest for His
Messenger that they try in the path of making mischief. If they were
true in their statements, they would not cast mischief and destruction,
because everybody knows that Allah does not love mischief. " And when he
turns back, he strives to cause mischief on the earth, and to destroy
the tilth and the stock. But Allah does not love mischief." There may
come forth this question that why the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) treated such
people kindly. The reason was for that he was commissioned to accept the
statements of all people as long as they did not show the contrary
status. And such should be that, of course. Some commentators have said
that the purpose of the phrase /wa'i¶a tawalla/ " And when he turns back
" at the beginning of the second verse may have been in the sense of '
government ', since the term /tawalla/ derived from the root /wilayat/
means government. Taking this consideration, the commentary of this
verse is such: ' when the

154

hypocrites take the government in their control, they begin making
mischief and destruction and stretching oppression and transgression
amongst people. Then as the result of the spread of oppression and
cruelty, the cities and societies turn to ruin and the lives and
properties of people will be in danger. These wicked people are so that
when they are prohibited from doing disgrace, their fanaticism and
obstinacy will be excited, then, they not only do not hearken to the
advices of the benevolent advisers but, with their own specific pride,
increase their wickedness and evil actions. Such people cannot be
controlled save with the Fire of Hell.

" And when it is said to him, ' Fear Allah ', pride drives him towards
sin. So Hell shall be sufficient for him and it is an evil abode
indeed." In fact, this verse is a hint to one of other characteristics
of hypocrites which is a stable zeal and a harsh pride and obstinacy
that drive them to the limits of the greatest evil:

"...pride drives him towards sin. ..."

In contrast to this group, there are the believing people who, under
the government of Faith, are apart from this hideous and dangerous
quality.

155

(207) وَمِنَ النَّاسِ مَن يَشْرِي نَفْسَهُ ابْتِغَاء مَرْضَاتِ اللّهِ
وَاللّهُ رَؤُوفٌ بِالْعِبَادِ

207. " And among people is he who sells his self to seek the pleasure
of Allah; and Allah is affectionate unto His (faithful) servants."

Commentary:

Ibn-i-Abil-Hadeed, one of the scholars of the Sunni schools who lived
in the seventh century A.H., has cited in his famous book,
Sharh-i-Nahjul-Balaqah (the Explanation of the statements of Imam 'Ali
(a.s.)) , that the commentators totally had said that the above verse
was revealed about and in the praise of Ali-ibn-Abi-Talib after that he
readily slept in the bed of the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) on the night known as
Laylat-ul-Mabit.(1) This idea is in wide scale famous so that none can
deny it but a pagan or a crazy one.

The explanation of the event precisely is such that the pagans of Mecca
decided to elect one person from each tribe to kill the Prophet Muhammad
(p.b.u.h.) all together in order to prevent the rise of Bani-Hashim
tribe in vengeance for his bloodshed. They thought, in that way, they
could be free from the Prophet's Call. But the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) became
aware of their hostile plot before it was too late. Then,
'Ali-ibn-Abi-Talib (a.s.) accepted readily to sleep in the Prophet's bed
so that he (p.b.u.h.) could get out of Mecca safely.

As soon as Ali (a.s.) slept in that bed instead of the holy Prophet
(p.b.u.h.) , the Providence questioned His two dear angels, Gabriel and
Michael, which of them was ready to be devoted to the other, but neither
of them was ready to do that. So, the Lord told them to watch then how
'Ali-ibn-Abi-Talib (a.s.) was ready to devote his soul for the Messenger
of Allah (p.b.u.h.) .

Many of the Muslim scholars have confessed to the above fact. The Late
'Allamah Amini has mentioned the names of such scholars in

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

(1) Sharh-i-Nahjul-Balaqah, vol. 13, p. 262, Egypt Edition, 1961

156

his famous book: Al-Qadir, vol. 2, p. 48, including Musnad-i-Imam Ahmad
Hanbal, vol. 1, p. 348.

It is cited in Atyab-ul-Bayan Fi Tafsir-il-Qur'an that the book called
Q­ayat-ul-Maram has narrated twenty traditions, nine of which are
through the Sunnite scholars and eleven of them are narrated through
Shi'ah scholars, denoting that the verse under discussion was revealed
on the virtue of Ali-ibn-Abi-Talib (a.s.) on Laylat-ul-Mabit i.e. the
night when he (a.s.) slept in the Prophet's bed and the Messenger of
Allah (p.b.u.h.) migrated to Medina. ( 1)

One of the books written in the third century A.H. entitled:
Tarikh-i-Tabari, vol. 2, p. 373 has explained the description of the
event of Laylat-ul-Mabit, the night in which 'Ali (a.s.) slept in the
bed of the Messenger of Allah (p.b.u.h.) . This event is also explained
in Tarikh-i-Ya'qubi, vol. 2, p. 39.

Ibn-i-Abil-Hadeed expresses in Sharh-i-Nahjul-Balaq­ah, vol. 4, p. 73
that Mu'awiyah payed four thousand Dirhams in order that it would be
said by people that the above holy verse was revealed upon the virtue of
Ibn-i-Muljam.

Some of the books from both Sunni and Shi'ah schools, which have
vividly considered the revelation of this verse upon the virtue of
'Ali-ibn-Abi-Talib (a.s.) , are as follows: 'Ihya'-u-'Ulum-id-Din, vol.
3, p.238 by Q­azali;Tathkirat-ul-Khawas, by Sebt-ibn-Jauzi Hanafi;
As-Sirat-un-Nabawiyyah Ibn-i-Husham, vol. 2, p. 291, by Ibn-i-Husham;
As-Sirat-ul-Halabiyyah, vol. 2, p. 29, printed in
Maktabat-ut-Tijariyat-ul-Kubra, Egypt, by Halabi; Al-Fusul-ul- Muhimmah,
by Ibn-i-Sabbaq­ Maliki.

**Explanations:**

1- Sometimes it happens that an evil person says something which seems
wonderful : " And among people is he whose speech... causes you to
wonder, ..." (the Qur'an, 2: 204) ; but, in comparison with that, a true
believer does something that causes the world to wonder:

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

(1) Atyab-ul-Bayan, vol. 2, p. 386

157

" And among people is he who sells his self..."

2- The most profitable bargain is the one that a person sells his best
property, his soul, to Allah, his Creator. Such a bargain is done
neither for Paradise nor for being safe from the Fire of Hell, but it is
merely performed for gaining His pleasure :

"...to seek the pleasure of Allah; ..."

3- This is important that a person ventures his self and puts his soul
in danger on the way of Allah by going forward towards the danger with
no fear of it, whether the one confronts that danger or not. Regarding
to the occasion of revelation, the praise is for the one who exposes his
soul in the process of sale although there happens no adventure.

4- The love and affection of Allah is the best reward. Allah has
ordinarily assigned a definite reward for every action in the Qur'an,
but in this verse, instead of expressing any sorts of reward, it simply
says Allah is affectionate:

"...and Allah is affectionate unto His (faithful) servants."

158

(208) يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ ادْخُلُواْ فِي السِّلْمِ كَآفَّةً
وَلاَ تَتَّبِعُواْ خُطُوَاتِ الشَّيْطَانِ إِنَّهُ لَكُمْ عَدُوٌّ
مُّبِينٌ

(209) فَإِن زَلَلْتُمْ مِّن بَعْدِ مَا جَاءتْكُمُ الْبَيِّنَاتُ
فَاعْلَمُواْ أَنَّ اللّهَ عَزِيزٌ حَكِيمٌ

208. " O' you who have Faith! enter you all into submission (to Allah
in being in peace) , and follow not the footsteps of Satan, for he is a
manifest foe for you. "

209. " But if you slip after clear arguments have come to you, then
know that Allah is the Mighty, the Wise. "

**Occasion of Revelation:**

It is narrated from 'Akramah that this verse was revealed about the
Jews who had converted to Islam, such as: 'Abdullah-ibn-Salam,
Tha'labat-ibn-Salam, Ibn-i-Yamin, Asad and Asid (the sons of Ka'b) ,
Shu'bat-ibn-Amr, Bahira-Rahib, Sa'id-ibn-Amr, and Ghays-ibn-Zayd. They
went to the Messenger of Allah (p.b.u.h.) and asked him to allow them to
glorify Saturday and recite the Torah; and, similar to the custom in the
Age of Ignorance, to avoid consuming the milk and meat of camel . (1)

**Commentary:**

The worldly peace is possible only under the Shadow of Faith. The
Qur'anic words /silm/ and /salam/ in lexicon mean 'peace' and
'quietness'. So, this verse invites all the believes to peace, and in
view of the fact that it addresses the believers, the verse means that
peace can come into existence only with the existence of Faith. Thus,
war and anxiety cannot be removed only by relying on mere human made
rules and laws based on material affairs. Then, it is only by the use of
the spiritual power of Faith that human beings, in spite of all their

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(1) Qur'an-il-Hakim, Persian translation, by Muhammad Khajawi, p. 263

159

differences, can live peacefully and in fellowship together when they,
consequently, may form a worldly government. " O' you who have Faith!
enter you all into submission (to Allah in being in peace) , ..."

It is evident that material affairs such as: language, race, wealth,
geographical region, and social classes are totally the origin of
separation and dispersion. They cannot provide the real worldly peace
which needs a firm circle of connection between the hearts of human
beings in the world. This linking circle is only Faith in Allah which is
beyond those differences. Therefore, a certain worldly peace without
Faith is impossible; the same manner that the inner peace and
tranquillity in the unity of a person and in his spiritual environment,
without having a true Faith, is impossible.

" ... and follow not the footsteps of Satan, ..."

As it was formerly mentioned, the Satanic temptations and deviations
usually come forth gradually and , according to the meanings of the
Qur'an, each of them is counted as the following of a step of Satan.(1)
Here, this fact is stated again that deviation from the right and
following the stimuli of enmity, hypocrisy, fighting and blood-shedding
usually begin from slight and simple stages. Believing people should be
aware of their advent in order to stop them. There is a proverb common
among Arab people which says: Verily, a destructive fight begins with a
slap.

"... for he is a manifest foe for you. " The enmity of Satan against
human kind is not something hidden or unknown. Satan has decided and
sworn to behave inimically towards man since the beginning of the
creation of Adam, and does his best to settle this enmity among the
human race. Yet, as it has been described before, this opposition and
hostility can not harm the true believers but it is a secret alongside
the path of spiritual development.

\* \* \* \*

" But if you slip after clear arguments have come to you, ... "

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(1) The Qura'n, 2: 168; 6: 142; 24:21

160 The path is clear; the program is clear; and the destination is
also clear; so, there is no room for falling for the temptations of
Satan. Yet, if you deviate from the straight path and go astray while
you have all of these clear reasons in hand, it will be your own fault.
Thus, do know that Allah is both 'Mighty' , so that no one can flee from
His justice, and 'Wise' so that He judges nothing unjustly.

" ... then know that Allah is the Mighty, the Wise. "

**Explanations:**

Another interpretation of the verse says: this verse indicates that the
Holy Prophet (p.b.u.h.) through this revelation was informed of what
will happen to those who joined the ranks of Islam for some interest of
their own or other. It is clearly stated in this verse that those who
backslide after adopting the faith, may not foolishly imagine that their
going astray is going to affect in the least, the cause of God or would
cause any inconvenience to the cause of those who believe in God. Those
who go astray, need not be arrogant as to imagine that they will defeat
God's Power or Wisdom. The loss will be of those who go astray and not
in the least of anybody else.

161

(210) هَلْ يَنظُرُونَ إِلاَّ أَن يَأْتِيَهُمُ اللّهُ فِي ظُلَلٍ مِّنَ
الْغَمَامِ وَالْمَلآئِكَةُ وَقُضِيَ الأَمْرُ وَإِلَى اللّهِ تُرْجَعُ
الأمُورُ

210. " Are they waiting for aught but Allah should come to them in the
shadows of clouds, with the angels? The matter has (already) been
decided; and to Allah is the reversion of all affairs. "

**Commentary:**

In this verse Prophet Muhammad (p.b.u.h.) is addressed, where the Lord,
following the previous subject, remarks whether all these available
signs and clear evidences and ordinances are not enough to protect
people from deviation and being safe from the grips of their obvious
foe, (Satan) .

Do the followers of Satan's command, besides having all those clear
signs, expect that Allah accompanied with the angels, should come unto
them in canopies (1) of cloud and yield them some evidences more clear
than the present ones? This is impossible, because Allah is not
substance. Suppose this impossible happening becomes possible, what is
the use of it when it is not needed? " Are they waiting for aught but
Allah should come to them in the shadows of clouds, with the angles? ...
"

It is in the case that the whole matter is decreed and determined, and
nothing has remained undone. " ... The matter has (already) been
decided; ..." And the destination of everything is to Allah, thus the
end of all affairs is unto Him.

" ... and to Allah is the reversion of all affairs. " Therefore, the
apparently interrogative sentence at the beginning of the verse, in
meaning, is a negative question which means such a

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

(1) The term /zulal/ is the plural form of /zullah/ meaning: 'awning,
sun-shade, canopy, tent... , or whatever that produces shade' . Thus,
the phrase /zulalin min-al-qa­mam/ means: 'canopies of clouds'.

162

thing cannot happen. (This is besides that, as we said, the occurrence
of this impossible action is not necessary, because all the means of
guidance have sufficiently been provided for the human race) . So,
according to this interpretation, there is nothing hidden in the meaning
of the verse; and, therefore, the words of it have exactly and totally
been commented on.

But, some of commentators have not taken the initial sentence of the
verse as a positive interrogation with a negative sense. They have
considered it a kind of warning against the sinners and those who follow
the temptations of Satan, (a threat causing worldly punishment or the
punishment of the world to come) . In this case, the meaning of the
verse will be as follows:

Are such people, with those unbecoming deeds and behaviour of theirs,
awaiting for the command of Allah and His angels (of wrath) to come upon
them for their punishment and put them in the chastisement of this world
or the coming world, and put an end to their affairs? Of course, their
deeds have no fruit for them but this very mentioned one indeed.

It is also worthy to note the explanation by al-'Allamah as-Sayyid
Muh¤ammad H¤usayn at-T¤abataba'i in Al-Mizan Commentary, vol. 3, pp.
152, 153 (English version) , about the verse under discussion where it
says:

It is self-evident truth, which is also proved by the Qur'an and the
sunnah, that attributes of the body connot be used for Allah, nor can He
be described with adjectives of transient things. No such word, phrase
of sentence can be used for Him which implies transience, need,
deficiency or want. Allah says: Nothing whatsoever (is there) like the
like of Him. (42:11) ; and Allah is He Who is Self-sufficient (35:15) ;
Allah is the Creator of everything. (39:62) There are numerous such
verses; and all of them are confirmed and decisive ones to which the
ambiguous verses should be referred. It is these confirmed verses which
guide us towards the correct interpretation of the ambiguous ones. If
any verse apparently attributes to Allah and action or a characteristic
of transient things, then it must be referred to the confirmed verses
and interpreted in a way which is not below His dignity nor opposed to
His

163

beautiful names.

Now here is a verse which attributes the action of 'coming' to Allah. A
few other verses also have used this word for Him. And comes your Lord
with the angels arrayed in ranks (89:22) ; then came upon them Allah
from whence they did not expect (59:2) ; so Allah came upon their
structure from the foundations (16:26) . In all such verses, it is
necessary to interpret them with such meaning which are worthy of Divine
sublimity. We may give them the meaning of, let us say, sending His
chastisement upon them or surrounding them with His power of wrath.
Accordingly, the meaning of 'Allah should come to them' in this verse
shall be: 'Allah should surround them with His power for enforcing His
decree on them'.


164


