Poor Governance As a Root Cause of World Problems
=================================================

It seems that lack of good governance and sufficient social capital
among individual, community, organizations, institutions and state in
the present system creates different type of problems. The governance
system performs at low level due to different factors including its one
dimensional structure of flow of information. This weakness in the
governance system creates a variety of problems at different levels. All
these bad outcomes in turn create a system of governance that leads to
world problems. Therefore, search of an ideal form of governance that
enables solution of problems, efficient and timely service delivery in a
peaceful world is desired.

4. Why Poverty Resides. Within the citizens of any country haves and
have-nots and inter countries poverty resides due to inequalities in
distribution of wealth, employment opportunities, natural resources,
environments, educational standard, health facilities, exploitation of
labor force, interest based economic order ete.

At global level poverty, debt servicing of the 3rd world countries,
poor countries are poor because they are poor, exploitation of labor
force at global level. To reduce the inequalities in distribution the
resources must be diverted to have- nots for optimum welfare.

**4,1 Balance of Resources in Faith Based Economy**

In the faith based economic system balance of resources is sought
between the citizens of the society. Muslims believe that if left
unchecked, unhealthy human instincts may be exploited to make money
through immoral and injurious products. Profit seeking can create
monopolies that paralyze market forces or at least hinder their natural
operation. Islam recognizes private ownership, profit motive and market
forces It is recognized that capital and entrepreneur are two separate
factors of production.

The person who contributes capital in the form of money in any
commercial enterprise assumes the risk of loss; so, is entitled to a
proportionate share in the actual profit. In this manner capital has an
intrinsic element of entrepreneurship with respect to business risk.
Therefore, instead of a fixed return as interest, it derives profit. The
more the profit of the business is then the higher the return on
capital. In this way the profits generated by the commercial activities
are equitably distributed to all persons engaged in the business.

A system of governance may be derived from religious doctrines
pertaining to welfare of humanity. A number of research based studies by
economists have proved positive relationship between economic growth and
religion.

Religious beliefs also affect individual's wellbeing as Chamberlain and
Zika (1988) have discussed the relationship of religiosity and
psychological wellbeing of individuals. Their results show that
religiosity has positive relationship with wellbeing but to smaller
extent. McCleary and Barro (2003) conclude that although religiosity
tends to decline overall with economic development, the partial
relations depend on the specific dimensions of development.

They documented that the measures of religiosity are positively related
to education, negatively related to urbanization, and positively related
to the presence of children. Increased life expectancy tends to be
negatively related with church attendance but positively related to
religious beliefs. Hence their productivity will be more as compared to
those persons who are not religious or less religious, that will
increase welfare in this world as well as the life here after.

Barro and McCleary (2003) find that economic growth responds positively
to the extent of religious beliefs, notably those in hell, heaven, and
life hereafter but negatively to church attendance. That is, growth
depends on the extent of believing relative to belonging. Their results
accord with a perspective in which religious beliefs influence
individual traits that enhance economic performance. To them the beliefs
are, in turn, the principal output of the religion sector, and church
attendance measures the inputs to this sector.

Barro and McCleary (2003) pointed out that greater religious pluralism,
measured by the diversity of adherence among major religions, is
associated with higher church attendance and beliefs. Across the
religions, attendance at religious services is higher for Catholic than
for the other religions, except for Muslim. The beliefs in heaven and
hell tend to be highest for Muslim, then Catholic, then the other
faiths. However religiosity is affected due to prevailing political and
governance system.

McCleary and Barro (2003) pointed out that the presence of a state
religion is positively related to the religiosity measures, probably
because of the subsidies that typically flow to the established
religions. Therefore religion may promote good governance. An ideal type
of governance in the globe is predicted in religious teachings. The
Islamic and other religious books give evidences of arrival of Imam
Mahdi and Jesus.

Divine Revelation Governance, Exploration, Distribution Philanthropy,
Donations, The Holy Qur'an, Hadith and Islamic literature tells about a
future which shall be based on justice, equity and would ensure
prosperity and human elevation as superb creation.

Qur'an Verse 32 note by S.V Amir Ali;

"this is as well the prophecy of the advent of the Imam Muhammad
Al-Mahdi, the Twelfth and the Last Imam or the Apostolic successor to
the Holy Prophet who is also named Muhmmad; in whose regime, the whole
world will be united into one single unit of a Universal Rule on earth
when the darkness of falsehood shall be gone and the world will be
wholly lighted with the light of divine justice, peace and security,
through the disbelievers may not like it to happen."

This interpretation has been vouched by most of the prominent and the
leading commentators eve of the Sunni and Shia schools of Islamic
thoughts.

**Qur'an :Sura Tauba 33**

"He it is who sent His Apostle with guidance and the religion of truth,
that may prevail it over all other religions though may detest it the
polytheists."

S. V Amir Ali notes that the triumph of Islam over all religions
mentioned in this verse is explained under the previous verse 32. It is
a note of prophecy accepted on all hands of the various schools in Islam
that the complete triumph of Islam over all the other religions of the
world will be realized during the regime of the awaited Mahdi, a
Hashimite of Holy family of Prophet Muhammad.

Notwithstanding the strength Christianity and the other major religions
of the world have gained, the beginning of the prevalence of the Islamic
faith over them all, has already set in. The Christian doctrine of the
vicarious atonement, the belief in the Trinity and the worshipping of
idols of the saints, all such false beliefs and wrong practices are fast
dying away a natural death and the monotheism and the inclination
towards the correct idea of worshipping only the One True God, is
gaining ground.

Add two sentences

**4.3 WHAT CAN BE AN IDEAL FORM OF GOVERNMENT?**

The ideal form of a government would be that which ensures eradication
of world problems like injustice, cruelty, corruption, mal-functioning
of institutions, mis-management of all types etc. Abundant literature
exist telling point of view of common people, philosophers, politicians
and others about the ideal form of government.

The Muslims, however, believe with conviction that the best form of
governance shall be ultimate established by Islam on whole globe. In
other divine religions it is believed that the Kingdom of God shall be
established when Jesus Christ shall come again. This view does not
create any difference from Islamic point of view as Jesus is believed to
be a Minister with the Holy Imaam Mahdi and He (Jesus) will say prayer
in Baitul Muqaddas behind Imaam e Zamaan (Imaam Mahdi A.S.).

**6. Conclusion.**

In the paper, the problems in current economic systems of the world
have been discussed. The main problems of social injustice, unequal
income distribution and other problems of governance both are with in
and across the countries. All these problems are reflected in the poor
governance of the poor countries. The conventional economics
fundamentally has no solution to these problems because the forecasting
in the conventional economics is done by the empirical method which is
based upon the adaptive expectations that may be true or wrong.

But Divine economics not only deals with the issues like growth,
employment, inflation etc. but also focuses on well being, happiness and
improve all other social indicators of human life. Moreover, the
problems such as equitable distribution of wealth, justice, equal
opportunities employment and economic activities. More over in divine
economics forecasting is made by using aforesaid three methods such as
divine revelation, experience / perception of Wiseman and the empirical
methods, hence forecasting by the divine economics will be true.

**References**

Ahmad, Khurshid, (1980) 'Studies in Islamic Economics' Islamic
Foundation U.K.

Azzi, Corry and Ronald Ehrenberg.1975, "Household Allocation of Time
and Church Attendance." Journal of Political Economy 84(3):27-56.

Chapra, M. Umer, (1992) 'Islam and Islamic Challenges' Islamic
Foundation, Leicester, U.K.

Economics for the Future, (17-19 Sep. 2003) A Cambridge Journal of
Economics Conference,(net).

Gale, Douglas (2005), "Is Psychology the Future of Economics", (net).

Hamdani, Syed Nisar Hussain (2003), A Divine Economics Framework for
the Study of Time Allocation Behavior and Religiosity. The Kashmir
Economic Review Vol. XI No.2

Hussain, Zahid … Atherton, John, "Faiths and Finance: A Place for
Faith-Based Economics (a preliminary statement from Muslims and
Christians in Manchester)", Manchester Diocesan Board for Ministry and
Society, 90 Deansgate, Manchester (net). Email:
mmiller@manchester.anglican.org

Legge, John M, 'Economics and the Future' (net).

Nadvi (1995), The Economic Verses of the Holy Qura'n, Ph. D.
Dissertation, UU.

Samuel Bowles, Herbert Gintis and Melissa Osborne (2001), The
Determinants of Earnings: A Behavioral Approach, Journal of Economic
Literature, Vol. XXXIX (December 2001),pp. 1137-1176.

Shah, Akhter Hussain (2007), Resource Allocation among Consumption,
Labor, Supply, Human Capital, Social Capital and Religious Human
Capital; Theory and Empirical Analysis. Unpublished Ph. D. Dissertation,
PIDE Islamabad.

USA's Future Economic Collapse, Excerpt from FOUNDATION TO ALL FREEDOM
(Net)


World Population International Data Base (US Census Bureau)

www.Census.gov/ipc/www/idb/worldpopinfo.html


World GDP country wise Year 2006

www.economywatch.com

15. Monthly Update World Populations Growth Present Past

Earth trends.wri.org/updatesnode/51


16. Data Quick Reference Tables World Bank

www.worldbank.org/data/quickreference/quickref. html


Krueger, Anne O, (2005), "How Stable is the Global Economy"
International Monetary Fund, Standard Institute of Policy Research:
Economic Summit Stanford, California, February 11, 2005.


World Population International Data Base (US Census Bureau)


