


Medical Sects in Islam
The author is a well-known Iranian scholar who has edited, either alone
or jointly with other scholars, numerous classics of Islamic philosophy,
mysticism, jurisprudence, etc. Among these are: Sabzawari's Sharh Ghurar
al-fara'id (1348 H.Sh) (which he, together with T. Izutsu has also
translated into English), Nasir Khusro's*Diwan* (1357 H.Sh), \`Abd
al-Razzaq Lahiji's*Shawariq al-‘ilham fi sharh Tajrid al-kalam* , Shaykh
Hasan ibn Zayn al-Din's*Ma\`alim al-din wa maladh al-mujtahidin
(Ma\`alim al-usul)* , Abu \`Abd Allah Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr
Tabrizi's*Sharh-e bist-o panj muqaddameh-ye Ibn Maymun* .

Introduction

In the history of Greek medicine three main schools were notable, namely
the empiricists*(Ashab al* *‑* *Tajarib)* , the dogmatists*(Ashab al*
*‑* *Qiyas)* , and the methodists (*Ashab al* *‑* *Hiyal)* . Different
opinions and arguments of these sects can best be seen in two works of
Galen: "On Medical Sects for Students"*(Fi firaq al* *‑* *tibb li al*
*‑* *muta'allimin)* and "On Medical Experience"*(Fi al* *‑* *tajribah
al* *‑* *tibbiyyah)* . In his work, Pinax, which is in fact a list of
his own works, Galen advises the students to start their studies by
reading "On Medical Sects."

Hunayn ibn Ishaq, who translated this book into Arabic, says that the
purpose of Galen was to bring side by side the arguments of these three
sects, which differ from each other by genus. Hunayn also adds that each
of these sects includes smaller divisions which differ from each other
by the species. This book, known as De sectis in Latin, was one of the
sixteen works by Galen which were compulsory for the medical students of
Alexandria.

Galen's "On Medical Experience" was translated by Hunayn from Greek into
Syriac and by Hubaysh from Syriac into Arabic. In this work, Galen
creates an imaginary court in which the representatives of each school
demonstrate their positions and refute the positions of the other
schools. He starts his work by saying:

**The art of healing was originally invented and discovered by analogy
(qiyas) in conjunction with experience (tajribah) and today also it can
only be practised excellently and done well by one who employs both of
these methods.**

Although his position is made clear in the above passage, yet he
disassociates himself from either of the two sects, namely the
dogma­tists and the empiricists, in the following statement:

**You must not allow yourself to think that what I am about to say first
against empiricism in this book is my own personal opinion, or that the
second argument I use in support of empiricism is my own view. Rather I
shall let one of the dogmatists bring forward the first argument, which
is similar to Asclepiades' view, and the second argument shall be laid
down by a repre­sentative of the empiricists, Menodots if you like, or
Serapion, or Theodosius."**

At the same time as the Greek medical heritage was being trans­mitted
into Arabic, arguments concerning the nature of these sects were taking
place among Islamic physicians.

Al‑Mas'udi states that at the time of al‑Wathiq, the \`Abbasid caliph, a
group of philosophers and physicians, among which were Bukhtishu\`, Ibn
Masuyah, Hunayn and Salmuyah, were asked by the caliph about the origin
of medicine and whether it was sense experience, reason or tradition.

One of those present spoke about the arguments of each sect on these
matters. When al‑Wathiq asked about the opinion of the major­ity of the
physicians, they unanimously declared that they are in favour of the
dogmatists.

Ishaq ibn Hunayn in "The History of Physicians and Philosophers" quotes
John Philoponos as saying that Asclepius, who was the first physician,
invented medicine with the help of experience. And after mentioning the
physicians who appeared after Asclepios, Ishiq continues as follows:

**They considered experience and analogy as the most –correct methods of
medicine. Medicine thus continued to be transmitted from those pupils to
those members of their families whom they taught and left behind.**

**When Plato appeared and studied the treatises, he realized that
experience alone was bad and dangerous and that analogy alone was not
correct. There­fore, he considered the two views together as correct. He
burned the books which they had composed and left the old books which
contained the two views together.**

Ishaq mentions that after Plato, Hippocrates the son of Heracleides
remained as the unique man of his time, the man of perfect virtue, the
one who had become proverbial, the philosopher‑physician. He
strength­ened the art of analogy and experience in a marvellous manner,
so that no blame would be able to dissolve it and tear it apart. Then he
con­tinues:

**When Hippocrates died, he left behind children and pupils from the
clan of Asclepios and other clans. Medicine continued to be transmitted
from those physicians to those whom they taught, until the time of the
appearance of Galen. The noteworthy physicians in the interval between
Hippocrates and Galen are quite a few.**

After mentioning Hippocrates and Galen, who supported experi­ence
together with analogy, Ishaq refers to methodism as follows:

**Among them there was one who held a different opinion and composed
books on the procedures of methodism in the craft of medicine. He wanted
to corrupt the people and to lead them away from the belief in analogy
and experience. Some physicians continued to accept methodism, and
others did not, until Galen appeared. He disapproved of methodism,
destroyed it, burned the books that existed on it, and invalidated that
technique.**

As mentioned above, in the 3rd/9th century, scholars and physi­cians
paid special attention to these three sects and their arguments. What
was agreed upon was that experience and analogy should be used together
to solve medical issues and that each one alone was not valid. This
point has been made clear by Ibn Abi Sadiq Nishaburi (fl. 5th/ 11th
century) in his "Commentary on Hippocrates's Aphorisms".

In connection with the first aphorism, that is "Life is short, and art
is long, the occasion fleeting, and experience is dangerous and analogy
is difficult"*(al* *‑* *\`umr qasir wa al* *‑* *sina\`ah tawilah wa al*
*‑* *waqt dayyiq wa al­-tajribah khatar wa al* *‑* *qada ‘asir)* , Ibn
Abi Sadiq comments that if experi­ence is not based on analogy and not
founded on a principle and rule it can be very dangerous. On the other
hand, analogy, which is difficult in itself, cannot be used as a source
for other arts, without the help of experience.

The most comprehensive account on the medical sects is given by the
Iranian physician Ibn Hindu of Qumm (d. 420/1029) in his book entitled
"The Key to the Science of Medicine"*(Miftah al* *‑* *tibb)* .

The sixth chapter of*Miftah al* *‑* *tibb* is devoted to the medical
sects, a summary of which is as follows:

**Each of the various medical \`sects' has its own particular view and
method in recognizing illness and treating it. The physicians agree that
the goal of medicine is to confer the benefit of health; that is, to
give health to sick persons. On the method of obtaining the things which
are beneficial to health, however, they differ. Some say that such thins
are obtained through experience (tajribah ).**

**These are called \`empiricists'. Others believe that experience alone
is not enough, but that is must rather be combined with analogy (qiyas);
these are called the \`dogma­tists'. There is also a third group, called
the \`methodists' (ashab al-hiyal), because they imagine that they have,
through clever tactics, cut short the science of medicine, purifying it
of the superficialities and accretions with which the empiricists and
dogmatists preoccupy themselves.**

Ibn Hindu, after introducing the three sects, goes on to describe and
characterize each of these sects as follows.

The Empiricists - Ashab al‑Tajarib

The empiricists say that medicine is derived from experience, experience
being the knowledge which is obtained through the senses. They also say
that the principles and rules of medicine result from four things:
incident*(ittifaq)* , intention*(iradah)* , comparison*(tashbih)* , and
the use of something in one case that was used in another similar
case*(naql min shay' iki shabihihi)* .

\`Incident' is in turn divided into two parts: natural incident, such as
a nosebleed, a sweat, vomiting, or something similar which occurs
naturally and which brings either benefit or harm; and \`accidental'
incident, which occurs in a human being neither naturally nor through
his intention, and which similarly results in either some benefit or
some harm. An example of an accidental incident is when a sick person
falls and blood flows out of him.

\`Intention' means when something is experienced by choice; the motive
for such an \`experience' may be something seen in a dream or other
similar thins.

\`Comparison' is when the physician employs one of the three instances
mentioned above (that is intention, natural incident, or accidental
incident) when a new case presents itself. For example, when he sees
that his patient, who has a bloody fever, obtains relief through a flow
of blood from his nose, whether that occurs naturally, acciden­tally, or
through his personal will, then he will try drawing blood in similar
illnesses.

Finally,*naql* is the method employed when the physician en­counters an
illness which he has not seen before, or which he has seen but for which
there is no proven treatment. In this case he will resort to*naql* ,
that is he will use a medicine which has been proven in the case of one
illness in a similar illness, or will use a medicine proven in the case
of one organ of the body for another similar organ; or if he does not
have access to the proper medicine, he will use a similar one.

The Dogmatists - Ashab al‑Qiyas

The dogmatists hold that there is no doubt that sense and experi­ence
are the root and principle of all sciences and arts, but these must be
subject to the instruments of thought. They say that the rules of
medicine and of other arts must be derived through thought and analogy;
that is, the determination of unknown things through things which are
known. It is through the use of thought and analogy that the various
natures and constitutions may be known, and through which the faculties
which are the cause of changes in the body may also be known.

Causes of changes in the body are of two types. One is that which
necessarily results in alteration: such as climate, movement and rest,
food and drink, sleep and wakefulness, and constipation and looseness,
as well as mental occurrences such as sorrow or happiness, anger or joy.
The second type of .cause is that which results in a change in the body
without that change being necessary: such as the change which appears as
the result of the blow of a sword, the attack of a wild animal, or burns
inflicted on the body.

It is also necessary to know the type of illness which the physician
intends to treat, for if it is not known it will not be possible to take
it away from the body. Finally, one must know the extent of the illness
in order that the type of treatment be determined. The extent will vary
in accordance with the following factors: the bodily strength of the
patient, age, temperament, the season in which the illness appears, the
weather on the day it appears, the type of city the patient lives in,
and his habits and profession.

The difference between these two sects is that when a patient comes to
an empiricist he refers to his previous experience of persons who have
had the same type of illness to the same degree, and who are of similar
age and temperament. Then he prescribes the same medicine which proved
effective in the past. The analogist will, however, on the basis of the
same evidence ‑ that is age, temperament, habits, and residence ‑
envisage a general rule with regard to each type of sickness, and when
he is presented with a new case will refer to that rule.

The Methodists - Ashab al‑Hiyal

As for the methodists, they examine neither the causes of illnesses, nor
the habits and age of the patient, nor the times of the year,
tempe­rament and residence, bodily strength or the members of the body.
They do not pay attention to each separate and particular case in
itself, and they say that such cases are unlimited.

Their attention is directed instead to a knowledge of the most general
aspects which consist, according to them, either of \`constipation' and
\`looseness', or a combi­nation of the two. By \`constipation' they mean
the trapping of waste which should normally be eliminated from the body,
such as the retention of urine and other such things. By \`looseness'
they mean an excess in the elimination of these same wastes, such as
constant urination and the like. By a combination of the two, finally,
they mean a sickness which combines both the conditions, such as an eye
which is swollen but which is at the same time constantly tearing.

The methodists state that the treatment of these three general illnesses
is accomplished either through the management of food and drink, through
rest and movement, or through sleep and wakefulness.

Ibn Hindu finally declares that the dogmatists are correct, and goes on
to demonstrate the invalidity of both the empiricist and methodist
schools. He concludes that it is the dogmatists who hold out the
possibility of progress in methods of diagnosis and treatment. The
empiricists, because they do not believe in analogy, are extremely
limited in this area As for the methodists, who do not deal at all with
particularities but pay attention only to certain general aspects, are
subject to many errors.

In this paper an attempt was made to show that the arguments of the
three Greek medical schools were continued among the physicians of the
Islamic world. In spite of the fact that among the Greeks atten­tion was
paid to experience and analogy together, it appears that Islamic
physicians were more in favour of analogy. It can be suggested that this
is due to the influence of logic in the centres of scholarship. The
influ­ence of logic is evident not only in medicine but also in Arabic
grammar and Islamic jurisprudence. It is hoped that more research would
be carried out on this point.
