


Introduction
We maintain that the business of philosophy is nothing other than to
look into creation and to ponder over it in order to be guided to the
Creator -- in other words, to look into the meaning of existence. For
the knowledge of creation leads to the cognizance of the Creator,
through the knowledge of the created. The more perfect becomes the
knowledge of creation, the more perfect becomes the knowledge of the
Creator. The Law encourages and exhorts us to observe creation. Thus, it
is clear that this is to be taken either as a religious injunction or as
something approved by the Law. But the Law urges us to observe creation
by means of reason and demands the knowledge thereof through reason.
This is evident from different verses of the Qur'an. For example, the
Qur'an says: "Wherefore take example from them, you who have eyes"
[Qur'an 49.2]. That is a clear indication of the necessity of using the
reasoning faculty, or rather both reason and religion, in the
interpretation of things. Again it says: "Or do they not contemplate the
kingdom of heaven and earth and the things which God has created"
[Qur'an 7.184]. This is in plain exhortation to encourage the use of
observation of creation. And remember that one whom God especially
distinguishes in this respect, Abraham, the prophet. For He says: "And
this did we show unto Abraham: the kingdom of heaven and earth" [Qur'an
6.75]. Further, He says: "Do they not consider the camels, how they are
created; and the heaven, how it is raised" [Qur'an 88.17]. Or, still
again: "And (who) meditate on the creation of heaven and earth, saying,
O Lord you have not created this in vain" [Qur'an 3.176]. There are many
other verses on this subject: too numerous to be enumerated.

Now, it being established that the Law makes the observation and
consideration of creation by reason obligatory -- and consideration is
nothing but to make explicit the implicit -- this can only be done
through reason. Thus we must look into creation with the reason.
Moreover, it is obvious that the observation which the Law approves and
encourages must be of the most perfect type, performed with the most
perfect kind of reasoning. As the Law emphasizes the knowledge of God
and His creation by inference, it is incumbent on any who wish to know
God and His whole creation by inference, to learn the kinds of
inference, their conditions and that which distinguishes philosophy from
dialectic and exhortation from syllogism. This is impossible unless one
possesses knowledge beforehand of the various kinds of reasoning and
learns to distinguish between reasoning and what is not reasoning. This
cannot be done except one knows its different parts, that is, the
different kinds of premises.

Hence, for a believer in the Law and a follower of it, it is necessary
to know these things before he begins to look into creation, for they
are like instruments for observation. For, just as a student discovers
by the study of the law, the necessity of knowledge of legal reasoning
with all its kinds and distinctions, a student will find out by
observing the creation the necessity of metaphysical reasoning. Indeed,
he has a greater claim on it than the jurist. For if a jurist argues the
necessity of legal reasoning from the saying of God: "Wherefore take
example*from them* O you who have eyes" [Qur'an

59.2], a student of divinity has a better right to establish the same
from it on behalf of metaphysical reasoning.

One cannot maintain that this kind of reasoning is an innovation in
religion because it did not exist in the early days of Islam. For legal
reasoning and its kinds are things which were invented also in later
ages, and no one thinks they are innovations. Such should also be our
attitude towards philosophical reasoning. There is another reason why it
should be so, but this is not the proper place to mention it. A large
number of the followers of this religion confirm philosophical
reasoning, all except a small worthless minority, who argue from
religious ordinances. Now, as it is established that the Law makes the
consideration of philosophical reasoning and its kinds as necessary as
legal reasoning, if none of our predecessors has made an effort to
enquire into it, we should begin to do it, and so help them, until the
knowledge is complete. For if it is difficult or rather impossible for
one person to acquaint himself single-handed with all things which it is
necessary to know in legal matters, it is still more difficult in the
case of philosophical reasoning. And, if before us, somebody has
enquired into it, we should derive help from what he has said. It is
quite immaterial whether that man is our co-religionist or not; for the
instrument by which purification is perfected is not made uncertain in
its usefulness by its being in the hands of one of our own party, or of
a foreigner, if it possesses the attributes of truth. By these latter we
mean those Ancients who investigated these things before the advent of
Islam.

Now, such is the case. All that is wanted in an enquiry into
philosophical reasoning has already been perfectly examined by the
Ancients. All that is required of us is that we should go back to their
books and see what they have said in this connection. If all that they
say be true, we should accept it and if there be something wrong, we
should be warned by it. Thus, when we have finished this kind of
research we shall have acquired instruments by which we can observe the
universe, and consider its general character. For so long as one does
not know its general character one cannot know the created, and so long
as he does not know the created, he cannot know its nature.

All things have been made and created. This is quite clear in itself, in
the case of animals and plants, as God has said "Verily the idols which
you invoke, beside God, can never create a single fly, though they may
all assemble for that purpose" [Qur'an 22.72]. We see an inorganic
substance and then there is life in it. So we know for certain that
there is an inventor and bestower of life, and He is God. Of the heavens
we know by their movements, which never become slackened, that they work
for our benefit by divine solicitude, and are subordinate to our
welfare. Such an appointed and subordinate object is always created for
some purpose. The second principle is that for every created thing there
is a creator. So it is right to say from the two foregoing principles
that for every existent thing there is an inventor. There are many
arguments, according to the number of the created things, which can be
advanced to prove this premise. Thus, it is necessary for one who wants
to know God as He ought to be known to acquaint himself with the essence
of things, so that he may get information about the

creation of all things. For who cannot understand the real substance and
purpose of a thing, cannot understand the minor meaning of its creation.
It is to this that God refers in the following verse "Or do they not
contemplate the heaven and the earth, and the things which God has
created?" [Qur'an 7.184]. And so a man who would follow the purpose of
philosophy in investigating the existence of things, that is, would try
to know the cause which led to its creation, and the purpose of it would
know the argument of kindness most perfectly. These two arguments are
those adopted by Law.

The verses of the Qur'an leading to a knowledge of the existence of God
are dependent only on the two foregoing arguments. It will be quite
clear to anyone who will examine closely the verses, which occur in the
Divine Book in this connection. These, when investigated, will be found
to be of three kinds: either they are verses showing the "arguments of
kindness," or those mentioning the "arguments of creation, " or those
which include both the kinds of arguments. The following verses may be
taken as illustrating the argument of kindness. "Have we not made the
earth for a bed, and the mountains for stakes to find the same? And have
we not created you of two sexes; and appointed your sleep for rest; and
made the night a garment to cover you; and destined the day to the
gaining of your livelihood and built over you seven solid heavens; and
placed therein a burning lamp? And do we not send down from the clouds
pressing forth rain, water pouring down in abundance, that we may
thereby produce corn, and herbs, and gardens planted thick with trees?"
[Qur'an 77.6-16] and, "Blessed be He Who has placed the twelve signs in
the heavens; has placed therein a lamp by day, and the moon which shines
by night" [Qur'an 25.62] and again, "Let man consider his food" [Qur'an
80.24].

The following verses refer to the argument of invention, "Let man
consider, therefore of what he is created. He is created of the seed
poured forth, issuing from the loins, and the breast bones" [Qur'an
86.6]; and, "Do they not consider the camels, how they are created; the
heaven, how it is raised; the mountains, how they are fixed; the earth
how it is extended" [Qur'an 88.17]; and again "O man, a parable is
propounded unto you; wherefore hearken unto it. Verily the idols which
they invoke, besides God, can never create a single fly, though they may
all assemble for the purpose" [Qur'an 22.72]. Then we may point to the
story of Abraham, referred to in the following verse, "I direct my face
unto Him Who has created heaven and earth; I am orthodox, and not of the
idolaters" [Qur'an 6.79]. There may be quoted many verses referring to
this argument. The verses comprising both the arguments are also many,
for instance, "O men, of Mecca, serve your Lord, Who has created you,
and those who have been before you: peradventure you will fear Him; Who
has spread the earth as a bed for you, and the heaven as a covering, and
has caused water to descend from heaven, and thereby produced fruits for
your sustenance. Set not up, therefore, any equals unto God, against
your own knowledge [Qur'an 2.19]. His words, "Who has created you, and
those who have been before you," lead us to the argument of creation;
while the words, "who has spread the earth" refer to the argument of
divine solicitude for man. Of this kind also are the following verses of
the Qur'an, "One sign of the resurrection unto them is

the dead earth; We quicken the same by rain, and produce therefrom
various sorts of grain, of which they eat" [Qur'an 36.32]; and, "Now in
the creation of heaven and earth, and the vicissitudes of night and day
are signs unto those who are endowed with understanding, who remember
God standing, and sitting, and lying on their sides; and meditate on the
creation of heaven and earth, saying O Lord, far be it from You,
therefore deliver us from the torment of hellfire" [Qur'an 3.188]. Many
verses of this kind comprise both the kinds of arguments.

This method is the right path by which God has invited men to a
knowledge of His existence, and informed them of it through the
intelligence which He has implanted in their nature. The followin verse
refers to this fixed and innate nature of man, "And when the Lord drew
forth their posterity from the loins of the sons of Adam, and took them
witness against themselves, Am I not your Lord? They answered, Yes, we
do bear witness" [Qur'an 7.171]. So it is incumbent for one who intends
to obey God, and follow the injunction of His Prophet, that he should
adopt this method, thus making himself one of those learned men who bear
witness to the divinity of God, with His own witness, and that of His
angels, as He says, "God has borne witness, that there is no God but He,
and the angels, and those who are endowed with wisdom profess the same;
who execute righteousness; there is no God but He; the Mighty, the Wise"
[Qur'an 3.16]. Among the arguments for both of themselves is the praise
which God refers to in the following verse, "Neither is there anything
which does not celebrate his praise; but you understand not their
celebration thereof" [Qur'an 17.46].

It is evident from the above arguments for the existence of God that
they are dependent upon two categories of reasoning. It is also clear
that both of these methods are meant for particular people; that is, the
learned. Now as to the method for the masses. The difference between the
two lies only in details. The masses cannot understand the two
above-mentioned arguments but only what they can grasp by their senses;
while the learned men can go further and learn by reasoning also,
besides learning by sense. They have gone so far that a learned man has
said, that the benefits the learned men derive from the knowledge of the
members of human and animal body are a thousand and one. If this be so,
then this is the method which is taught both by Law and by Nature. It is
the method which was preached by the Prophet and the divine books. The
learned men do not mention these two lines of reasoning to the masses,
not because of their number, but because of a want of depth of learning
on their part about the knowledge of a single thing only. The example of
the common people, considering and pondering over the universe, is like
a man who looks into a thing, the manufacture of which he does not know.
For all that such a man can know about it is that it has been made, and
that there must be a maker of it. But, on the other hand, the learned
look into the universe, just as a man knowing the art would do; try to
understand the real purpose of it. So it is quite clear that their
knowledge about the Maker, as the maker of the universe, would be far
better than that of the man who only knows it as made. The atheists, who
deny the Creator altogether, are like men who can see and feel the
created things, but would

not acknowledge any Creator for them, but would attribute all to chance
alone, and that they come into being by themselves.

Now, then, if this is the method adopted by the Law, it may be asked:
What is the way of proving the unity of God by means of the Law; that
is, the knowledge of the religious formula that "there is no god, but
God. " The negation contained in it is an addition to the affirmative,
which the formula contains, while the affirmative has already been
proved. What is the purpose of this negation? We would say that the
method, adopted by the Law, of denying divinity to all but God is
according to the ordinance of God in the Qur'an. .

If you look a little intently it will become clear to you, that in spite
of the fact that the Law has not given illustration of those things for
the common people, beyond which their imagination cannot go, it has also
informed the learned men of the underlying meanings of those
illustrations. So it is necessary to bear in mind the limits which the
Law has set about the instruction of every class of men, and not to mix
them together. For in this manner the purpose of the Law is multiplied.
Hence it is that the Prophet has said, "We, the prophets, have been
commanded to adapt ourselves to the conditions of the people, and
address them according to their intelligence." He who tries to instruct
all the people in the matter of religion, in one and the same way, is
like a man who wants to make them alike in actions too, which is quite
against apparent laws and reason.

From the foregoing it must have become clear to you that the divine
vision has an esoteric meaning in which there is no doubt, if we take
the words of the Qur'an about God as they stand, that is, without
proving or disproving the anthropomorphic attribute of God. Now since
the first part of the Law has been made quite clear as to God's purity,
and the quantity of the teaching fit for the common people; it is time
to begin the discussion about the actions of God, after which our
purpose in writing this treatise will be over.

In this section we will take up five questions around which all others
in this connection revolve. In the first place a proof of the creation
of the universe; secondly, the advent of the prophets; thirdly,
predestination and fate; fourthly, Divine justice and injustice; and
fifthly, the Day of Judgment.


