


Problem First: the Creation of the Universe
The Law teaches that the universe was invented and created by God, and
that it did not come into being by chance or by itself. The method
adopted by the Law for proving this is not the one upon which the
Asharites have depended. For we have already shown that those methods
are not specially certain for the learned, nor common enough to satisfy
all the classes of men. The methods which are really serviceable are
those which have a very few premises, and the results of which fall very
near to the commonly known ideas. But in instructing the common people
the Law does not favor statements composed of long and complete
reasoning, based upon different problems. So everyone who, in teaching
them, adopts a different course, and interprets the Law according to it,
has lost sight of its purpose and gone astray from the true path. And so
also, the Law in giving illustrations for its reasoning uses only those
which are present before us.

Whatever has been thought necessary for the common people to know, has
been explained to them by the nearest available examples, as in the case
of the day of Judgment. But whatever was unnecessary for them to know,
they have been told that it was beyond their knowledge, as the words of
God about the Soul [Qur'an 22.85]. Now that we have established this, it
is necessary that the method adopted by the Law for teaching the
creation of the universe to the common people be such as would be
acknowledged by all. It is also necessary that since there cannot be
found anything present to illustrate the creation of the universe the
Law must have used the examples of the creation of things in the visible
world.

So the method adopted by Law is that the universe was made by God. If we
look intently into the verse pertaining to this subject we shall see
that the method adopted is that of divine solicitude, which we know to
be one of those which prove the existence of God. When a man sees a
thing made in a certain shape, proportion and fashion, for a particular
advantage is derived from it, and purpose which is to be attained, so
that it becomes clear to him, that had it not been found in that shape,
and proportion, then that advantage would have been wanting in it, he
comes to know for certain that there is a maker of that thing, and that
he had made it in that shape and proportion, for a set purpose. For it
is not possible that all those qualities serving that purpose be
collected in that thing by chance alone. For instance, if a man sees a
stone on the ground in a shape fit for sitting, and finds its
proportions and fashion of the same kind, then he would come to know
that it was made by a maker, and that he had made it and placed it
there. But when he sees nothing in it which may have made it fit for
sitting then he becomes certain that its existence in the place was by
chance only, without its being fashioned by any maker.

Such is also the case with the whole of the universe. For when a man
sees the sun, the moon, and all the stars, which are the cause of the
four seasons; of days and nights, of rain, water and winds, of the
inhabitation of the parts of the earth, of the existence of man, and of
the being of all the animals and the plants and of the earth being fit
for the habitation of a man, and other animals living in it; and the
water fit for the animals living in it; and the air fit for birds, and
if there be anything amiss in this creation and edifice, the

whole world would come to confusion and disorder, then he would come to
know with certainty that it is not possible that this harmony in it for
the different members of the universe -- man, animals, and plants -- be
found by chance only.

He will know that there is one who determined it, and so one who made it
by intention, and that is God, exalted and magnified may He be. He would
know with certainty that the universe is a created thing, for he would
necessarily think that it is not possible that in it should be found all
this harmony, if it be not made by someone, and had come into existence
by chance alone. This kind of argument, is quite definite and at the
same time clear, and some have mentioned it here. It is based upon two
principles which are acknowledged by all. One of them being, that the
universe, with all its component parts, is found fit for the existence
of man and things; secondly, that which is found suitable in all its
parts, for a single purpose, leading to a single goal, is necessarily a
created thing. So those two principles lead us naturally to admit that
the universe is a created thing, and that there is a maker of it. Hence
"the argument of analogy" leads to two things at one and the same time,
and that is why it is the best argument for proving the existence of
God. This kind of reasoning is also found in the Qur'an in many verses
in which the creation of the universe is mentioned.

For instance, "Have We not made the earth a bed, and the mountains for
shelter to fix the same? And have We not created you of two sexes; and
appointed your sleep for rest and made the night a garment to cover you,
and destined the day to a gaining of a livelihood; and built over you
seven heavens, and placed therein a burning lamp? And do We not send
down from the clouds pressing forth rain, water pouring down in
abundance, that We may hereby produce corn and herbs, and gardens
planted thick with trees" [Qur'an 77.3ff]. If we ponder over this verse
it would be found that our attention has been called to the suitability
of the different parts of the universe for the existence of man. In the
very beginning we are informed of a fact well-known to all -- and that
is that the earth has been created in a way which has made it suitable
for our existence. Had it been unstable, or of any other shape, or in
any other place, or not of the present proportion, it would not have
been possible to be here, or at all created on it. All this is included
in the words, "Have We not made the earth a bed for you"? for in a bed
are collected together all the qualities of shape, tranquility, and
peace, to which may be added those of smoothness and softness.

So how strange is this wonderful work and how excellent this
blessedness, and how wonderful this collection of all the qualities!
This is so because in the word*mihad* (bed) are brought together all
those qualities, which are found in the earth, rendering it suitable for
the existence of man. It is a thing which becomes clear to the learned
after much learning and a long time, "But God will appropriate His mercy
unto whom He pleases [Qur'an 2.99]. Then as to the divine words, "And
the mountains for stakes," -- they tell us of the advantage to be found
in the tranquility of the earth on account of the mountains. For had the
earth been created smaller than it is now, that is, without mountains,
it would have been quivered by the motion of other elements, the water
and the air, and would have been shaken and

thus displaced. This would naturally have been the cause of the
destruction of the animal world. So when its tranquility is in harmony
with those living on it, it did not come into being by chance alone, but
was made by someone's intention, and determination. Certainly it was
made by One who intended it, and determined it, for the sake of those
living on it.

Then He calls our attention to the suitability of the existence of night
and day for animals. He says "And made the night a garment to cover you;
and destined the day to a gaining of your livelihood. " He means to say
that He has made the night like a covering and clothing for all the
things, from the heat of the sun. For had there been no setting of the
sun at night, all the things, whose life has been made dependent upon
the sun, would have perished -- that is, the animals and the plants. As
clothing protects the people from the heat of the sun, in addition to
its being a covering, so God likened the night to it. This is one of the
most beautiful of the metaphors. There is also another advantage in the
night for the animals: their sleep in it is very deep, after the setting
of the sun, which keeps faculties in motion, that is, wide awake. So God
has said, "And appointed your sleep for rest, " on account of the
darkness of the night. Then He says, "And built over you seven heavens,
and placed therein a burning lamp." Here by the word building He means
their creation, and their harmony with the created things, and their
arrangement and system. By strength He means that power of revolution
and motion which is never slackened, and never overtaken by fatigue; and
they never fall like other roofs and high edifices. To this refer the
words of God, "And made the heaven a roof well-supported" [Qur'an
21.33]. By all this He shows their fitness in number, shape, fashion,
and movement, for the existence of those who live on the earth round it.
Were one of the heavenly bodies, not to speak of all, to stop for a
moment all would be chaos on the face of the earth. Some people think
the blast of the last trumpet, which will be the cause of the
thunderbolt, will be nothing but a stop in the revolution of the
heavenly bodies.

Then He tells us of the advantage of the sun for those living on the
earth and says, "And placed therein a burning lamp. " He calls it a lamp
because in reality it is all darkness, and light covers the darkness of
the night, and if there be no lamp, man can get no advantage out of his
sense of sight at nighttime; and in the same way if there were no sun
the animals can have no benefit of their sense of seeing. He calls our
attention to this advantage of the suns ignoring others because it is
the noblest of all the advantages and the most-apparent of all. Then He
tells us of His kindness in sending down rain, for the sake of the
plants and the animals. The coming down of rain in an appointed
proportion, and at an appointed season, for the cultivated fields cannot
be by chance alone, but is the result of divine solicitude for us all.
So He says, "And do We not send down from the clouds pressing forth
rain, water pouring down in abundance that We may hereby produce corn
and herbs, and gardens planted thick with trees."

There are many verses of the Qur'an on this subject. For instance, He
says, "Do you not see how God has created the seven heavens, one above
another, and has placed the moon therein for a light, and has appointed
the sun for a taper? God has also provided and caused you to bring forth
wheat

from the earth" [Qur'an 71.14-16]. If we were to count all such verses
and comment upon them showing the kindness of the Creator for the
created, it would take too many volumes. We do not intend to do it in
this book. If God should grant us life and leisure we shall write a book
to show the kindness of God to which He has called our attention.

It should be known that this kind of argument is just contrary to that
which the Asharites think leads to the knowledge of God. They think that
the creation does not lead us to the knowledge of God through any of His
goodness, but through possibility, that is, the possibility which is
found in all things, which we can understand to be of his shape or of
quite a contrary one. But if this possibility be found alike in both the
cases, then there is no wisdom in the creation of the universe, and
there is found no harmony between man and the parts of it. For, as they
think, if it is possible for the things to have any other form than they
have now, then there can exist no harmony between man and other existent
things by the creation of which God has obliged man and commanded him to
be thankful to Him. This opinion, by which the creation of man, as a
part of the universe, is just as possible, for instance, as his creation
in the void, is like the opinion of those who say that man exists but he
could have been created in quite a different shape, and yet could
perform actions like a man. According to them it is also possible that
he may have formed the part of another universe quite different from the
existing one. In that case the blessing of the universe can have no
obligation for man, for they are not necessary for his purpose. Hence
man is quite careless of them and they of him. So their existence is no
blessing to him. This is all against the nature of man.

On the whole, a man who denies the existence of the effects arranged
according to the causes in the question of arts, or whose wisdom cannot
understand it, then he has no knowledge of the art of its Maker. So also
a man who denies the existence of an order of effects in accordance with
causes in this universe, denies the existence of the Creator altogether.
Their saying that God is above these causes, and that they cannot have
any bearing on the effects by His command, is very far from the true
nature of philosophy, nay, it is a destroyer of it. For if it is
possible to have the same effects with other than the prescribed causes
just in the same degree as by them, then where is the greatness in
producing the effects from the known Causes? It is so because the
effects from the causes have one of the following three reasons. Either
the existence of the causes will be in place of the effects by
compulsion, as a man's taking his food; or their being more perfect,
that is, the effect becoming better and more perfect through them, as a
man's having two eyes, or they may have neither a better nor a more
compulsive effect. In this case the existence of the effect and the
cause would be by chance, without any intention at all; and, hence,
there would be no greatness found in it.

For instance, if the shape of a human hand, the number of the fingers,
and their length be neither necessary nor adding any perfection in its
work in seizing things of different kind, then the actions of the hand
from this shape, and number of parts, would be by chance alone. If it be
so, then it makes no difference whether a man is given a hand or a hoof,
or something

else, like the different animals, for their particular actions. On the
whole, if we ignore the causes and their effects, then there remains
nothing to refute the arguments of those who believe in the creation of
the universe by chance alone, that is, those who say that there is no
Creator at all, and that which has come into being in this universe is
the result of material causes. For taking one of the two alternatives it
is not more possible that it may have happened by chance, than done by
an independent Actor. So when the Asharites say that the existence of
one or more possibilities shows that there is a particular Maker of
these things, they can answer and say that the existence of things by
one of these possibilities was by chance alone, for intention works as
one of the causes, and that which happens without any means or cause is
by chance. We see that many things come into being in this way. For
example, the elements mix together by chance, and then by this
unintentional mixing there is produced a new thing. They mix again, and
this quite unintentionally produces quite a new thing. In this way every
kind of creation may be said to have come into existence by chance.

We say that it is necessary that there be found order and arrangement,
the more perfect and finished than what can be imagined. This mixing
together of elements is limited and prearranged, and things produced by
them are sure to happen, and no disorder has ever happened in them. But
all this could not happen by chance alone, for that which happens in
this way by chance is of the least value. It is to this that God refers,
"It is the work of the Lord, who has rightly disposed all things"
[Qur'an 27.90]. I would like to know what completeness can be found in
things made by chance, for such things are by no means better than their
opposites. To this God refers in the following words, "You cannot see in
the Creation of the most Merciful any unfitness or disproportion. Lift
your eyes again to heaven, and look whether you see any flaw" [Qur'an
67.3]. But what defect can be greater than that all the things can be
found with any other quality than they really possess. For the
non-existent quality may be better than the existing one. In this way,
if one thinks that were the Eastern movement to become Western and
vice-versa, there would be no difference in the universe then he has
destroyed philosophy altogether. He is like a man who thinks that were
the right side of the animals to become left, and vice-versa, there
would be no difference at all, for one of the two alternatives is there.
For as it is possible to say that it is made according to one
alternative by an independent Maker, so it is possible to assert that it
was all made by chance alone. For we see so many things coming into
being by themselves.

It is quite clear to you that all the people see that lower kinds of
creation could have been made in a different way from that in which they
really are, and as they see this lower degree in many things they think
that they must have been made by chance. But in the higher creation they
know that it is impossible to have been made in a more perfect and
excellent form than that given to it by the Creator. So this opinion,
which is one of the opinions of the Mutakallimun is both against the Law
and philosophy. What we say is that the opinion of possibility in
creation is closer to a complete denial of God, than leading us nearer
to Him. At the same time it falsifies philosophy. For if we do not
understand that there is a mean between the beginnings and

ends of the Creation, upon which is based the ends of things, then there
can neither be any order nor any method in it. And if they be wanting
then there can be no proof of the existence of an intelligent and
knowing Maker; for taking them together with cause and effect we are led
to the fact that they must have been created by wisdom and knowledge.

But, on the other hand, the existence of either of two possibilities
shows that they may have been performed by a not-knowing Maker and by
chance alone. Just as a stone falling on the earth may fall in any
place, on any side, and in any form. It will show the want of the
existence either of a creator at all or at least of a wise and knowing
Creator. The thing which has compelled the Mutakallimun of the Asharites
to adopt this opinion is a denial of the action of those natural forces
which God has put in all things, as He has endowed them with life, power
and so forth. They avoided the opinion that there was any other creator
but God, and God forbid that there be any other, for he is the only
creator of the causes and they are made effective by His command only.
We will talk of this in detail when discoursing on Fate and
Predestination. They were also afraid that by admitting the natural
causes they might be accused of saying that the universe came into being
by chance only. They would have known that a denial of it means a denial
of a great part of the arguments, which can be advanced for a proof of
the existence of God. One who denies any part of God's creation denies
His work, which falls very near to a denial of a part of His attributes.

On the whole as their opinion is based upon hasty conclusions, which
come to the mind of a man by superficial thought and as apparently it
appears that the word "intention" can be applied to one who has power to
do bad or otherwise, they saw that if they did not admit that all the
creation is possible, they would not be able to say that it came into
existence by the action of an intending creator. So they say that all
the creation is possible so that they may prove that the creator is an
intelligent one. They never thought of the order which is necessary in
things made, and with that their coming from an intelligent creator.
These people have also ignored the blame they will have to bear in thus
denying wisdom to the creator; or maintaining that chance should be
found governing creation. They know, as we have said, that it is
necessary, on account of the order existent in nature, that it must have
been brought into being by some knowing creator, otherwise the order
found in it would be by chance. When they were compelled to deny the
natural forces they had to deny with them a large number of those forces
which God has made subservient to His command for the creation and
preservation of things. For God has created some things from causes
which He has produced from outside, these are the heavenly bodies; there
are other things which He has made by causes placed in the things
themselves, that is; the soul, and other natural forces, by which he
preserves those things. So how wicked is the man who destroys
philosophy, and "invented a lie about God" [Qur'an 3.88].

This is only a part of the change which has taken place in the Law, in
this and other respects, which we have already mentioned, and will
mention hereafter. From all this it must have become clear to you that
the method which God had adopted for teaching His creatures that the
universe is made and created by Him is the method of kindness and
wisdom, towards all His creatures and especially towards man. It is a
method which bears the same relation to our intellect, as the sun bears
to our senses. The method which it has adopted towards the common people
about this problem is that of illustration from things observed. But as
there was nothing which could be given as an illustration, and as the
common people cannot understand a thing, an illustration of which they
cannot see, God tells us that the universe was created in a certain time
out of a certain thing, which He made. He tells us his condition before
the creation of the universe, "His throne was above the waters" [Qur'an
11.9]. He also says, "Verily your Lord is God who created the heavens
and the earth in six days" [Qur'an 7.52], and "Then He set His mind to
the creation of the heavens, and it was smoke" [Qur'an 12.10]. In
addition to these there are other verses of the Book, pertaining to this
subject. So it is incumbent that nothing out of them should be
interpreted for the common people, and nothing should be presented to
them in explaining it but this illustration. For one who changes it,
makes the wisdom of the Law useless. If it be said that the Law teaches
about the universe that it is created, and made out of nothing and in no
time, then it is a thing which even the learned cannot understand, not
to speak of the common people. So we should not deviate in this matter
of the Law.


