


Problem Fourth: Divine Justice and Injustice
The Asharites have expressed a very peculiar opinion, both with regard
to reason and religion; about this problem they have explained it in a
way in which religion has not, but have adopted quite an opposite
method. They say that in this problem the case of the invisible world is
quite opposed to the visible. They think that God is just or unjust
within the limits of religious actions. So when a man's action is just
with regard to religion, he also is just; and whatever religion calls it
to be unjust, He is unjust. They say that whatever has not been imposed
as a divinely ordained duty upon men, does not come within the four
walls of religion. He is neither just or unjust, but all His actions
about such things are just. They have laid down that there is nothing in
itself which may be called just or unjust. But to say that there is
nothing which may in itself be called good or bad is simply intolerable.
Justice is known as good, and injustice as bad. So according to them,
polytheism is in itself neither injustice nor evil, but with regard to
religion, and had religion ordained it, it would have been just and
true. Such also would have been the case with any kind of sin. But all
this is quite contrary to our*hadith* and reason.

As to*hadith* God has described himself as just, and denied injustice to
himself. He says "God has borne witness that there is no God but He; and
the angels and those who are endowed with wisdom profess the same, who
execute righteousness" [Qur'an 3.16]; and "Your God is not unjust
towards His servants;" and again, "Verily, God will not deal unjustly
with men in any respect; but men deal unjustly with their own souls"
[Qur'an 41.46]. It may be asked, What is your opinion about misleading
the people, whether it is just or unjust, for God has mentioned in many
a verse of the Qur'an, "That He leads as well as misleads the people?"
[Qur'an 10.45]. He says, "God causes to err whom He pleases, and directs
whom He pleases" [Qur'an 14.4]; and, "If we had pleased, we had
certainly given every soul its direction" [Qur'an 32.11]. We would say
that these verses cannot be taken esoterically, for there are many
verses which apparently contradict them -- the verses in which God
denies injustice to himself.

For instance, He says, "He likes not ingratitude (*Kufr* ) in His
servant" [Qur'an 39.9]. So it is clear that as He does not like
ingratitude even from them, He certainly cannot cause them to err. As to
the statement of the Asharites that God sometimes does things which He
does not like, and orders others which He does not want, God forbid us
from holding such a view about him, for it is pure infidelity. That God
has not misled the people and has not caused them to err will be clear
to you from the following verses: "Wherefore be you orthodox and set
your face towards true religion, the institution of God, to which He has
created man kindly disposed" [Qur'an 30.29]; and, "when your Lord drew
forth their posterity from the lions of the sons of Adam" [Qur'an
7.171]. A *hadith* of the Prophet says "Every child is born according to
the divine constitution."

These being contradictions in this problem we should try to reconcile
them so that they may agree with reason. The verse, "Verily, God will
cause to err whom He pleases, and will direct whom He pleases" [Qur'an
14.4] refers to the prearranged divine will, with which all things have
been

endowed. They have been created erring, that is, prepared to go astray
by their very nature, and led to it by inner and outer causes. The
meaning of the verse, "If We had pleased, We have given unto every soul
its direction" [Qur'an 35.9], is that He thought of not creating people
ready to err, by their nature, or by the outer causes, or by both,
though He could have done so. But as the dispositions of men are
different the words may mislead the one and direct the other. For these
are the verses which speak of misleading the people. For instance, "He
will thereby mislead many, and will direct many thereby: but He will not
mislead any thereby except the transgressors" [Qur'an 2.24]; and, "We
have appointed the vision which We showed you" [Qur'an 17.62], and also
the tree cursed in the Qur'an, and the verses about the number of angels
of hell. "Thus does God cause to err whom He pleases and He directs whom
He pleases" [Qur'an 74.34]. It means that for evil natures, these verses
are misleading, as for the sick bodies even good drugs are injurious.


