


Problem Fifth: The Day of Judgment
Come the Day of Judgment, some believe that the body will be different
from our present body. This is only transient, that will be eternal. For
this also there are religious arguments. It seems that even Abdullah
ben-Abbas held this view. For it is related of him that he said, "There
is nought in this world of the hereafter, but names." It seems that this
view is better suited to the learned men because its possibility is
based upon principles, in which there is no disagreement according to
all men: the one being that the soul is immortal, and the second is that
the return of the souls into other bodies does not look so impossible as
the return of the bodies themselves. It is so because the material of
the bodies here is found following and passing from one body to
another,*i.e* ., one and the same matter is found in many people and in
many different times. The example of bodies cannot be found, for their
matter is the same. For instance a man dies and his body becomes
dissolved into earth. The earth ultimately becomes dissolved into
vegetable, which is eaten by quite a different man from whom another man
comes into being. If we suppose them to be different bodies, then our
aforesaid view cannot be true.

The truth about this question is this question is that man should follow
that which he himself has thought out but anyhow it should not be the
view which may deny the fundamental principle altogether. For this would
be denying its existence. Such a belief leads to infidelity, on account
of a distinct knowledge of this condition being given to man, both by
religion and by human reason, which is all based upon the eternal nature
of the soul. If it be said whether there is any argument or information
in the Law about this eternal nature of the soul, we would say that it
is found in the Qur'an itself, where God says, "God takes unto himself
the souls of men at the time of their death; and those which die not He
also takes in their sleep" [Qur'an 39.43]. In this verse sleep and death
have been placed upon the same level, on account of the change in its
instrument, and in sleep on account of a change in itself. For had it
not been so it would not have come to its former condition after
awakening. By this means we know that this cession does not effect its
essence, but was only attached to it on account of change in its
instrument. So it does not follow that with a cessation of the work of
the instrument, the soul also ceases to exist. Death is only a cessation
of work, so it is clear that its condition should be like that of sleep.
As someone has said that if an old man were to get the eyes of the
young, he would begin to see like him.

This is all that we thought of in an exposition of the beliefs of our
religion, Islam. What remains for us is to look into things of religion
in which interpretation is allowed and not allowed. And if allowed, then
who are the people to take advantage of it? With this thing we would
finish our discourse.

The things found in the Law can be divided into five kinds. But in the
first place there are only two kinds of things: indivisible and the
divisible. The second one is divided into four kinds. The first kind
which is mentioned in the Qur'an, is quite clear in its meanings. The
second is that in which the thing mentioned is not the thing meant but
is only an example of it. This is

again divided into four kinds. First, the meanings which it mentions are
only illustrations such that they can only be known by the far-fetched
and compound analogies, which cannot be understood, but after a long
time and much labor. None can accept them but perfect and excellent
natures; and it cannot be known that the illustration given is not the
real thing; except by this far-fetched way. The second is just the
opposite of the former: they can be understood easily, and it can be
known that the example is just what is meant here. Thirdly, it can be
easily known that it is merely an illustration, but what it is the
example of is difficult to comprehend. The fourth kind is quite opposite
to the former. The thing of which it is an example, is easily
understood; while it is difficult to know that it is an example at all.

The interpretation of the first kind is wrong without doubt. The kind in
which both the things are far-fetched: its interpretation particularly
lies with those who are well-grounded in knowledge; and an exposition of
it is not fit for any but the learned. The interpretation of its
opposite -- that which can be understood on both the sides -- is just
what is wanted, and an exposition of it is necessary. The case of the
third kind is like the case of the above. For in it illustration has not
been mentioned because of the difficulty for the common people to
understand it: it only incites the people to action. Such is the case
with the*hadith* of the prophet, "The black stone is God's action on
Earth," etc., etc. That which can be easily known that is an example,
but difficult to know of which it is an example, should not be
interpreted but for the sake of particular persons and learned men.
Those who understand that it is only an illustration, but are not
learned enough to know the thing which it illustrates, should be told
either that it is allegorical and can be understood by the
well-established learned men; or the illustration should be changed in a
way which might be near to their understanding. This would be the best
plan to dispel doubts from their minds.

The law about this should be that which has been laid down by Abu Hamid
(Al Ghazzali) in his book,*Al Tafriga bainal Islam wal Zindiga* . It
should be understood that one thing has five existences which he calls
by the name of essential ( *Zati* ); sensual ( *Hissi* ); rational (
*Agli* ); imaginative ( *Khayali* ); and doubtful ( *Shilbhi* ). So at
the time of doubt it should be considered which of these five kinds
would better satisfy the man who has doubts. If it be that which he has
called essential than an illustration would best satisfy their minds. In
it is also included the following *hadith* of the Prophet, "Whatever the
earlier prophets saw I have seen it from my place here, even heaven and
hell;" "Between my cistern of water and the pulpit there is a garden of
paradise;" and "The earth will eat up the whole of a man except the
extremity of the tail." All these, it can easily be known are but
illustrations, but what is the thing which they illustrate it is
difficult to comprehend. So it is necessary in this case to give an
instance to the people which they may easily understand. This kind of
illustration, when used on such an occasion, is allowable; but when used
irrelevantly it is wrong. Abu Hamid has not decided about the occasion
when both the sides of the question -- the illustration and the
illustrated -- be both far-fetched and difficult to understand. In this
case there would apparently be a doubt, but a doubt without any
foundation. What should be done is to prove that the

doubt has no basis, but no interpretation should be made, as we have
shown in many places in our present book against the Mutakallimun,
Asharites and the Mutazilites.

The fourth kind of occasion is quite opposite to the former. In this it
is very difficult to understand that it is an example, but when once
understood, you can easily comprehend the thing illustrated. In the
interpretation of this also, there is a consideration: about those
people who know that if it is an example, it illustrates such and such a
thing; but they doubt whether it is an illustration at all. If they are
not learned people, the best thing to do with them is not to make any
interpretation, but only to prove the fallacy of the views which they
hold about its being an illustration at all. It is also possible that an
interpretation may make them still distant from the truths on account of
the nature of the illustration and the illustrated. For these two kinds
of occasions, if an interpretation is given, they give rise to strange
beliefs, far from the law which when disclosed are denied by the common
people. Such has been the case with the Sufis, and those learned men who
have followed them. When this work of interpretation was done by people
who could not distinguish between these occasions, and made no
distinction between the people for whom the interpretation is to be
made, there arose differences of opinion, at last forming into sects,
which ended in accusing one another with unbelief. All this is pure
ignorance of the purpose of the Law.

From what we have already said the amount of mischief done by
interpretation must have become clear to you. We always try to acquire
our purpose by knowing what should be interpreted, and what not; and
when interpreted, how it should be done; and whether all the difficult
portions of the Law and*Hadith* are to be explained or not. These are
all included in the four kinds which have already been enumerated.

The purpose of our writing this book is now completed. We took it up
because we thought that it was the most important of all purposes --
connected with God and the Law.


