


Main Text
*The first religious obligation of every intelligent boy who comes of
age, as marked by years or by the dreams of puberty, is to form the
intention of reasoning as soundly as he can to an awareness that the
world is originated.*

*Abū ‘l-Ma’āli al-Juwaynī (1028-1085)1*

Al-Juwaynī thought that an awareness of the originatedness [*hud\_th* ]
of the world necessarily meant a rejection of any claim to its being
eternal and led, consequently, to the affirmation that it was created by
God. He argues that it is reasonable to hold that the world is
temporally finite -- this is what it means to be originated -- and that,
on the basis of such an observation, one can come to know that there is
a Creator. Furthermore, knowledge of creation is knowledge of divine
sovereignty, which leads one to submit religiously to God’s plan.

Discussions about the relationship between physics and theology —
between our knowledge of the world of nature and our knowledge of God —
are one of the enduring features of Western culture. Although my remarks
will have as their focus developments in the Christian Latin West, we
need to remember that in the natural sciences and in philosophy the
Latin West was heavily influenced by the work of Muslim and Jewish
thinkers. In some of my comments today and in my next lecture I hope to
show the nature and extent of that influence.

The twin pillars of every civilization are religion and science.
Contemporary cosmological theories, especially discourse about the
origins of the universe, reveal the continuing encounter between physics
and theology. It is a discourse which interests thinkers of our own age
as much as it did those in the Middle Ages. I should like to sketch some
of the current discussion in order to suggest how the contemporary world
can learn a great deal from mediaeval analyses of the relationship among
physics, metaphysics, and theology. In fact, to go from Stephen Hawking
to Avicenna is, in an important sense, to go from confusion to clarity.

Recent studies in particle physics and astronomy have produced dazzling
speculations about the early history of the universe. Cosmologists now
routinely entertain elaborate scenarios which propose to describe what
the universe was like when it was the size of a softball, a mere 10-35
second after the Big Bang. The description of the emergence of four
fundamental forces and twelve discrete subatomic particles is almost a
common-place in modern physics. There is little doubt among scientists
that we live in the aftermath of a giant explosion which occurred around
15 billion years ago -- give or take a few billion.

John Gribbin, an astrophysicist at Cambridge University, summarizes the
importance of Big Bang cosmology in this way: “*the* discovery of the
century, in cosmology at least, was without doubt the dramatic discovery
made by Hubble, and confirmed by Einstein’s equations, that the Universe
is not eternal, static, and unchanging.”2 In 1988, Hawking observed that
as a result of Big Bang cosmology the question of the beginning of the
universe entered “the realm of science.”3 More recently he has argued
that we can

have no scientific theory of nature unless the theory accounts for the
beginning of the universe.

The only way to have a scientific theory is if the laws of physics hold
everywhere, including at the beginning of the universe. One can regard
this as a triumph of the principles of democracy: why should the
beginning of the universe be exempt from the laws that apply to other
points? If all points are equal, one can’t allow some to be more equal
than others.4

This confidence that cosmology now can address the beginning of the
universe -- a confidence shared by many cosmologists -- has led to all
sorts of speculations about the initial state of the universe. For many
scientists, philosophers, and theologians such speculations in cosmology
speak directly to long-established beliefs about creation.5

Most physicists refer to the Big Bang as a “singularity,” that is, an
ultimate boundary or edge, a “state of infinite density” where spacetime
has ceased. Thus it represents an outer limit of what we can know about
the universe. If all physical theories are formulated in the context of
space and time, it would not be possible to speculate, at least in the
natural sciences, about conditions before or beyond these categories.
Nevertheless, during the last twenty years, precisely such speculation
has intrigued several cosmologists.6 Some of them now offer theories
which propose to account for the Big Bang itself as a fluctuation of a
primal vacuum. Just as sub-atomic particles are thought to emerge
spontaneously in vacuums in laboratories, so the whole universe may be
the result of a similar process.7 Professor Alexander Vilenkin of Tufts
University has developed a variation of an inflationary model of the
expanding universe which accounts for the birth of the universe “by
quantum tunneling from nothing.” “Nothing,” for Vilenkin, is a “state
with no classical space-time . the realm of unrestrained quantum
gravity; it is a rather bizarre state in which all our basic notions of
space, time, energy, entropy, etc., lose their meaning.”8

For those cosmologists unwilling to accept an unexplained Big Bang, or
an explanation which seemed to them to require a supernatural agent, the
variation of the Big Bang theory proposed by Vilenkin and Guth was
welcome.

Are we on the verge of a scientific explanation of the very origin of
the universe? The contention of several proponents of the new theories
is that the laws of physics are themselves sufficient to account for the
origin and existence of the universe. If this be true, then, in a sense,
we live in a universe which needs no explanation beyond itself, a
universe which has sprung into existence spontaneously from a cosmic
nothingness. Heinz Pagels, writing a few years ago, claimed that “When
historians of science look back on the 1970s and 1980s they will report
that for the first time scientists constructed rational mathematical
models based on the laws of physics which described the creation of the
universe out of nothing. And that will mark the beginning of a new
outlook on the creation of existence.” Pagels is confident that “from
microcosm to macrocosm, from its origin to its end, the universe is
described by physical laws comprehensible to the human mind.”9

Paul Davies, who has written extensively on physics, cosmology, and
their philosophical and theological implications, thinks that the theory
of an

inflationary universe accounts for the emergence “out of nothingness” of
both fundamental particles and spacetime itself “as the result of a
causeless quantum transition.”

In this remarkable scenario, the entire universe simply comes out of
nowhere, completely in accordance with the laws of physics, and creates
along the way all the matter and energy needed to build the universe as
we now see it.10

Although recently Davies has become less enthusiastic about the promises
of the new physics, a decade ago he wrote the following:

For the first time, a unified description of all creation could be
within our grasp. No scientific problem is more fundamental or more
daunting than the puzzle of how the universe came into being. Could this
have happened without any supernatural input? Quantum physics seems to
provide a loophole to the age-old assumption that ‘you can’t get
something from nothing.’ Physicists are now talking about the
‘self-creating universe’: a cosmos that erupts into existence
spontaneously, much as a subnuclear particle sometimes pops out of
nowhere in certain high energy processes. The question of whether the
details of this theory are right or wrong is not so very important. What
matters is that it is now possible to conceive of a scientific
explanation for all of creation. Has modern physics abolished God
altogether. .?11

In an even more radical vein, the philosopher Quentin Smith writes that
“there is sufficient evidence to warrant the conclusion that the
universe . began to exist without being caused to do so.”12 The title of
his essay is “The Uncaused Beginning of the Universe,” and his
conclusion is revealing: “. . the fact of the matter is that the most
reasonable belief is that we came from nothing, by nothing and for
nothing.”13 Elsewhere Smith writes that if Big Bang cosmology is true
“our universe exists without cause or without explanation. . [This
world] exists non necessarily, improbably, and causelessly. It
exists*for absolutely no reason at all.* ”14

There is another major trend in the application of quantum mechanics to
cosmology -- different from the inflationary universe and the quantum
tunneling from nothing described by Vilenkin -- but no less significant
in the claims it makes, or are made for it, concerning the answers to
ultimate questions about the universe. This is the view made famous by
Stephen Hawking in*A Brief History of Time* (1988). Hawking argues that
quantum mechanics shows us that the classical picture of a “well-defined
spacetime arises as a limiting case of the quantum perspective.”15 Time
is less fundamental than space and, as a consequence, spacetime cannot
have a singular, initial boundary. There is no singularity, no initial
boundary at all; the universe has no beginning! Even though unbounded,
the universe is finite. Here is how Hawking sets forth his view:

The quantum theory of gravity has opened up a new possibility, in which
there would be no boundary to space-time and so there would be no need
to specify the behavior at the boundary. One could say: ‘The boundary
condition of the universe is that it has no boundary.’ The universe
would be completely self-contained and not affected by anything outside
itself. It would neither be created nor destroyed. It would just BE.16

The appeal to an initial singularity is, for Hawking, an admission of
defeat: “If the laws of physics could break down at the beginning of the
universe, why couldn’t they break down anywhere?”17 To admit a
singularity is to deny a universal predictability to physics, and, hence
ultimately, to reject the competency of science to understand the
universe.

Hawking is not shy about drawing a theological conclusion from his
cosmological speculations. If the universe had no beginning, there is

nothing whatsoever for God to do -- except to choose the laws of
physics. Physics, were it to discover a unified theory, will allow us to
know “the mind of God.” Here again are Hawking’s words:

So long as the universe had a beginning, we could suppose it had a
creator. But if the universe is really completely self-contained, having
no boundary or edge, it would have neither beginning nor end: it would
simply be. What place, then, for a creator?18

Carl Sagan, in his introduction to*A Brief History of Time* , argues
that Hawking’s cosmology shows us “a universe with no edge in space, no
beginning or end in time, and nothing for a Creator to do.”19

One of the more prolific writers on current cosmology is John Barrow,
professor of astronomy at the University of Sussex. In*The Origins of
the Universe* (1994), Barrow observes that the no-boundary condition of
Hawking’s quantum cosmology has become increasingly attractive because
it “avoids the necessity for . a cataclysmic beginning.” Barrow thinks
that the traditional Big Bang picture, with its initial singularity of
infinite density “is, strictly speaking, . creation out of absolutely
nothing.”20

It is interesting that some Christians rushed to embrace Big Bang
cosmology because they saw it as scientific confirmation of the Genesis
story of creation.21 Accordingly, we may understand the particular
attraction of some to current variations in Big Bang cosmology which
purport either to account for the initial singularity in terms of
quantum tunneling or to deny the existence of an initial boundary to the
universe. In either case, so it might seem, the role of a creator is
superfluous.22 I think that an examination of the discussion of physics
and theology in the Middle Ages, especially the development by Thomas
Aquinas of the doctrine of creation out of nothing, will enable us to
see that to use Big Bang cosmology either to affirm creation or to deny
it is an example of misunderstandings of both cosmology and creation.

The universe described by Sagan, Hawking, and others -- the fruit so it
seems of contemporary cosmology -- is a self-contained universe,
exhaustively understood in terms of the laws of physics. In such a
universe there would seem to be little if any need for the God of
Jewish, Christian, or Muslim revelation. The traditional doctrine of
creation seems obsolete in the face of the recent advances of modern
science. For some the notion of a Creator represents an intellectual
artifact from a less enlightened age.

Too often contemporary discussions about the theological and
philosophical implications of Big Bang cosmology, as that cosmology has
been refined, suffer from an ignorance of the history of science, and,
with respect to the theories which claim to involve the origin of the
universe, these recent discussions reveal an ignorance of the
sophisticated analyses of the natural sciences and of creation which
took place in the Middle Ages. The reception of Aristotelian science in
Muslim, Jewish, and Christian intellectual circles in the Middle Ages
provided the occasion for a wide-ranging discussion of the relationship
between theology and the natural sciences.23 There is no better way, I
think, to begin to understand this discussion than to focus on the
development of the doctrine of creation. This will serve as the unifying
theme of my reflections in several of my lectures. In fact, I will claim
that Aquinas’ understanding of creation — and, in particular, the
distinctions he draws among theology, metaphysics, and

natural philosophy — can continue to serve as an anchor of
intelligibility in a contemporary sea of speculative theories.

The story of the reception of Greek science, and in particular of the
texts of Aristotle, in the Latin West is readily available and I do not
want to retell it here. The footnotes to this lecture provide references
to these texts. I do wish, however, to make a few brief comments on the
reception of Greek learning.

The development of cathedral schools in the eleventh and twelfth
centuries, a part of the reform program championed by the papacy,
brought renewed interest in the heritage of classical antiquity.24 At
Chartres, for example, there was extensive study of Plato’s cosmological
work, the*Timaeus* , along with Chalcidius’ commentary, as well as of
Martianus Capella’s*Marriage of Philology and Mercury* ,
Macrobius’*Dream of Scipio* , Seneca’s*Natural Questions* , Cicero’s*On
the Nature of the Gods* , along with works by Augustine, Boethius, and
John Scotus Eriugena. The*Timaeus* was particularly important in that it
contained the most systematic discussion of questions in cosmology and
physics. Thierry of Chartres (d. after 1156) was especially influential
in his attempt to use Platonic cosmology in his reading of the creation
account in Genesis.25

“The revival of learning began as an attempt to master and exploit
traditional Latin sources. However, before the end of the twelfth
century it was transformed by the infusion of new books, containing new
ideas, freshly translated from Greek and Arabic originals. This new
material, first a trickle and eventually a flood, radically altered the
intellectual life of the West.”26

The Christian reconquest of Toledo in Spain in 1085 and the Norman
conquest of southern Italy and Sicily in the late eleventh century
provided the opportunity for the translation of a significant number of
texts from Arabic and Greek into Latin. In the twelfth century, under
the sponsorship of the Archbishop of Toledo, a team of scholars led by
Dominic Gundissalinus translated works by Avicenna, al-Farabi, and
al-Kindi. Gerard of Cremona (ca. 1114-87) learned Arabic and translated
most of the Aristotelian works in the natural sciences. Gerard
translated seventy-one works from the Arabic. As James Weisheipl has
observed, Gerard deserves recognition as the “midwife of Western
science.”27 In the thirteenth century Robert Grosseteste28 and William
of Moerbeke29 labored tirelessly to produce even better translations of
Greek texts. Between 1200 and 1209, Grosseteste, the renowned Oxford
master, produced the first full exposition of the*Posterior Analytics* ,
a text which John of Salisbury in the previous century described as
having as many barriers to understanding as there were chapters. By 1220
Averroes’ commentary on this text appeared in Latin. It is difficult to
underestimate the importance of the*Posterior Analytics* in Western
intellectual history since it represents Aristotle’s systematic
exposition of his understanding of the nature of science and the role of
demonstration in acquiring knowledge of nature. By late 1260s both
Albert the Great and Thomas Aquinas had completed extensive commentaries
on this work.

The curriculum of the newly established universities, especially at
Oxford and Paris, would eventually be revolutionized by the influx of
the new learning. Although there is some evidence that there were
lectures on Aristotle’s “logica nova” in the first decade of the
thirteenth century at both universities, there is little evidence of
significant influence until the 1240s and 1250s. In 1210, in 1215, and
again in 1231 Aristotle’s works “concerning natural philosophy” were
formally banned from the curriculum at Paris, but this early hostile
reaction eventually dissipated so that by the middle of the century
Aristotelian texts were taught openly. The reaction to a radical form of
Aristotelianism which resulted in formal condemnations by the Bishop of
Paris in 1270 and 1277 will be the subject of a future lecture, so I
will set aside for now any detailed account of the reception of
Aristotle in the thirteenth century.

The controversies in the Latin West were in important ways anticipated
in the Islamic world, and I want to devote the remainder of my remarks
to mediaeval Islamic culture since Aquinas’ development of his
understanding of creation depends heavily upon the work of medieval
Muslim thinkers. Furthermore, as I have already indicated, there is no
more important area of encounter among the natural sciences, theology,
and metaphysics than the topic of creation.

The reception of Greek philosophy in the Islamic world is a complex
story.30 Well before the rise of Islam, Nestorian Christians in Syria
and Persia established centers of learning producing translations of
Greek texts into different Near Eastern languages (especially Syriac and
later Arabic). By the middle of the eighth century the ‘Abassid caliphs
had built the new capital city of Baghdad31 and under their influence
the Hellenization of the Islamic world accelerated. The caliph
al-Ma’m\_n (813-833) founded a research institute, the House of Wisdom,
in Baghdad, which served as the center for translations.32 The primary
interest was in medical texts, but a few Platonic dialogues, including
the*Timaeus* , Euclid’s*Elements* , and Ptolemy’s*Almagest* were
translated. By the year 1000 A.D. “almost the entire corpus of Greek
medicine, natural philosophy, and mathematical science had been rendered
into usable Arabic versions.”33

The role of Greek science in Islamic culture continues to be the subject
of scholarly controversy: that is, whether it existed only on the
margins of Islamic culture or whether it was appropriated into that
culture and served an important role in the development of law and
theology. It does seem clear, however, that the claim that science in
Islam remained simply a matter of being faithful to Greek thinking and,
hence, “was destitute of all originality,” is false.34 Whatever their
role of disciples might involve, Muslim scientists made important
contributions to medicine, astronomy, optics, and mathematics.35

As we remember that the focus of my comments concerns, if not “the
dreams of puberty,” at least that “religious obligation . to form the
intention of reasoning as soundly as . [we] can to an awareness that the
world is originated,” let us turn our attention to theology and the
natural sciences in the Islamic setting. As early as 932 there was a
famous public debate in Baghdad over the merits of the “new learning.”36
Greek

philosophy seemed particularly challenging to many Muslim theologians
(*mutakallimun* ) who came to view it with suspicion as an alien way of
thinking. Divine sovereignty and the radical contingency of the created
order must be protected from the encroachments of Greek logic and an
Aristotelian science which sought to discover the necessary nexus
between cause and effect. Any necessity posited in the created order
seemed to threaten divine omnipotence and, accordingly, many theologians
embraced a radical occasionalism which saw events in the world as only
the occasions for divine action. God alone is the true cause of all that
happens. The position which these Muslim theologians feared can be found
in the work of al-Farabi (870-950), who established in Cairo a
curriculum for the study of Plato and Aristotle, and of Avicenna
(980-1037), whose writings in medicine, natural philosophy, and
metaphysics proved to be extraordinarily influential. Their work offers
an excellent example of the way in which Greek thought could be
appropriated in the Islamic world.37 Also, Avicenna, translated into
Latin, will prove to be especially important for Thomas Aquinas, as we
shall see. Avicenna’s understanding of the relationship between God, the
absolutely necessary being, and the created order of things which are,
in themselves, only possible will contribute to Aquinas’ understanding
of creation. In his monumental*al-Shifa’: al-Ilahiyyat* , Avicenna
writes: “This is what it means that a thing is created, that is,
receiving its existence from another . . As a result everything, in
relation to the first cause, is created. . Therefore, every single
thing, except the primal One, exists after not having existed with
respect to itself.”38

In explaining the kind of agent (or efficient) causality which creation
involves, Avicenna notes that there is an important difference between
the ways in which metaphysicians and natural philosophers discuss agent
cause:

. . the metaphysicians do not intend by the agent the principle of
movement only, as do the natural philosophers, but also the principle of
existence and that which bestows existence, such as the creator of the
world.39

The recognition that creation is properly a subject of metaphysics and
not of physics (i.e., of natural philosophy) will be particularly
important for Aquinas, as will Avicenna’s insistence on the distinction
between essence and existence. With respect to the latter topic,
Avicenna observes that a reflection on what it means for something to be
reveals that what something is -- i.e., its essence -- is different from
whether a thing exists. On the basis of the ontological distinction
between essence and existence, Avicenna argues that all beings other
than God (in whom this distinction disappears) require a cause in order
to exist.40

Avicenna’s distinction between existence and essence is part of his
contribution to a long standing intellectual project which sought to
understand the relationship between existing individuals and their
“intelligible natures.” Those schooled in the Neoplatonic tradition gave
ontological priority to the intelligible nature; hence, the attraction
of an emanationist scheme according to which all existing things flow
from a primal source of being and intelligibility. The immediate context
of Avicenna’s distinction between existence and essence is his
discussion of necessary and possible being. Aquinas follows Avicenna’s
lead but comes to recognize a rather different sort of creaturely
contingence from that of

Avicenna. For Avicenna, essence is something prior and to which
existence “happens” or comes as an accident.41 According to Avicenna,
“real existence” emerges as a new attribute for the contingent being of
the created world (which was originally present as an essence or
“possibility” in the divine mind); it is “a kind of added benefit
bestowed by God upon possible being in the act of creation.”42 As David
Burrell observes, Aquinas will use Avicenna’s distinction between
essence and existence but develop the notion of radical dependency in
such a way that creaturely existence is understood not as something
which happens to essence but as a fundamental*relation* to the Creator
as origin.43 But I will examine the distinctive contribution of Aquinas
on this topic in the next two lectures.

An eternal world was often viewed as a necessary world, a world which,
accordingly, was not the result of the free creative act of God.
Avicenna sought to be faithful to Greek metaphysics (especially in the
Neoplatonic tradition) and also to affirm the contingency of the created
order.44 Although the world proceeds from God by necessity and is
eternal, it differs fundamentally from God in that*in itself* it is only
possible and requires a cause in order to exist. God, on the other hand,
is necessary in Himself and, thus, requires no cause. A key to science,
in the sense set forth by Aristotle in his*Posterior Analytics* , is the
knowledge of a necessary nexus between cause and effect; only such
necessary knowledge truly deserves the name science (*episteme* ).
Contingent existence, although not necessary in itself (*per se* ), is
necessary through/by another.45 Avicenna thought that the contingency of
the world he described did not deny natural necessity.46 Finite
creatures are contingent in themselves but necessary with reference to
their causes, and ultimately with reference to God. A world without
necessary relationships is an unintelligible world. Yet, at the same
time, the fear was that a necessary world is a self-sufficient world, a
world which cannot not be: the opposite, so it seemed of a world created
by God. At best a necessary world would only be a world which*must*
surge forth from a primal source of being. The explanation of the
absolute origin of the world in terms of a necessary emanationist schema
was attractive since it seems to do justice to both necessity and
dependence.*Necessity* is demanded by Greek science in order to protect
the intelligibility of the world;*dependence* is demanded by theology to
protect the ‘originatedness’ of the world. Creation for Avicenna is an
ontological relationship -- a relationship in the order of being -- with
no reference to temporality. In fact, Avicenna accepted the established
Greek view that the universe is eternal. Obviously, his view of the
emanation of existing things from a primal source -- a view which
excluded the free act of God -- only made sense in an eternal universe.
But, does an emanationist metaphysics do justice to creation? Is it
consistent with the God revealed in the Koran or the Bible?

It was precisely such questions which led al-Ghazali (1058-1111), a
jurist, theologian, and mystic, to argue against what he considered to
be threats to Islam in the thought of philosophers such as Avicenna.
In*The Incoherence of the Philosophers* [*Tahafut al-Falasifah* ]
al-Ghazali sets forth a wide-ranging critique of Greek thought:

In the three questions. . they [the philosophers] were opposed to [the
belief] of all Muslims, viz. in their affirming (1) that men’s bodies
will not be assembled on the Last

Day, but only disembodied spirits will be rewarded and punished, and the
rewards and punishments will be spiritual, not corporeal . they falsely
denied the corporeal rewards and punishments and blasphemed the revealed
Law in their stated views. (2) The second question is their declaration:
‘God Most High knows universals, but not particulars.’ This also is
out-and-out unbelief. . (3) The third question is their maintaining the
eternity of the world, past and future. No Muslim has ever professed any
of their views on these questions.47

He defends what he considers to be the orthodox Islamic doctrine of
creation versus Avicenna’s embrace of an eternal world. Such a world,
al-Ghazali thought, was the very antithesis of a created one. An eternal
world cannot be dependent upon an act of God, since an eternal world
would be a completely self-sufficient world.48 In fact, al-Ghazali
claims that, even on philosophical grounds, all the arguments advanced
for an eternal world fail. It is perhaps ironic that Stephen Hawking and
Carl Sagan would agree with al-Ghazali in claiming that a universe that
has an absolute temporal beginning is what is necessarily meant by a
created universe. They, of course, think that by denying such a
singularity they have left nothing for a creator to do. Avicenna, as we
have seen, argued that creation is a metaphysical dependence — an
explanation of the cause of existence of things — and as such creation
is not a subject of reflection in the natural sciences. I will pursue
this theme in my next lecture, showing that Thomas Aquinas offers an
excellent antidote to confusing discussions in our own age about God,
physics, and the origin of the world.

The incoherence which al-Ghazali found in Avicenna’s position was the
affirmation of a world which is simultaneously eternal and created. It
would seem to many Muslim theologians that one had to choose between
Athens and Mecca, between Greek science and the revelation of the Koran.
To seek to embrace both is, so they thought, to be incoherent. In the
next lecture we will examine this claim of incoherence as it is rejected
by Averroes, Maimonides, and Aquinas. Aquinas will defend the
possibility of an eternal world created*ex nihilo* by God. Aquinas’
understanding of creation, forged in the midst of the mediaeval
controversy about the relationship between Greek science and divine
revelation, remains one of the towering achievements of human history. I
leave you with a sentence from the young Aquinas, written in the 1250s
at the University of Paris: “Not only does faith hold that there is
creation but reason also demonstrates it.” It is a claim which we shall
explore at our next session.


