


Endnotes
1 From his*Kitab al-Irshad* (*Book of Right Guidance* ); quoted in L. E.
Goodman,*Avicenna* (London: Routledge, 1992), p. [^49]: An Ash’arite
theologian, he taught al-Ghazali at Nishapur.

2 John Gribbin,*In the Beginning: The Birth of the Living Universe*
(Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1993), p. [^19]:

3 Stephen Hawking,*A Brief History of Time* (New York: Bantam Books,
1988), p. [^8]:

4 Stephen Hawking and Roger Penrose,*The Nature of Space and Time*
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1996), p. [^71]:

5 The literature on this subject is enormous. Among many authors who
offer a survey of these recent variations in Big Bang cosmology and
comment on their philosophical and theological implications see: William
E. Carroll, “Big Bang Cosmology, Quantum Tunneling from Nothing, and
Creation,”*Laval théologique et philosophique* , 44, no.1 (février
1988), pp. 59-75; Mariano Artigas, “ Física y creación: el origen del
universo,”*Scripta Theologica* , 29, nos. 1 and 2 (1987), pp. 347-373;
E. McMullin, “Natural Science and Belief in a Creator: Historical
Notes,” W. R. Stoeger, “Contemporary Cosmology and Its Implications for
the Science-Religion Dialogue,” T. Peters, “On Creating the Cosmos,” J.
Polkinghorne, “The Quantum World,” R. J. Russell, “Quantum Physics in
Philosophical and Theological Perspective,” and C. J. Isham, “Creation
of the Universe as a Quantum Process,” in*Physics, Philosophy, and
Theology: A Common Quest for Understanding* , edited by Robert John
Russell, William R. Stoeger, S.J., and George V. Coyne, S.J. (Vatican
City: Vatican Observatory Publications, 1988), pp. 49-79, 219- 247,
273-296, 333-342, 343-374, 375-408; William Lane Craig and Quentin
Smith,*Theism, Atheism and Big Bang Cosmology* (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1993); C.J. Isham, “Quantum Theories of the Creation
of the Universe” and Robert John Russell, “Finite Creation Without a
Beginning: The Doctrine of Creation in Relation to Big Bang and Quantum
Cosmologies,” in*Quantum Cosmology and the Laws of Nature* , edited by
Robert John Russell, Nancey Murphy, and C.J. Isham (Vatican City:
Vatican Observatory Publications, 1993), pp.49- 89, 293-329; Ernan
McMullin, “Indifference Principle and Anthropic Principle in
Cosmology,”*Studies in History and Philosophy* *of Science* , 24, no. 3
(1993), pp. 359-389; Juan José Sanguineti,*El Origen del Universo: La
cosmología en busca de la filosofía* (Buenos Aires: Editorial de la
Universidad Catolica Argentina, 1994) and “La creazione nella cosmologia
contemporanea,”*Acta Philosophica* 4, no. 2 (1995), pp. 285-313; Joseph
Zycinski, “Metaphysics and Epistemology in Stephen Hawking’s Theory of
the Creation of the Universe,”*Zygon* , vol. 31, no. 2 (June 1996), pp.
269-[^284]:

6   As a historian of science I am not competent to judge the specific
scientific claims in these various speculations. I do wish to examine
the philosophical and theological claims so frequently associated with
these speculations and to show how the history of mediaeval philosophy,
theology, and science is especially useful in such an examination.

7   One of the early proponents of this view was Edward Tryon of the
City University of New York. He argued that the Big Bang could be
understood as “quantum tunneling from nothing.”*Nature* 246, no. 14 (14
December 1973), p. [^396]:

8  “Birth of Inflationary Universes,” in*Physical Review D* , 27:12
(1983), p. [^2851]: Other essays by Vilenkin: “Quantum Cosmology and the
Initial State of the Universe, “ in*Physical Review* D 37 (1988), pp.
888-897, and “Approaches to Quantum Cosmology,” in*Physical Review* D 50
(1994), pp. 2581-2594.

9  *Perfect Symmetry: The Search for the Beginning of Time* (London:
Michael Joseph, Ltd., 1985), pp. 349 and [^17]:

10*God and the New Physics* (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1983), p.
[^215]: When Davies speaks of a “causeless quantum transition,” he is
using the term “cause” to refer to a temporal succession of predictable
events. There is a great deal of confusion in

the philosophical interpretation of quantum mechanics, especially with
respect to the meaning of Heisenberg’s “relation of uncertainty.” It is
one thing to affirm that we are not able to provide a precise
mathematical measure of both the velocity and the position of a
sub-atomic particle; it is quite another to deny the objective reality
of the particle or to contend that there is a realm of “causeless”
effects. We might not be able to predict certain events. This does mean
that these events have no cause.

11*ibid.* , p. viii.

12 William Lane Craig and Quentin Smith,*op. cit* ., p. [^109]:

13*ibid* ., p. [^135]: A particularly good example of the persisting
confusion about the roles of science, metaphysics, and theology in
understanding the universe and its origins is an essay by P.W. Atkins,
distinguished physical chemist at Oxford University. Convinced that all
human knowledge is reducible to the explanatory categories of the
natural sciences, Atkins thinks that the domain of scientific discourse
is truly limitless. Accordingly, he says that it is the task of science
“to account for the emergence of everything from absolutely nothing. Not
almost nothing, not a subatomic dust-like speck, but absolutely nothing.
Nothing at all. Not even empty space.” P. W. Atkins, “The Limitless
Power of Science,” in*Nature’s Imagination: The Frontiers of Scientific
Vision* , edited by John Cornwell (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1995), p. 131. For a criticism of this essay, see William E. Carroll,
“Reductionism and the Conflict Between Science and Religion,”*The Allen
Review* 15 (Oxford, 1996), pp. 19-22.

14*ibid.* , p. [^217]: Italics are in the original.

15 For a very good account of Hawking’s analysis, actually the
Hartle/Hawking analysis, see Robert John Russell, “ Finite Creation
Without a Beginning . .,” in*Quantum Cosmology and the Laws of Nature*
,*op. cit.,* pp. 293-[^329]: J. Hartle, S. Hawking, “Wave Function of
the Universe,” in*Physical Review* D, 28 (1983), pp. 2960-2975; S.
Hawking, “The Boundary Condition of the Universe,” in*Astrophysical
Cosmology* , edited by H.A. Brück, G.V. Coyne, M.S. Longair (Vatican
City: Pontifical Academy of Science, 1982), pp. 563-572; S. Hawking,
“The Quantum State of the Universe,” in*Nuclear Physics* B 239 (1984),
pp. 257-276. See also, Keith Ward’s discussion, “Creation and Modern
Cosmology,” in*Religion and Creation* (Oxford University Press, 1996),
pp. 287-315.

16 Hawking,*A Brief History of Time* ,*op. cit.,* p. [^136]: The two
“most remarkable features that I have learned in my research on space
and time [are]: 1) that gravity curls up spacetime so that it has a
beginning and an end; 2) that there is a deep connection between gravity
and thermodynamics that arise[s] because gravity itself determines the
topology of the manifold on which it acts.” Hawking in Hawking and
Penrose (1996),*op. cit* ., p. 103.

17*ibid.* , p. [^76]:

18*ibid.* , p. [^141]: C.J. Isham thinks that the Hartle/Hawking model
is philosophically superior to the standard Big Bang model with an
initial singularity. “[T]hese [quantum fluctuation] theories are prone
to predict, not a single creation/seed-point, but rather an infinite
number of them. . .” “There is simply no way of distinguishing any
particular instant of time” at which the universe would spontaneously
appear. Whereas for Aquinas reason alone is unable to decide whether or
not the universe has an absolute temporal beginning; or better, since he
believes that there is such a beginning, it is hidden from the view of
human reason, in the Hartle/Hawking model an absolute beginning simply
does not exist. Willem Drees agrees with Isham and thinks that, since
theology is not really wedded to historical origination but only
ontological orgination, the Hartle/Hawking model is more compatible with
the Christian doctrine of creation*ex nihilo. Beyond the Big Bang:
Quantum Cosmologies and God* (LaSalle, IL: Open Court: 1990), especially
pp. 70-71.

19*ibid.* , p. x.

20 John Barrow,*The Origin of the Universe* (New York: Basic Books,
1994), p. [^113]:

21 In fact, in the 1950s and 1960s Soviet cosmologists were forbidden to
teach the theory since it was considered to be theistic science.

22 For a discussion of these reactions, see Carroll, “Big Bang
Cosmology, Quantum Tunneling from Nothing, and Creation,”*op. cit.* ,
pp. 64-[^67]:

23 See Herbert A. Davidson, Proofs for Eternity, Creation and the
Existence of God in Medieval Islamic and Jewish Philosophy (New York:
Oxford University Press, 1987).

24 In the Latin Middle Ages almost all of the works of Aristotle were
translated into Latin, either from the Arabic or the Greek, and
eventually were the subject of study. The exceptions were the*Eudemian
Ethics* , which was never translated, and the*Poetics* , which although
translated by William of Moerbeke, remained virtually unknown. Most of
the works of Aristotle were translated from the Greek; our knowledge of
them comes from a corpus of 2000 manuscripts (dating from the ninth to
the sixteenth centuries) in various European libraries. Some of the
works were mistakenly attributed to Aristotle. Our knowledge of these
translations owes its origin to the initial work of Amable Jourdain who
in 1819 published*Recherches critiques sur l’âge et l’origine des
traductions latines d’Aristote.* By the middle of the present century
the catalogue of these manuscripts appeared and now there is an
extensive collection, in the series*Aristoteles latinus* , of critical
editions of these translations. See Charles H. Lohr, “Aristotele
latinus,” in*The Cambridge History of Later Medieval Philosophy* ,
edited by Norman Kretzmann, Anthony Kenny, and Jan Pinborg (Cambridge
University Press, 1982), pp. 45-[^46]: Lohr provides a useful table of
all the translations, pp. 74-79. Many of these works were translated
more than once. Already in the sixth century Boethius had begun his
project of translating all of Plato and Aristotle into Latin, but the
only works of Aristotle which we have evidence that he translated are
the*Categories, De interpretatione* ,*Prior Analytics* ,*Topics* ,
and*Sophistici elenchi* : that is, all of what has been called
Aristotle’s “Organon” with the exception of the*Posterior Analytics.*
Lohr,*op. cit.* , p. 53.

For more than five hundred years the knowledge of Greek science in the
Latin West depended upon Boethius’ translations of Aristotle’s logical
treatises, his summary of Euclid’s Elements, his own treatises on
arithmetic and music, as well as a partial translation of Plato’s
Timaeus and commentaries by Chalcidius and Cicero. Schools established
at cathedrals and monasteries, as well as at secular courts, were more
concerned with studying grammar, logic, and theology. especially
biblical exegesis, than with scientific questions. James A. Weisheipl,
OP, The Development of Physical Theory in the Middle Ages (Ann Arbor,
MI: Ann Arbor Paperbacks, 1971), pp. 18-19.

25 David Lindberg, The Beginnings of Western Science: The European
Scientific Tradition in Philosophical, Religious, and Institutional
Context, 600 B.C. to A.D. 1450 (University of Chicago Press, 1992), pp.
190-[^197]: William of Conches (d. after 1154) is a good example of the
increasing tendency to affirm the importance of the study of nature. In
his Philosophy of the World, William attacks those who too readily
appeal to direct divine intervention in the world: “Because they are
themselves ignorant of nature’s forces and wish to have all men as
companions in their ignorance, they are unwilling to investigate them,
but prefer that we believe like peasants and not inquire into the
[natural] causes [of things]. However, we say that the cause of
everything is to be sought. . But these people. . if they know of
anybody so investigating, proclaim him a heretic.” Andrew of St. Victor,
discussing the interpretation of biblical events, cautioned that “in
expounding Scripture, when the event described admits of no natural
explanation, then and then only should we have recourse to miracles.”
Quoted in Lindberg, p. 200.

26 Lindberg,*op. cit.* , p. 203

27 Gerard translated Avicenna’s*Canons of Medicine* and many works by
Galen and Hippocrates. He translated Ptolemy’s*Almagest* with Arabic
commentaries. He translated Euclid’s*Elements* from the Arabic as well
as Aristotle’s*Physics* ,*On the Heavens* ,*On Generation and
Corruption* , and the*Posterior Analytics.* Weisheipl,*op. cit.* , p.
[^21]: Gerard had come from northern Italy to Spain in the late 1130s or
early 1140s in search of a copy of Ptolemy’s*Almagest* . He found a copy
in Toledo and remained there

where he learned Arabic, and found a treasure trove of other texts to
translate. Lindberg,*op. cit.* , pp. 204-5.

28 Grosseteste was first chancellor of Oxford University and bishop of
Lincoln from 1235 until his death in [^1253]: In addition to his role as
translator of Aristotle, he was a major political, ecclesiastical,
scientific, and philosophical figure in his own right. Charles H. Lohr,
“Aristotele latinus,” in*The Cambridge History of Later Medieval
Philosophy* , edited by Norman Kretzmann, Anthony Kenny, and Jan Pinborg
(Cambridge University Press, 1982), p. 61. Lohr provides a useful table
of all the translations, pp. 74-79.

29 Moerbeke, a Dominican and friend of Thomas Aquinas, was born in
Belgium around [^1215]: He traveled extensively in Greece and “was
presumably a member of the Dominican convent established at Thebes at
least since 1253..” He served in the papal court at Viterbo, and in 1278
he was named Archbishop of Corinth in Greece, where he died in 1286. See
Lohr,*op. cit.* , pp. 62-3.

30 Oliver Leaman, An Introduction to Medieval Islamic Philosophy
(Cambridge University Press, 1985); Herbert A. Davidson, Proofs for
Eternity, Creation and the Existence of God in Medieval Islamic and
Jewish Philosophy (New York: Oxford University Press, 1987); Fadlou
Shehadi, Metaphysics in Islamic Philosophy (Delmar, N.Y.: Caravan Books,
1982); F.E. Peters, Aristotle and the Arabs: The Aristotelian Tradition
in Islam (New York University Press, 1968).

31 In 762, al’Mansur (754-775) built the new capital. The Persian
influence was evident in the powerful royal advisors from the Barmak
family, formerly from the province of Bactria, and recent converts to
Islam. Nestorian Christian physicians also served at the court. See
David Lindberg,*The Beginnings of Western Science: The European
Scientific Tradition in Philosophical, Religious, and Institutional
Context, 600 B.C. to A.D. [^1450]:* (Chicago: The University of Chicago
Press, 1992), p. 168.

32 The principal translator was an Arab, Hunayn ibn Ishaq (808-873), who
came from a family which had converted to Nestorian Christianity before
the advent of Islam. He was fluent in Arabic, Syriac, and Greek.*.*

33 Lindberg, p. [^170]:

34 Pierre Duhem, “Physics, History of” in*The Catholic Encyclopedia*
(1911) 11:[^48]:

35 A.I. Sabra provides a very good sketch of these contributions in
“Science, Islamic” in*Dictionary of the Middle Ages* 11:81-[^88]:
“Islamic astronomy is a good illustration of the relationship between
Islamic and Greek science. Muslim astronomers produced a great deal of
very sophisticated astronomical work. The work was carried out largely
within the Ptolemaic framework (though we must acknowledge early Hindu
influences on Islamic astronomy, largely displaced by subsequent access
to Ptolemy’s*Almagest* and other Greek astronomical works). Muslim
astronomers sought to articulate and correct the Ptolemaic system,
improve the measurement of Ptolemaic constants, compile planetary tables
based on Ptolemaic models, and devise instruments that could be used for
the extension and improvement of Ptolemaic astronomy in general.”
Lindberg,*op. cit.* , p. 177.

36 The specific debate concerned whether Aristotelian logic transcended
the Greek language and was, thus, appropriate to use by those who spoke
and wrote in Arabic. See Shehadi,*op. cit.* , pp. 23-[^4]:

37 On al-Farabi, see Ian R. Netton,*Al-Farabi and His School* (London
and New York: Routledge, 1992). An excellent survey of Avicenna can be
found in the*Encyclopedia Iranica* (Routledge, 1989), Vol. 3, pp.
66-[^110]: Also L. E. Goodman,*Avicenna* (Routledge, 1992).

38*al-Shifa’: al-Ilahiyyat* , VIII.3, translated in Georges Anawati,*La
Métaphysique du Shifa’* (Paris, 1978), Vol. II, pp. 83-[^84]: “C’est ce
qui veut dire que la chose est créé, i.e., recevant l’existence d’un
autre. . Par conséquent le tout par rapport à la Cause première est
créé. . Donc toute chose, sauf l’Un premier, existe après n’avoir par
existé eu égard à elle- même [*bistihqaq nafsihi* ].” “When some thing
through its

own essence is continuously a cause for the existence of some other
thing, it is a cause for it continuously as long as its essence
continues existing. If it [the cause] exists continuously, then that
which is caused exists continuously. Thus, what is like this [cause] is
among the highest causes, for it prevents the non- existence of
something, and is that which gives perfect existence to something. This
is the meaning of that which is called ‘creation’ [*ibda* ’] by the
philosophers, namely, the bringing into existence of something after
absolute non-existence. For it belongs to that which is caused, in
itself, that it does not exist [*laysa* ], while it belongs to it from
its cause that it does exist [*aysa* ]. That which belongs to something
in itself is prior, according to the mind, in essence, not in time to
that which comes from another. Thus, everything which is caused is
existing after non-existing by a posteriority in terms of essence. . If
[an effect’s] existence comes after absolute non- existence, its
emanation from the cause in this way is called*ibda’* (“absolute
origination”). This is the most excellent form of the bestowal of
existence, for (in this case) non-existence has simply been prevented
and existence has been given the sway*ab initio* .”*al-Shifa’:
al-Ilahiyyat* , II.266, quoted in Barry Kogan,*Averroes and the
Metaphysics of Causation* (Binghamton, NY: State University of New York
Press, 1985), p. 276, n. 58. See also F. Rahman, “Ibn Sina’s Theory of
the God-World Relationship,” in*God and Creation* , edited by David
Burrell and Bernard McGinn (University of Notre Dame Press, 1990), pp.
38-56.

39*al-Shifa’: al-Ilahiyyat* , VI. 1, quoted in A. Hyman and J. Walsh
(eds.),*Philosophy in the Middle Ages* , second edition (Hackett, 1983),
p. [^248]:

40 “Il n’y a donc pas d’autre quiddité (*mahiyya* ) pour le
nécessairement existant que le fait qu’il est nécessairement existant.
Et c’est cel l’être (*al-anniya* ).”*al-Shifa’: al-Ilahiyyat* , VIII. 4,
tranlsated by Georges Anawati,*op. cit.,* Vol. II, p. [^87]: The classic
work on Avicenna’s analysis of essence and existence is Amelie-Marie
Goichon,*La distinction de l’essence et l’existence d’après Ibn Sina*
(Paris, 1937).

41 David Burrell, “Aquinas and Islamic and Jewish Thinkers,” in*The
Cambridge Companion to Aquinas* , edited by Norman Kretzmann and
Eleonore Stump (Cambidge University Press, 1993), p. [^69]: Georges
Anawati, in his introduction to the*Shifa’,* puts it this way: “C’est en
partant de l’essence qu’Avicenne aboutit forcément à considérer l’*esse*
qui l’affecte comme un accident. S. Thomas par contre part de l’être
existant et il fait de l’*esse* ce qu’il y a de plus intime et de plus
profond dans cet être.” Georges Anawati,*op. cit.,* Vol. 1, p. 78. For
an extensive discussion of the “accidentality of existence” in Avicenna,
see Shehadi,*op. cit.* , pp. 93-114.

42 Charles Kahn, “Why Existence Does Not Emerge as a Distinct Concept in
Greek Philosophy,” in*Philosophies of Existence: Ancient and Medieval* ,
ed. by P. Morewedge (NY: Fordham, 1982), p. [^8]: “The key to Ibn Sina’s
synthesis of the metaphysics of contingency with the metaphysics of
necessity lies in the simple phrase:*considered in itself* . Considered
in itself, each effect is radically contingent. It does not contain the
conditions of its own existence; and, considered in itself, it need not
exist. Its causes give it being. It is by abstracting from its causes
that we can regard even the world as a whole as radically contingent.
But considered in relation to its causes, not as something that in the
abstract might not have existed, but as something concretely given
before us, with a determinate character, the same conditionedness that
required us to admit its contingency requires us to admit its necessity.
Considered in relation to its causes, this object must exist, in the
very Aristotelian sense that it does exist, and must have the nature
that it has in that its causes gave it that nature. A thing might*have
been* other than as it is, it might yet be other than it is, but it
cannot*now* be other than it is.” Goodman,*Avicenna* , pp. 66-7.

43 “In one fell swoop, Aquinas has succeeded in restoring the primacy
Aristotle intended for individual existing things, by linking them
directly to their creator and by granting Avicenna’s ‘distinction’ an
unequivocal ontological status. Yet as should be clear, this is more
than a development of Avicenna; it is a fresh start requiring a
conception of

*existing* that could no longer be confused with an*accident* , and
which has the capacity to link each creature to the gratuitous activity
of a free creator. Only in such a way can the radical*newness* of the
created universe find coherent expression, for the*existing* ‘received
from God’ will be the source of all perfections and need not presume
anything at all -- be it matter or ‘possibles.’“ David Burrell, “Aquinas
and Islamic and Jewish Thinkers,”*op. cit* ., pp. 69-70.

44 Avicenna, in his philosophic argumentation, “fused the Aristotelian
metaphysics of self- sufficiency with the monotheistic metaphysics of
contingency. . .” Goodman,*Avicenna* ,*op. cit.* , p. [^63]:

45 See Emil l. Fackenheim, “The Possibility of the Universe in
Al-Farabi, Ibn Sina, and Maimonides,” in*Proceedings of the American
Academy of Jewish Research* , Vol. xvi (1947), pp. 39-70; George F.
Hourani, “Ibn Sina on Necessary and Possible Existence,”
in*Philosophical Forum* , 4 (1972), pp. 74-86

46 “It was at this juncture between the Aristotelian givenness and the
Scriptural gift of being that Ibn Sina created a third major option in
metaphysics, subsuming the creationist contingency of the*kalam* and the
essentialist eternalism of Aristotle. Ibn Sina’s cosmos, in contrast
with Aristotle’s, was contingent. But, by contrast with the cosmos of
the*kalam* , its contingency did not negate natural necessity, or the
efficacy of natural causes and potentialities, including human actions
and dispositions. . Finite things were contingent in themselves but
necessary with reference to their causes and ultimately to God, who is
the Cause of causes. Thus the natural order retains its integrity and
the continuity of its categories -- time, space, causality, the
wholeness of human intelligence, and moral sense.” Goodman,*Avicenna,*
p. [^74]:

47 al-Ghazali,*Munqidh* , quoted in L.E. Goodman,*An Introduction to
Medieval Islamic Philosophy* , pp. 20-[^21]:

48*Tahafut al-Falasifah* , discussions 1-[^4]: Goodman summarizes
al-Ghazali’s central point: “The philosophers [like Avicenna] wanted to
show the world’s timeless dependence upon God, but the idea of
timelessness demands that of self-sufficiency, and Ibn Sina’s conception
of creation as contingent in itself and necessary with reference to its
cause only papers over a contradiction.” Goodman,*op. cit.* , p. 83.


