


Summary
The book begins by introducing Mukhtar and traces his life from the
moment he first welcomes Muslim Aqeel, the cousin of Imam Husein (as),
who was sent to assess the situation in Kufa.

Mukhtar is subsequently imprisoned by the authorities because of his
love and support of Imam Husein (as).

Mukhtar manages to get himself released through the help of a Kumayl
Hamadani. Meanwhile, the atrocities of Yazeed continues and because of
the Kerbala effect, the political situation in the region also changes
dramatically.

After Yazeed's death, and parallel to Mukhtar's activities, a group
called the Tawwabuns (the Penitents), led by Sulayman Surad Khuzai,
organise themselves to punish the Kerbala perpetrators. The Tawwabun
decide to first punish Ubaydallah Ziyad, one of the leaders of the
planning of the Kerbala massacre. However, the Tawwabun are heavily
crushed by the forces of Ubaydallah Ziyad.

Mukhtar tries to form an alliance with a friendly governor in the region
in order to start avenging the Kerbala perpetrators, but is rebuffed. He
therefore teams up with another valiant supporter of the Ahlal-bayt,
Ibrahim Malik Ashtar. Together, they lead a group of people in taking
the control of the Governorship of Kufa.

Once in power, Mukhtar has to defend himself from his enemies who want
him dead, for the fear of being hunted out for their part in the
atrocities they carried out at Kerbala.

Having consolidated his power and his hold in Kufa, Mukhtar begins his
mission in earnest. He starts searching for the perpetrators of Kerbala,
puts them on trial and punishes the guilty.

Finally, the booklet traces the events leading to the martyrdom of
Mukhtar.


