


Chapter 10 - Mukhtar's Permission from Imam Z Abideen (as)
Meanwhile in Medina, on hearing of Yazeed's death, the Governor imposed
by Muslim Aqaba is ousted and thrown out by Medinites; Abdulla Zobayr
takes the opportunity to consolidate his power over Medina, and sends
Mukhtar to oversee things.

Mukhtar goes to Mecca to Abdulla Zobayr to make detailed plans of
avenging the Kerbala perpetrators; Abdulla Zobayr however is no longer
very responsive to the idea, saying they should take on the task of
avenging when the time is right and not now.

Mukhtar is very disappointed and reminds Abdulla Zobayr of his promise,
when he solicited Mukhtar's help in establishing Abdulla Zobayr as a
ruler, and the moral duty to please the Ahlal-bayt, but Abdulla Zobayr
does not listen.

Abdulla Muti, a friend of Mukhtar and the prime minister of Abdulla
Zobayr, advises Mukhtar to leave Mecca for the safety of his life, as
otherwise Abdulla Zobayr would have Mukhtar killed if he were to remain
in Mecca; Abdulla Muti gives Mukhtar money and transportation to help
him get out of Mecca.

So Mukhtar alone (since Abdulla Zobayr has now turned) now has to effect
a scheme planning for the avenge of the perpetrators of Kerbala; but
first he wants the blessings for the mission from the Imam of the time,
Imam Zainul Abideen (as).

Mukhtar goes to Medina to see Mohamed Hanafiya with whom he was in good
terms; he requests Mohamed Hanafiya to accompany him to Imam Zainul
Abideen (as) to seek his permission and blessings for the mission;
Mohamed Hanafiya was the step­brother of Imam Husein (as) and so he was
the uncle of Imam Zainul Abideen (as).

Mohamed Hanafiya and Mukhtar go to meet Imam Zainul Abideen (as);
Mohamed Hanafiya explains to Imam Zainul Abideen (as) the mission that
Mukhtar is taking on.

Imam Zainul Abideen (as) says to Mohamed Hanafiya: the work of avenging
Imam Husein's (as) killers is a right and Wajib for everyone to perform;
I cannot do it myself because of the political situation at present and
it is in the overriding interest of spreading Islam that I do not take
on the task myself (this is Imam's knowledge and assessment); however, I
leave this matter in your (Mohamed Hanafiya) hands and you have my full
blessings.

Both, Mohamed Hanafiya and Mukhtar understood the implicit permission of
Imam Zainul Abideen (as), but because of the political situation, Imam
Zainul Abideen (as) could not say so openly, but delegated the
responsibility to Mohamed Hanafiya; Mohamed Hanafiya consents to
Mukhtar's mission, and Mukhtar, with the consent of Mohamed

Hanafiya as an attorney of Imam Zainul Abideen (as), sets out on his
mission.


