


Chapter 12 - Ubaydallah Ziyad Flees Basra
There is a crisis of succession to the office after Yazeed's death,
especially when his elder son Muawiyah denounces the office, and who is
soon murdered for his defiance.

So, who now takes over the office? The government of Damascus considers
three candidates:

1- 1. Umar Bashir Ansaree - he is one of the most prominent in the
government circles in Damascus

2- 2. Khalid Yazeed - a twelve year old son of Yazeed; this would keep
the dynasty going

3- 3. Abdulla Zobayr in Mecca - as he has already got Mecca and Medina
under his control.

Marwan Hakam writes a letter to Ubaydallah Ziyad informing him of
Yazeed's death, and telling him to come to Damascus to discuss the
question of succession to the office; Marwan Hakam sends the letter to
Kufa.

When the letter gets to Kufa, Ubaydallah Ziyad is at that time in Basra
for the six month administration cycle between Kufa and Basra; his son
Omar is left in charge of Kufa; with a homing pigeon, Omar passes Marwan
Hakam's letter to Basra together with the news of the unrest going on in
Kufa as the news of Yazeed's death was now public knowledge in Kufa.

Ubaydallah Ziyad gathers the Basrites at a public meeting; he tells them
of Yazeed's death (other reports say he does not); and says: I am
leaving Basra to go to Damascus immediately of the unrest there; there
should be no unrest here while I am away, and my deputy will be in
charge; anyone who opposes my deputy will be executed together with his
family.

Ubaydallah Ziyad then asks if there are any persons who will ensure his
speedy and safe journey to Damascus for a very large fee.

Umar Jaru (another source says Umar Haris) was an experienced and a
professional desert guide and it was his job to escort merchants and
people from area to area; he had five sons (another source says twenty
one sons), each experienced in the ways of desert travelling and guide,
and each son had about thirty assistants.

Umar Jaru and his group escort Ubaydallah Ziyad to Damascus; Ubaydallah
Ziyad packs up all the monies, jewels and valuables from his palace and
these are sent by a different route (from the one he will be taking) to
Damascus to avoid an ambushed robbery on the way.

The entourage of Umar Jaru with Ubaydallah Ziyad has about a hundred
camels carrying people, luggage and water; many of the camels were water
carriers stocking for the long journey ahead; and so Ubaydallah Ziyad
sets out for Damascus.

Sulayman Surad Khuzai and the Tawwabun (numbering about four and a half
thousand), who are now just outside Kufa, hear of Ubaydallah Ziyad
entourage going to Damascus; the Tawwabun therefore position themselves
at the crossroad from Basra to Damascus.

Umar Jaru's group were experienced and professional guides, and an
advance party was always sent to watch out for any ambush etc; they
report that a huge force of people are blocking their way to Damascus,
and are

carrying a banner "Ya ala siratil Husein" (those who are in the path of
Husein).

They report back to Umar Jaru, who in turn questions Ubaydallah Ziyad:
why is there such a force blocking our way? Ubaydallah Ziyad now has to
confess of Yazeed's death, and that his visit to Damascus is to
influence the question of succession to Yazeed, and that the force ahead
is of the Tawwabun who are after him; Ubaydallah Ziyad now promises Umar
Jaru an even bigger fee if he (Ubaydallah Ziyad) could reach Damascus
alive.

Umar Jaru comes up with a plan, which Ubaydallah Ziyad first refuses,
but later has to accept in order to save himself; the plan is to tie
Ubaydallah Ziyad completely under the belly of a camel, and then cover
him with the hanging water carriers all around the camel; this way, with
so many camels having water carriers around them, Ubaydallah Ziyad's
chance of being spotted would be very small.

Sulayman Surad Khuzai and the Tawwabun arrive; Sulayman tells Umar Jaru
that they are not interested in robbing him of his belongings etc, as
they are just after Ubaydallah Ziyad, whom Umar Jaru was escorting to
Damascus; Umar Jaru naturally denies, saying he is just transporting
luggage and Ubaydallah Ziyad is not with them; Umar Jaru gives
permission for a search for Ubaydallah Ziyad.

The Tawwabun search but do not for one moment think of looking low under
a camel's belly, although they did spread the water carriers of some of
the camels; Sulayman Surad Khuzai and his men therefore go back towards
Kufa thinking Ubaydallah Ziyad played a trick of decoy and managed to
escape them.

After some distance, Ubaydallah Ziyad is untied and he finally reaches
Damascus unchallenged


