


Chapter 14 - The Tawwabun's Mission
Now, when the Tawwabun could not find Ubaydallah Ziyad personally with
the Umar Jaru's group, Sulayman Surad Khuzai and his group of about four
and a half thousand return to Kufa, where he recruits more men to a
total of about sixteen thousand.

On 1 Muharram 65 AH, the Tawwabun under Sulayman Surad Khuzai camp at
Nukhaila, just out of the Kufaboundary; Sulayman sees that of the
sixteen thousand recruited, only about three thousand are actually
present; he goes back into Kufa with the message of "Ya ala siratil
Hussein" and manages to rally another one and half thousand volunteers,
making a total force of about four and a half thousand men.

Before setting off in earnest to hunt down Ubaydallah Ziyad, the
Tawwabun go to Kerbala where they spend a whole day and night in
lamentations and Ziyarat; as the Tawwabun leave Kerbala for Damascus,
Ubaydallah Ziyad leaves Damascus for Kufa.

The Tawwabun reach Qarqisiya at night, where Zufar Haris (who ran away
from the purge of Ubaydallah Ziyad in Damascus) is now the ruler of
Qarqisiya; Sulayman sends his deputy Mosayab Najaba to tell Zufar that
they have not come to invade Qarqisiya, but are on their way to find
Ubaydallah Ziyad; Zufar is happy that Ubaydallah Ziyad is being hunted
down and orders the shopkeepers to open at night and stock up the
Tawwabun free of charge.

Ubaydallah Ziyad's group is 300,000 strong total, including an advance
party of 100,000; the Tawwabun are 4,500 men.

The two groups meet at Ayn al-Warda where the battle occurs.

The first round of battle lasts for two days between the Tawwabun and
the advance party of Ubaydallah Ziyad.

The second round of battle between the Tawwabun and the whole of
Ubaydallah Ziyad’s army lasts for seven days.

In Sulayman's group of the remaining 75 men, are the five commanders who
are to take up the position of Chief Commander in the case of the
previous commander's death: Sulayman Surad Khuzai, Mosayab Najaba,
Abdulla Saad, Abdulla Walin, Rufa' Shadad.

On the last night of the battle, some of the Tawwabun say that they
should retreat considering their small number of men who are extremely
fatigued, wounded and thirsty (for the water supply is guarded by
Ubaydallah Ziyad's soldiers), compared against the remaining well
equipped army of 150,000 men; Sulayman says the aim is to avenge Imam
Husein's (as) killers and if that is not possible, then it is better to
die in battle for the mission rather than retreat.

After prayers, during the night, Sulayman Surad Khuzai nods off and
dreams: he is in a pretty and most beautiful gardens full of flowers and
tree, and a golden house is in the middle; a lady in Chaddar comes out
of the palace; Lady Khadija, conveys Salaams from the Panjatan and Imam
Husein's (as) congratulations to the Tawwabun for their work so far, and
informs Sulayman of his martyrdom the next day; Lady Khadija takes a pot
of water and gives it to Sulayman to sprinkle on all their wounds for
the battle the next day.

Sulayman wakes up and sees the pot of water next to him, and offers
prayers of thanks; he sprinkles the water on the wounds of the remaining
Tawwabun, who are asleep; the heavenly water completely heals all the
wounds and removes all fatigue; the water pot disappears when Sulayman
is in prayers; when the rest of the group wake up, Sulayman informs them
of the miracle.

Next day, the Tawwabun put up a resilient fight against the 150,000
soldiers of Ubaydallah Ziyad who expected a very feeble resistance;
Sulayman is killed at about noon; Mosayab Najaba takes charge and he is
also killed; Abdulla Saad then takes charge and he is also killed; next,
Abdulla Walin takes charge and he is killed; finally, Rufa' Shadad takes
charge and with the 10 remaining Tawwabun, they retreat to Kufa to try
and regroup.

On winning the second round of battle, and having decisively crushed the
Tawwabun, Ubaydallah Ziyad goes to Basra.


