


Chapter 1 - Who was Mukhtar?
His full name: Mukhtar Abu Obaida Masood Thaqafi of Banu Hawazin tribe;
he was born in 1 AH.

His mother's name was Husna (some sources say Hilya) and his father's
name was Abu Obaida Thaqafi.

He had one sister named Safiya who was married to Abdulla Omar, the son
of the so-called second Khalifa Omar; another sister was married to Umar
Saad, the chief commander of Yazeed's army in Kerbala; one of his
daughter was married to Imam Zainul Abideen (as) to have a son named
Omar.

Due to his successful mission of avenging the enemies of Imam (as),
there were many false accounts and distortions of his life at the time;
for example, that he was of a "low" family, not to be respected, etc;
but some eminent people of the Banu Hawazin tribe are:

Maimoona - wife of Prophet Muhammad (saww)

Ummul Baneen - wife of Imam Ali (as), mother of H Abbas

Laila - wife of Imam Hussein (as), mother of Ali Akbar

Labeed - a great poet of Arabia; author of one of the seven poems at one
time hung at Kaaba

Abu Obaida Thaqafi always wished for a son who would do an honourable
and memorable deed in this world, and only marries when he is convinced
of the right partner to give him such a son; once he has a dream to
choose a certain girl from a brave family of his tribe, named Husna.

During the pregnancy of Mukhtar, Husna dreams of a horse rider
descending from the sky and congratulating her for a brave son to come;
on the night following the birth of Mukhtar, Husna dreams again of the
same horse rider descending from the sky and congratulates her on the
actual birth of the baby that would grow to be a firm follower of the
Prophet Muhammad (saww), the Ahlal-bayt and avenger of Imam Husein's
(as) killers and enemies.

Abu Obaida, Mukhtar's father, was the commander of an army unit which
invaded Iran under the orders of Omar (the "second" Khalifa); the
Iranian troops had elephants which Abu Obaida's people never saw before
and were frightened of them, thus affecting their battle performance,
but Abu Obaida fights gallantly and makes inroads to the territory; Abu
Obaida dies in this battle in 13 AH when Mukhtar is 12 years old.

The battle command is then taken over by Abu Obaida's brother, to
finally win the whole battle and bring the area fought under his
influence.

Meanwhile, Mukhtar is brought up by his mother and uncle; his uncle is
made governor of Madayn by Omar; during the time of Muawiyah, when there
is a cease-fire between Imam Hasan (as) and Muawiyah, Mukhtar's uncle,
till then the governor of Madayn, is transferred to the governorship of
Mosul. (Madayn is where Salman Farsi, Jabir Abdulla Ansaree and Huzayfa
Yamani are buried; also in Madayn is the Take Kisra.)


