


Chapter 20 - Abdulla Muti Joins Forces with Masa'b Zobayr
Abdulla Muti reaches Basra where Masa'b Zobayr (the brother of Abdulla
Zobayr) is the governor; Masa'b wants Mukhtar out of the way, and he
convinces Abdulla Muti to fight against Mukhtar to take his revenge; so
they both agree to go after Mukhtar and his people; Masa'b tells Abdulla
Muti to go ahead with an army unit and that he will follow with more
reinforcements after a few days as he has some unfinished business in
Basra.

Abdulla Muti's side comes up against Ibrahim and his army outside the
Kufa boundary, for they form the first line of defence to the city of
Kufa; Abdulla Muti's and Ibrahim's armies meet at Nahrawan; a battle
ensues and Abdulla Muti's side suffer a heavy loss.

At night, Abdulla Muti sends a spy to Ibrahim's side to assess the
position; the spy is caught and questioned by Ibrahim. The spy says he
was conscripted into the army in Basra and did not wish to be involved
in any battle.

Ibrahim explains their mission to avenge the perpetrators of Kerbala; on
knowing the truth, the spy changes side and offers to take Ibrahim back
to Abdulla Muti's camp to ambush and kill Abdulla Muti.

Ibrahim disguises himself and together with the spy, they head for
Abdulla Muti's tent; they are stopped by guards on the way enquiring
about the spy's companion; the spy says it is his friend, but the guards
refuse to let him through without Abdulla Muti's permission.

The guards go into the tent to ask for permission, but Abdulla Muti' was
just about to sleep and answers to let the spy and his unknown friend
through, for he is eagerly awaiting news about Ibrahim's positions.

By the time the spy and Ibrahim get to Abdulla Muti's tent, he was fast
asleep; Ibrahim was just about to take his sword from its sheath to
strike Abdulla Muti, when a noisy arrival was heard just outside the
tent, and so Ibrahim could not kill Abdulla Muti.

It was the arrival of Masa'b Zobayr and his men, having come to
reinforce Abdulla Muti's side; Ibrahim was not recognised, and he and
the spy managed to get back unchallenged.

The next day, battle resumes, and Ibrahim manages to kill Abdulla Muti
in the battle; Masa'b Zobayr runs back to Basra.


