


Chapter 22 - Control for Mosul
Ibrahim advises Mukhtar that before embarking on the mission in earnest
for tracking down the Kerbala perpetrators, they should first bring
under their influence the surrounding areas to consolidate their
government.

Mosul was of a strategic importance, and they decide on a tactic to
bring it under their control; at the time, Mosul was under the rule of
Mohamed Ashath who was a staunch anti­-Shia; his father Ashath Qays
caused a lot of problems for Imam Ali (as), and his sister Joda Ashath,
who was a wife of Imam Hassan (as), poisoned Imam Hassan (as).

So Mukhtar and Ibrahim are aware of the opposition they would face
against Mohamed Ashath; the plan is first to call in prominent Kufians
and the commanders of the army units who were in Kerbala, the majority
of whom were living in Kufa.

These people are called in and Mukhtar tells them that his earlier
statements of wanting to avenge the killers of Imam Husein (as) were
just a front to gain him power; and now he has got power, he is only
interested in keeping it and amassing wealth. He gives them a lot of
money and gifts to convince them of his greed for wealth, and a promise
to share out any more war booty.

After a few days, Mukhtar calls in Mohamed Ashath's son Abdu Rahman, who
was residing in Kufa; Mukhtar treats him like royalty and gives him lots
of money and gifts, telling him the same story as he told the other
Kufians.

After a few more days, Mukhtar calls for Abdu Rahman again, asking him
to take a personal message to his father Mohamed Ashath in Mosul; the
message says: let Mohamed Ashath swear his political allegiance to
Mukhtar and in return Mohamed Ashath will get the governorship of
Madayn, which is a larger and a more powerful province than Mosul.

Z Abdu Rahman travels to Mosul and meets with his father and conveys
Mukhtar's message; Mohamed Ashath is very surprised that his son should
bring such a message, but Abdu Rahman explains the apparent change of
heart by Mukhtar; he assures this to his father by the evidence of gifts
and money to him and to the perpetrators of Kerbala living in Kufa.

Mohamed Ashath consults his advisers and is told that the offer is too
good to refuse for two reasons; firstly, Madayn is indeed a greater
province, but secondly, and more importantly, if Ubaydallah Ziyad who is
on his way to Mosul to consolidate Abdul Malik Marwan's (who is now the
new ruler of Damascus) power, then Mukhtar and Ibrahim will come after
Ubaydallah Ziyad even in Mosul, with or without the support of Mohamed
Ashath, in which case then Mohamed Ashath will be unwillingly dragged
into the battle.

So Mohamed Ashath takes an army of four thousand men and leaves Mosul to
go to Mukhtar in Kufa; the Mosulians are angry that he now runs away
with all their money with him which they paid as taxes; they confront
Mohamed Ashath with his army; a battle ensues and the public get all
their money back and only then allow Mohamed Ashath to leave Mosul; with
no money and power base now, Mohamed Ashath is forced to accept
Mukhtar's offer.

On reaching Kufa, Mukhtar receives Mohamed Ashath with honour and gives
him a lot of money and a house, telling him that he would soon make
arrangements for his Madayn's governorship.

Mukhtar appoints a man named Abdu Rahman to become the governor of Mosul
(note that this is not Mohamed Ashath's son who is of the same name).

Meanwhile Abdul Malik from Damascus sends Haseen Nameer with an army to
Mosul to overthrow Abdu Rahman; Haseen Nameer's unit was to be an
advance party, to be followed by reinforcements led by Ubaydallah Ziyad
himself; Ubaydallah Ziyad was presently busy enforcing the consolidation
of Abdul Malik's rulership in Damascus.

On hearing of Haseen Nameer's coming, Abdu Rahman runs away from Mosul
to Tikrit, with a letter sent to Mukhtar saying he cannot face Haseen
Nameer and Mukhtar should send another governor.

In Kufa, Zaeed, who is old and sick himself, is more than willing to
travel to Mosul to confront Haseen Nameer, for Zaeed particularly wanted
to personally avenge Haseen Nameer for delivering the fatal lance to Ali
Akbar.

Zaeed with his units head for Mosul to confront Haseen Nameer, whilst at
the same time, Ubaydallah Ziyad and his units leave from Damascus
heading to Mosul to reinforce Haseen Nameer.

The two armies meet en-route to Mosul and a battle ensues; here Zaeed
dies of his illness, and his side is defeated, with Ubaydallah Ziyad
victoriously heading for Mosul.

Back in Kufa, Mukhtar gets the news of the battle and the defeat of
Zaeed; Mukhtar and Ibrahim now make strategic military decision that
instead of going for the local perpetrators of Kerbala, now is the best
opportunity to get Ubaydallah Ziyad in Mosul, for after all, Ubaydallah
Ziyad was the main architect of carrying out Yazeed's order for the
Kerbala massacre.

A huge army using all the reserves is assembled in Kufa with Ibrahim as
its commander to head for Mosul, with the intention to finish off
Ubaydallah Ziyad.

Ibrahim is worried though that with all the reserves out of Kufa,
Mukhtar is left unguarded with so many enemies within; they decide that
it is best to ask the prominent Kufians and the killers of Kerbala to
have their household helps in Mukhtar's palace with the pretext of
guarding Mukhtar, thereby reducing the chances of these killers mounting
a surprise attack; the killers agreed to the plan for they had an
ulterior motive of having reliable inside information on Mukhtar's
activities.

Ibrahim and the assembled army of all the reserves leave for Mosul to
confront Ubaydallah Ziyad.


