


References & Bibliography
***1- The Biography of Amir Mukhtar***

(English Translation of “The Life of Amir Mukhtar” by Haji Naji),
Peermahomed Ebrahim Trust, Karachi, Pakistan, 1973.

***2- Majlis of Maulana Sadiq Hassan***

Karachi, Pakistan.

***3-The Tragedy of Kerbala***

Syed Mohsin Naquvi, Second edition; Mohsena Memorial Foundation, New
Jersey, USA, 1992.

***4-The Martyr For Mankind***

Allamah Ali Naqi Naqvi; Edited by Dr I K A Howard, The Muhammadi Trust
of Great Britain, London, UK, 1986.

***5- Imam Husayn: The Savior of Islam***

Compiled by Sayyid Muhammad Rizvi, Richmond, Canada, 1984.

***6- A Probe Into The History of Ashura***

Dr Ibrahim Ayati, Islamic Seminary Publications, Karachi, Pakistan,
1984.

***7- Kitab Al-Irshad***

Shaykh al-Mufid; Translated by Dr I K A Howard, Ansariyan Publications,
Qum, Iran.

***8- Imam Hussein and The Day of Ashura***

Second edition; Al-Balagh Foundation, Tehran, Iran, 1992.

***9- Islamic Shi’ite Encyclopaedia***

Volume IV; Hassan Ul\_Ameene, Beirut, Lebanon, 1973.

***10- The Mission of Imam Husain***

Muhammad Yazdi, Tehran, Iran, 1987.

***11- The Apple of Sayyeda’s Eyes***

Peermahomed Ebrahim Trust, Karachi, Pakistan, 1973.

***12- Hossein (AS): A Warning and A Symbol***

Jame Mosque; Tehran, Iran, 1980.

***13- The Umayyad Caliphate (65 AH - 86 AH): A Political Study***

A A Dixon, Luzac and Company, London, UK, 1971.

***14- Islamic History: A New Interpretation (600 AD - 750 AD; 132
AH)***

M A Shaban, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 1990.

***15- The History of al-Tabari***

Tabari, Volumes XIX, XX, XXI, State University of New York Press, USA,
1990

***16- The Origins and Early Development of Shia Islam***

S H M Jafri, Second edition; Ansariyan Publications, Qum, Iran, 1989

***17- Extensive discussions (1993) with:***

Mohsin Jaffer, Murtaza Lakham Abdulhusein Akbarm, Husein Abdulrasul
Datoo.


