A
=

**aadheenam:** (Tamil) Endowment, foundation, institution,
establishment, estate, property. A Saivite Hindu monastery and temple
complex in the South Indian Saiva Siddhanta tradition. Also known as
matha or pitha, as in Kailasa Pitha. The aadheenam head, or pontiff, is
called the Guru Mahasannidhanam or Aadheenakarthar. See: monastery.

**abhasa:** (Sanskrit) "Shining out; manifestation, emanation." The
means by which Siva creates out of Himself, a concept central to
monistic schools. See: emanation, tattva.

**abhaya:** (Sanskrit) Fearlessness, one of the cardinal virtues.
"Fearlessness is the fruit of perfect Self Realization--that is, the
recovery of nonduality" (Brihadaranyaka Upanishad 1.4.2). Also names the
mudra (hand gesture) common in Hindu icons, betokening "fear not," in
which the fingers of the right hand are raised and the palm faces
forward. See: mudra, murti.

**Abhinavagupta:** (Sanskrit) Kashmir Saivite guru (ca 950-1015),
scholar and adept in the lineage of Vasugupta. Among his philosophical
writings, Pratyabhijna Vimarshini and Tantraloka are an important basis
of Kashmir Saivism. Also an influential theoretician of poetics, dance,
drama and classical music, he is said to have disappeared into a cave
near Mangam along with 1,200 disciples. See: Kashmir Saivism.

**abhisheka:** (Sanskrit) "Sprinkling; ablution." Ritual bathing of the
Deity's image with water, curd, milk, honey, ghee, rosewater, etc. A
special form of puja prescribed by Agamic injunction. Also performed in
the inauguration of religious and political monarchs and other special
blessings. See: puja.

**abhor (abhorrence):** To detest, hate or find disgusting or repulsive
and hence to pull back or shrink from.

**abide:** To stand firm, remain as one is. Not abandoning principles or
qualities of character even in the face of difficulties.

**abjuration:** Renunciation, giving up by oath, as a sannyasin gives up
family life. See: sannyasa dharma.

**ablution:** Snana. A washing of the body, especially as a religious
ceremony.

**abode:** Home. Place where one lives or stays.

**abortion:** The deliberate termination of pregnancy. From the earliest
times, Hindu tradition and scriptures condemn the practice, except when
the mother's life is in danger. It is considered an act against rita and
ahimsa. Hindu mysticism teaches that the fetus is a living, conscious
person, needing and deserving protection (a Rig Vedic hymn [7.36.9, RvP,
2469] begs for protection of fetuses). The Kaushitaki Upanishad (3.1
UpR, 774) describes abortion as equivalent to killing one's parents. The
Atharva Veda (6.113.2 HE, 43) lists the fetus slayer, brunaghni, among
the greatest of sinners (6.113.2). The Gautama Dharma Shastra (3.3.9 HD,
214) considers such participants to have lost caste. The Sushruta
Samhita, a medical treatise (ca 100), stipulates what is to be done in
case of serious problems during delivery (Chikitsasthana Chapter,
Mudhagarbha), describing first the various steps to be taken to attempt
to save both mother and child. "If the fetus is alive, one should
attempt to remove it from the womb of the mother alive..." (sutra 5). If
it is dead, it may be removed. In case the fetus is alive but cannot be
safely delivered, surgical removal is forbidden for "one would harm both
mother and offspring. In an irredeemable situation, it is best to cause
the miscarriage of the fetus, for no means must be neglected which can
prevent the loss of the mother" (sutras 10-11).

**Absolute:** Lower case (absolute): real, not dependent on anything
else, not relative. Upper case (Absolute): Ultimate Reality, the
unmanifest, unchanging and transcendent Parasiva--utterly nonrelational
to even the most subtle level of consciousness. It is the Self God, the
essence of man's soul. Same as Absolute Being and Absolute
Reality.**--absolutely real:** A quality of God Siva in all three
perfections: Parasiva, Parashakti and Parameshvara. As such, He is
uncreated, unchanging, unevolutionary. See: Parameshvara, Parashakti,
Parasiva.

**absolution (to absolve):** Forgiveness. A freeing from guilt so as to
relieve someone from obligation or penalty.**--atone:** to compensate or
make up for a wrongdoing. Atonement can only be done by the person
himself, while absolution is granted by others, such as a family head,
judge or jury. Exoneration, the taking away of all blame and all
personal karmic burden, can only be given by God Siva. Society would
naturally acknowledge and accept this inner transformation by forgiving
and forgetting. See: penance, sin.

**absorption:** Taking in and making part of an existent whole. Known in
Sanskrit as samhara, absorption is one of God's five powers
(panchakritya), synonymous with destruction or dissolution, but with no
negative or frightful implications. All form issues from God and
eventually returns to Him. See: Maheshvara, Nataraja.

**abstain:** To hold oneself back, to refrain from or doing without. To
avoid a desire, negative action or habit. See: yama-niyama.

**abyss:** A bottomless pit. The dark states of consciousness into which
one may fall as a result of serious misbehavior; the seven chakras
(psychic centers), or talas (realms of consciousness), below the
muladhara chakra, which is located at the base of the spine. See:
chakra, Naraka, loka.

**accelerate:** To increase the speed of a thing; to intensify its rate
of progress.

**accordant:** In agreement or harmony with.

**achara:** (Sanskrit) "Conduct, mode of action, behavior; good
conduct." Also, custom, tradition; rule of conduct, precept.

**acharya:** (Sanskrit) "Going toward;" "approaching." A highly
respected teacher. The wise one who practices what he preaches. A title
generally bestowed through diksha and ordination, such as in the
Sivacharya priest tradition. See: diksha.

**acosmic pantheism:** "No-cosmos, all-is-God doctrine." A Western
philosophical term for the philosophy of Shankara. It is acosmic in that
it views the world, or cosmos, as ultimately unreal, and pantheistic
because it teaches that God (Brahman) is all of existence. See:
Shankara, shad darshana.

**actinic:** Spiritual, creating light. Adjective derived from the Greek
aktis, "ray." Of or pertaining to consciousness in its pure,
unadulterated state. Describes the extremely rarified superconscious
realm of pure bindu, of quantum strings, the substratum of
consciousness, shuddha maya, from which light first originates. Actinic
is the adjective form of actinism, defined in the Oxford English
Dictionary as: "1) the radiation of heat or light, or that branch of
philosophy that treats of it; 2) that property or force in the sun's
rays by which chemical changes are produced, as in photography." See:
actinodic, kala, kosha, odic, tattva.

**actinodic:** Spiritual-magnetic. Describes consciousness within
shuddhashuddha maya, which is a mixture of odic and actinic force, the
spectrum of the anahata chakra, and to a certain degree the vishuddha
chakra. See: tattva.

**adept:** Highly skilled; expert. In religion, one who has mastered
certain spiritual practices or disciplines. An advanced yogi. See:
siddha yoga.

**adharma:** (Sanskrit) "Unrighteousness." The opposite of dharma.
Thoughts, words or deeds that transgress divine law. Irreligiousness;
demerit. See: dharma, papa, sin Vaishnavism, victors and vanquished.

**adhere:** To remain attached or faithful, as to a leader, society,
principle, etc.

**adhyatma:** (Sanskrit) "Spiritual; soul." The inner, spiritual self or
spirit. See: atman.

**adhyatma prasara:** (Sanskrit) "Spiritual evolution." The gradual
maturation of the soul body, anandamaya kosha, through many lives.
Prasara means, "coming forth, spreading; advance, progress." See:
evolution of the soul.

**adhyatma vikasa:** (Sanskrit) "Spiritual unfoldment." The blossoming
of inner or higher (adhi), soul (atma) qualities as a result of
religious striving, sadhana. Vikasa means, "becoming visible, shining
forth, manifestation opening," as a flower unfolds its petals, or the
chakras unfold theirs as a result of kundalini awakening. See: spiritual
unfoldment.

**Adi Granth:** (Sanskrit) "First book." The central Sikh scripture,
compiled 1603-1604 from the writings of Sikh, Moslem and Hindu holy men,
most importantly the beautiful hymns of adoration, called Japji, by Guru
Nanak, the first Sikh Guru. In 1699, Gobind Singh, the tenth preceptor,
decreed that the living succession would end with him, and this
scripture would henceforth serve as Sikhism's guru. Its eloquent
teachings are in harmony with Hinduism, but for the rejection of the
Vedas and disavowal of image worship and caste. The Adi Granth is
enshrined in all Sikh temples (gurudwaras). See: Sikhism.

**Adinatha:** (Sanskrit) "First Lord." A sage considered the first great
preceptor (date unknown) of the Adinatha Sampradaya, a teaching
tradition embodied in the Siddha Siddhanta sect of Saivism. See:
Saivism, Natha.

**Adinatha Sampradaya:** (Sanskrit) See: Natha Sampradaya.

**Adisaiva:** (Sanskrit) A hereditary priest and teacher of the South
Indian Saiva Siddhanta tradition; Saivite brahmins descended from the
gotras of five rishis and who alone are entitled to conduct rites in
Agamic Siva temples. Adisaiva and Sivacharya are synonyms for this
hereditary priest lineage. See: Sivacharya.

**adopt:** To recognize as one's own, especially an idea, principle, or
even a religion and henceforth live with it and by it. See: conversion
to Hinduism.

**adore:** To love greatly; to worship as divine. See: puja.

**adorn:** To put on ornaments or decorations to make more beautiful,
attractive or distinguished. See: kala-64.

**adrishta:** (Sanskrit) "Unseen potency; destiny." The unseen power of
one's past karma influencing the present life. This power is known in
the West as fate or destiny, generally not cognized as being of one's
own making, but misunderstood as a mysterious, uncontrollable cosmic
force. See: karma, fate.

**adulate:** To praise, revere, admire or flatter highly.

**adultery:** Sexual intercourse between a married man and a woman not
his wife, or between a married woman and a man not her husband. Adultery
is spoken of in Hindu shastras as a serious breach of dharma. See:
sexuality.

**advaita:** (Sanskrit) "Non dual; not twofold." Nonduality or monism.
The philosophical doctrine that Ultimate Reality consists of a one
principal substance, or God. Opposite of dvaita, dualism. Advaita is the
primary philosophical stance of the Vedic Upanishads, and of Hinduism,
interpreted differently by the many rishis, gurus, panditas and
philosophers. See: dvaita-advaita, Vedanta.

**Advaita Ishvaravada:** (Sanskrit) "Nondual and Personal-God-as-Ruler
doctrine." The Sanskrit equivalent of monistic theism. A general term
that describes the philosophy of the Vedas and Saiva Agamas, which
believes simultaneously in the ultimate oneness of all things and in the
reality of the personal Deity. See: Advaita, Advaita Siddhanta, monistic
theism.

**Advaita Ishvaravadin:** (Sanskrit) A follower of Advaita Ishvaravada.

**Advaita Siddhanta:** (Sanskrit) "Nondual perfect conclusions." Saivite
philosophy codified in the Agamas which has at its core the nondual
(advaitic) identity of God, soul and world. This monistic-theistic
philosophy, unlike the Shankara, or Smarta view, holds that maya (the
principle of manifestation) is not an obstacle to God Realization, but
God's own power and presence guiding the soul's evolution to perfection.
While Advaita Vedanta stresses Upanishadic philosophy, Advaita Siddhanta
adds to this a strong emphasis on internal and external worship, yoga
sadhanas and tapas. Advaita Siddhanta is a term used in South India to
distinguish Tirumular's school from the pluralistic Siddhanta of
Meykandar and Aghorasiva. This unified Vedic-Agamic doctrine is also
known as Shuddha Saiva Siddhanta. It is the philosophy of this
contemporary Hindu catechism. See: Advaita Ishvaravada, dvaita-advaita,
monistic theism, Saiva Siddhanta.

**Advaita Vedanta:** (Sanskrit) "Nondual end (or essence) of the Vedas."
Names the monistic schools, most prominently that of Shankara, that
arose from the Upanishads and related texts. See: Vedanta.

**adversity:** A condition of misfortune, poverty or difficulty.

**advocate:** To write or speak in support of an idea, action or
practice.

**affirmation:** Dridhavachana. "Firm statement." A positive declaration
or assertion. A statement repeated regularly while concentrating on the
meaning and mental images invoked, often used to attain a desired
result.

**affirmation of faith:** A brief statement of one's faith and essential
beliefs. See: anbe Sivamayam Satyame Parasivam.

**aftermath:** A result or consequence of a happening. The events or
repercussions following an experience.

**Agama:** (Sanskrit) "That which has come down." An enormous collection
of Sanskrit scriptures which, along with the Vedas, are revered as
shruti (revealed scripture). Dating is uncertain. They were part of an
oral tradition of unknown antiquity which some experts consider as
ancient as the earliest Vedas, 5000 to 6000 bce. The Agamas are the
primary source and authority for ritual, yoga and temple construction.
Each of the major denominations--Saivism, Vaishnavism and Shaktism--has
its unique Agama texts. Smartas recognize the Agamas, but don't
necessarily adhere to them and rely mainly on the smriti texts. See:
Saiva Agamas, shruti.

**Agastya:** (Sanskrit) One of 18 celebrated Saiva siddhas (adepts), and
accepted as the first grammarian of Tamil language. He is said to have
migrated from North India to the South. His name appears in the
Mahabharata, Ramayana and the Puranas and was known to ancient
Indonesians. See: siddha.

**Aghora:** (Sanskrit) "Nonterrifying." An aspect of Siva which, like
Rudra, is the personification of His power of dissolution or
reabsorption. Ghora means "terrific, frightful, terrible, etc." See:
Sadasiva.

**Aghorasiva:** (Sanskrit) A Saivite philosopher of South India who in
the 12th century founded a Siddhanta school emphasizing dualistic
passages of the Agamas and other early texts. The later Meykandar
pluralistic philosophy is based partly on Aghorasiva's teachings. See:
dvaita-advaita, dvaita Siddhanta, Saiva Siddhanta.

**Aghori:** (Sanskrit) "Nonterrifying." An order of Saiva ascetics
thought to be derived from the Kapalika order (ca 14th century).
Following the vamachara, "left-hand ritual of the tantras," they are
widely censured for radical practices such as living in cemeteries and
using human skulls as eating bowls.

**agni:** (Sanskrit) "Fire." 1) One of the five elements, panchabhuta.
2) God of the element fire, invoked through Vedic ritual known as yajna,
agnikaraka, homa and havana. The God Agni is the divine messenger who
receives prayers and oblations and conveys them to the heavenly spheres.
See: yajna.

**agnihotra:** (Sanskrit) "Fire sacrifice." Household rite traditionally
performed daily, in which an oblation of milk is sprinkled on the fire.
See: yajna.

**agnikaraka:** (Sanskrit) "Fire ritual." The Agamic term for yajna.
See: yajna.

**Aham Brahmasmi:** (Sanskrit) "I am God." Famous phrase often repeated
in the Upanishads. In this ecstatic statement of enlightenment, "I" does
not refer to the individuality or outer nature, but to the essence of
the soul which is ever identical to God Siva (or Brahman, the Supreme
Being) as Satchidananda and Parasiva. One of four Upanishadic "great
sayings," mahavakya.

**ahamkara:** (Sanskrit) "I-maker." Personal ego. The mental faculty of
individuation; sense of duality and separateness from others. Sense of
I-ness, "me" and "mine." Ahamkara is characterized by the sense of
I-ness (abhimana), sense of mine-ness, identifying with the body
(madiyam), planning for one's own happiness (mamasukha), brooding over
sorrow (mamaduhkha), and possessiveness (mama idam). See: anava, ego,
mind (individual).

**ahimsa:** (Sanskrit) "Noninjury," nonviolence or nonhurtfulness.
Refraining from causing harm to others, physically, mentally or
emotionally. Ahimsa is the first and most important of the yamas
(restraints). It is the cardinal virtue upon which all others depend.
See: yama-niyama.

**aikya:** (Sanskrit) "Union, oneness." See: Vira Saivism.

**Aitareya Brahmana:** (Sanskrit) Part of the Rig Veda dealing
principally with worship and ceremonies of royal inauguration. See: Rig
Veda,Vedas.

**Aitareya Upanishad:** (Sanskrit) Three chapters of the Aitareya
Aranyaka of the Rig Veda expounding the esoterics of ritual, revealing
the means of preparing oneself for the deepest spiritual attainments.

**Ajita Agama:** (Sanskrit) Among the 28 Saiva Siddhanta Agamas, this
scripture especially elucidates temple construction, worship and rules
for installation of various Siva icons (murti). See: murti, Saiva
Agamas.

**ajna chakra:** (Sanskrit) "Command wheel." The third-eye center. See:
chakra.

**akasha:** (sanskrit) "Space." The sky. Free, open space. Ether, the
fifth and most subtle of the five elements--earth, air, fire, water and
ether. Empirically, the rarified space or ethereal fluid plasma that
pervades the universes, inner and outer. Esoterically, mind, the
superconscious strata holding all that exists and all that potentially
exists, wherein all happenings are recorded and can be read by
clairvoyants. It is through psychic entry into this transcendental
akasha that cosmic knowledge is gathered, and the entire circle of
time--past, present and future--can be known. Space, akasha, in this
concept is a positive substance, filled with unseen energies and
intelligences, in contrast with the Western conception that space is the
absence of everything and is therefore nothing in and of itself. The
Advayataraka Upanishad (2.1.17) describes five levels of akasha which
can be yogically experienced: guna rahita akasha (space devoid of
qualities); parama akasha (supreme space), maha akasha (great space),
tattva akasha (space of true existence) and surya akasha (space of the
sun). See: mind (universal).

**akshata:** (Sanskrit) "Unbroken." Unmilled, uncooked rice, often mixed
with turmeric, offered as a sacred substance during puja, or in
blessings for individuals at weddings and other ceremonies. This, the
very best food, is the finest offering a devotee can give to God or a
wife can give to her husband. See: puja.

**Allama Prabhu:** (Sanskrit) A contemporary of Basavanna and central
figure of Vira Saivism (ca 1150), the head of an order of 300
enlightened beings which included 60 women. Initially a temple drummer,
he became an extraordinary siddha, mystic and poet. The Mantra Gopya are
his collected writings. See: Basavanna, Vira Saivism.

**allegory:** A story in which the character, places and events have
symbolic meaning, used to teach ideas and moral principles. See:
Itihasa, Purana.

**all-pervasive:** Diffused throughout or existing in every part of the
universe. See: Satchidananda.

**aloof:** Distant, reserved, withdrawn, drawn back; cool in attitude,
not sympathetic with or interested in an idea, project or group of
people.

**altruistic:** Unselfish. Showing more concern for others than oneself.

**Alvar:** (Tamil) "One who rules the Lord through bhakti." A group of
renowned saints of the Vaishnava religion (7th-9th century), devotional
mystics whose lives and teachings catalyzed to a resurgence of
Vaishnavism in Tamil Nadu. Their devotional poems are embodied in the
Nalayiram Divya Prabandham, containing about 4,000 hymns. Among the 12
most famous Alvars are Poykai, Pudam, Tirumalisai, Nammalvar,
Kulashekhara, Andal, Tiruppan and Tirumangai. A term not to be confused
with Nalvar, naming the four Samayacharya Saivite saints: Appar,
Sundarar, Sambandar and Manikkavasagar, who were their contemporaries.
See: Nalvar, Nayanar.

**Amardaka Order:** (Sanskrit) An order of Saiva sannyasins founded by
Amardaka Tirthanatha in Andhra Pradesh (ca 775).

**Amardaka Tirthanatha:** (Sanskrit) See: Amardaka Order.

**Ambika:** (Sanskrit) "Mother." A benign form of the Goddess, one of
the central Deities of the Shakta religion, along with Durga, Kali and
Parvati. See: Shakti.

**amends:** To make amends, to make up for injury or loss that one has
caused to another. This is done through sincere apology, expressing
contrition, public penance, such as kavadi, and the abundant giving of
gifts. See: papa, penance.

**amid (amidst, amongst):** In the middle of, among.

**Amman:** (Tamil) "Mother." Usually refers to Mariyamman, the "smallpox
Goddess," protectress from plagues, a popular gramadevata ("village
Deity" or tutelary Deity of a locale). There are many Mariyamman temples
and shrines in Malaysia, Mauritius and rural areas of South India. In
the Tamil tradition, amman is often appended to the names of various
Goddesses, as in Kali Amman or Draupadi Amman (deified heroine of the
Mahabharata). One of the distinguishing features of gramadevata shrines
is that they are not served by brahmin priests. See: Shakti, Shaktism.

**amorphous:** Of no definite shape or form. See: formless.

**amritatman:** (Sanskrit) "Immortal soul." See: atman, jiva, purusha,
soul.

**amrita:** (Sanskrit) "Immortality." Literally, "without death
(mrita)." The nectar of divine bliss which flows down from the sahasrara
chakra when one enters very deep states of meditation. This word is
apparently the source of the Greek amrotos, the ambrosia, food or drink,
of the Gods, which has its Vedic equivalent in the legendary elixir
called soma, a central element in Vedic rites in which it is venerated
as a Divinity.

**anahata chakra:** (Sanskrit) "Wheel of unstruck [sound]." The heart
center. See: chakra.

**analogy:** An explanation of a thing made by comparing it point by
point with another thing. For example, in the analogy of the potter, the
potter represents God and the clay represents the primal substance, or
"matter."

**analytical:** Prone to looking closely at things, intellectually
studying them to understand their nature, meaning and component parts.

**ananda:** (Sanskrit) "Bliss." The pure joy--ecstasy or enstasy--of
God-consciousness or spiritual experience. In its highest sense, ananda
is expressed in the famous Vedic description of God: sat-chit-ananda,
"existence-consciousness-bliss"--the divine or superconscious mind of
all souls. See: God Realization, Satchidananda.

**anandamaya kosha:** (Sanskrit) "Bliss body." The body of the soul,
which ultimately merges with Siva. See: soul, kosha.

**ananda tandava:** (Sanskrit) "Violent dance of bliss." See: Nataraja,
tandava.

**anava mala:** (Sanskrit) "Impurity of smallness; finitizing
principle." The individualizing veil of duality that enshrouds the soul.
It is the source of finitude and ignorance, the most basic of the three
bonds (anava, karma, maya) which temporarily limit the soul. Anava mala
has the same importance in Agamic philosophy that maya-avidya has in
Vedantic philosophy. The presence of anava mala is what causes the
misapprehension about the nature of God, soul and world, the notion of
being separate and distinct from God and the universe. Anava obscures
the natural wisdom, light, unity and humility of the soul and allows
spiritual ignorance, darkness, egoity and pride to manifest. It is
inherent in a maturing soul, like the shell of a seed. When anava is
ripe, anugraha, "grace," comes, and anava falls away. Anava is the root
mala and the last bond to be dissolved. See: evolution of the soul,
grace, mala, soul.

**anavopaya:** (Sanskrit) "Minute or individual means." See: upaya.

**Anbe Sivamayam Satyame Parasivam:** Tamil for "God Siva is Immanent
Love and transcendent Reality." The affirmation of faith which
capsulizes the entire creed of monistic Saiva Siddhanta. In Sanskrit it
is Premaiva Sivamaya, Satyam eva Parasivah.

**anchorite:** "Hermit." A monk or aspirant who lives alone and apart
from society, as contrasted with cenobite, a member of a religious order
living in a monastery or convent. See: monk, nunk.

**ancillary:** Auxiliary. Aiding or supporting. Supplementary;
secondary.

**Andal:** (Tamil) Famed Vaishnava saint of Tamil Nadu. One of the
Alvars, she lived in the early 9th century and today is venerated as one
of South India's greatest bhakta poetesses. See: Alvar, Vaishnavism.

**Andhra Pradesh (Pradesha):** (Sanskrit) Modern Indian state located on
the southeast coast of India north of Tamil Nadu. The capital is
Hyderabad. Language: Telegu. Dominant faith: Vaishnavism. Area: 106,000
square miles. Population 54 million. Famous for its opulent Tirupati
Vaishnava temple.

**anekavada:** (Sanskrit) "Pluralism," or "not-one theology." See:
pluralism.

**anekavadin:** (Sanskrit) A follower of anekavada.

**anga:** (Sanskrit) "Part; limb." Term for the individual soul in Vira
Saivism. The anga is of finite intelligence, while Siva is of infinite
intelligence. See: Vira Saivism.

**aniconic:** "Without likeness; without image." When referring to a
Deity image, aniconic denotes a symbol which does not attempt an
anthropomorphic (humanlike) or representational likeness. An example is
the Sivalinga, "mark of God." See: murti, Sivalinga.

**animate-inanimate:** From the Latin animatus, "to make alive, fill
with breath." These terms indicate the two poles of manifest existence,
that which has movement and life (most expressly animals and other
"living" beings) and that which is devoid of movement (such as minerals
and, to a lesser degree, plants). From a deeper view, however, all
existence is alive with movement and possessed of the potent, divine
energy of the cosmos. See: tattva.

**animism:** The belief that everything (including inanimate objects) is
alive with soul or spirit, a conviction pervasive among most indigenous
(tribal/pagan/shamanistic) faiths, including Hinduism, Shintoism and
spiritualism.

**anjali mudra:** (Sanskrit) "Reverence gesture." Also called
pranamanjali. A gesture of respect and greeting, in which the two palms
are held softly together and slightly cupped. Often accompanied by the
verbal salutation "namaskara," meaning "reverent salutation." The anjali
mudra has various forms, including held near the chest in greeting
equals, at eye level in greeting one's guru, and above the head in
salutation to God. One form is with the open hands placed side by side,
as if by a beggar to receive food, or a worshiper beseeching God's grace
in the temple. See: mudra, namaskara.

**ankusha:** (Sanskrit) Goad, symbol of Lord Ganesha's power to remove
obstacles from the devotee's path, and to spur the dullards onward.

**annamaya kosha:** (Sanskrit) "Food sheath." The physical body. See:
kosha.

**annaprashana:** (Sanskrit) "Feeding." The childhood sacrament of first
solid food. See: samskaras of childhood.

**annihilate:** To destroy completely, to reduce to nothing.

**antagonism:** Opposition, hostility.

**antahkarana:** (Sanskrit) "Inner faculty." The mental faculty of the
astral body, sukshma sharira, comprising intellect, instinct and ego--in
Sanskrit, buddhi, manas and ahamkara--which are a three-fold expression
of chitta, consciousness. Chitta is sometimes listed as a tattva, or
part of a tattva, at the Prakriti level, in Saiva Siddhanta. In Vedanta,
chitta, "mind stuff," is often understood as a part of antahkarana;
while in the Saiva Siddhanta, Yoga and Sankhya Darshanas, it is
generally viewed as the total mind, of which manas, buddhi and ahamkara
are the inner faculties. Thus, while Vedanta describes antahkarana as
four-fold, Sankhya and Yoga discuss it as three-fold. Siddha Siddhanta
views antahkarana as five-fold, with the inclusion of chaitanya as
"higher consciousness." See: consciousness, mind (individual), tattva.

**Antarloka:** (Sanskrit) "Inner or in-between world." The astral plane.
See: loka.

**anthology:** A choice collection of prose or poetry excerpts.

**antyavachanam:** (Sanskrit) "Final word." Colophon. Epilogue.

**antyeshti:** (Sanskrit) "Last rites." Funeral. See: death, samskara.

**anu:** (Sanskrit) A common prefix conveying the meanings: "after, near
to, under, secondary or subordinate to."

**anubhava:** (Sanskrit) "Perception, apprehension; experience."
Personal experience; understanding; impressions on the mind not derived
from memory.

**anugraha shakti:** (Sanskrit) "Graceful or favoring power." Revealing
grace. God Siva's power of illumination, through which the soul is freed
from the bonds of anava, karma and maya and ultimately attains
liberation, moksha. Specifically, anugraha descends on the soul as
shaktipata, the diksha (initiation) from a satguru. Anugraha is a key
concept in Saiva Siddhanta. It comes when anava mala, the shell of
finitude which surrounds the soul, reaches a state of ripeness,
malaparipaka. See: anava, grace, Nataraja, shaktipata.

**anukramanika:** (Sanskrit) "Succession, arrangement." An index.

**anupaya:** (Sanskrit) "Without means." A term used in Kashmir Saivism
to mean spontaneous Self Realization without effort. See: upaya.

**anxiety:** State of uneasiness, worry or apprehension. See: manas.

**Apasmarapurusha:** (Sanskrit) "Forgetful person." The soul under
Siva's foot of obscuring grace, depicted in numerous icons. He
represents ignorance and heedlessness. (Sometimes simply Apasmara.) See:
Nataraja.

**apatya:** (Sanskrit) "Offspring; child; descendant."

**apex:** Highest point, peak.

**apex of creation:** The highest or initial movement in the mind that
will eventually manifest a creation. The quantum level of manifestation.
See: microcosm-macrocosm, quantum, tattva.

**Appar:** (Tamil) "Father." Endearing name for Tirunavukarasu (ca 700),
one of four Tamil saints, Samayacharyas, who reconverted errant Saivites
who had embraced Jainism. Calling himself the servant of God's servants,
he composed magnificent hymns in praise of Siva that are reverently sung
to this day. See: Nalvar, Nayanar, Saiva Siddhanta.

**apparent:** Appearing, but not necessarily real or true. Seeming to
be.

**Appaya Dikshita:** (Sanskrit) Philosophical genius of South India
(1554-1626) who worked to reconcile Vaishnavism and Saivism, advancing
the Siva Advaita school of Saivism by his writings, and bolstering other
schools by his brilliant summations of their philosophies. He is best
known for his commentaries on the teachings of Srikantha. Appaya
Dikshita also created a manual of Saiva temple ritual still in use
today. See: Siva Advaita.

**apprehend:** To mentally seize and hold, to see or understand; to
physically detain.

**Aranyaka:** (Sanskrit) "Forest treatise." Third section of each of the
four Vedas. Texts containing esoteric, mystical knowledge, largely on
the inner meanings and functions of the Vedic yajna, or fire ceremonies.
See: Vedas.

**arati:** (Sanskrit) "Light." The circling or waving of a lamp--usually
fed with ghee, camphor or oil--before a holy person or the temple Deity
at the high point of puja. The flame is then presented to the devotees,
each passing his or her hands through it and bringing them to the eyes
three times, thereby receiving the blessings. Arati can also be
performed as the briefest form of puja. See: archana, puja.

**Arbhuta Tiru Antadi:** (Tamil) poem of 100 verses in praise of Lord
Siva composed in Tamil by the woman Saint Karaikkal Ammaiyar (ca 5th
century). See: Nayanar.

**archana:** (Sanskrit) A special, personal, abbreviated puja done by
temple priests in which the name, birthstar and family lineage of a
devotee are recited to invoke individual guidance and blessings. Archana
also refers to chanting the names of the Deity, which is a central part
of every puja. See: puja.

**Ardhanari Nateshvara Stotram:** (Sanskrit) A short hymn alternately
praising Siva and Shakti as merged in the androgynous image of
Ardhanarishvara. See: Ardhanarishvara.

**Ardhanarishvara:** (Sanskrit) "Half-female Lord." Lord Siva in
androgynous form, male on the right side and female on the left,
indicating that: 1) Siva (like all Mahadevas) is genderless; 2) Siva is
All, inseparable from His energy, Shakti; 3) in Siva the ida (feminine)
and the pingala (masculine) nadis (psychic nerve currents) are balanced
so that sushumna is ever active. The meditator who balances these
through sadhana and yoga becomes like Siva. In the unity of
Ardhanarishvara all opposites are reconciled; duality vanishes back into
the one source. This icon especially represents Siva's second
perfection: Pure Consciousness (Satchidananda or Parashakti). See:
kundalini, nadi, Shakti, Siva.

**Ardra Darshana:** (Sanskrit) A ten-day festival ending on Ardra
nakshatra, near the full moon of December-January honoring Siva
Nataraja. In Tamil Nadu, each morning at 4am, the mystical songs of
Saint Manikkavasagar, Tiruvembavai, are sung or recited. Unmarried girls
go to the temple in small groups to pray for rains, for the welfare of
the land and for fine, spiritual husbands. At the famed temple of
Chidambaram in Tamil Nadu, Lord Nataraja, the presiding Deity, is taken
out for a grand procession in a chariot pulled through the streets by
thousands of devotees. See: darshana, Nataraja.

**arduous:** Strenuous, laborious. Difficult to climb, do or accomplish.

**arena:** Any place where an event, usually involving struggle or
conflict, takes place. The earth is the arena of the soul's evolution.
See: evolution of the soul.

**Aristotle:** Greek philosopher (384-322 bce) who left a profound
legacy of writings on metaphysics, ethics, logic and law. A disciple of
Plato.

**arjava:** (Sanskrit) "Steadfastness." See: yama-niyama.

**Arjuna:** (Sanskrit) A hero of the Mahabharata and central figure of
the Bhagavad Gita. See: Bhagavad Gita.

**artha:** (Sanskrit) "Goal" or "purpose;" wealth, substance, property,
money. Also has the meaning of utility; desire. See: dharma,
purushartha.

**Arthaveda:** (Sanskrit) "Science of statecraft." A class of ancient
texts, also called Nitishastras, on politics, statecraft and much more,
forming the Upaveda of the Rig Veda. The most important text of this
group is Kautiliya's Arthashastra (ca 300 bce) which gives detailed
instructions on all areas of government. It embodies the kshatriya
perspective of rulership and society. See: Upaveda.

**Arunagirinathar:** (Tamil) South Indian Saivite poet saint (ca 1500).
See: Kandar Anubhuti.

**Aruneya Upanishad:** (Sanskrit) A short Upanishad dealing with
sannyasa. See: sannyasa.

**Aryaman:** (Sanskrit) "Close friend; matchmaker; Sun God." A Vedic
Deity who personifies hospitality, the household and grihastha life. He
presides over matrimonial alliances, and protects tradition, custom and
religion. He is also invoked during shraddha (funeral-memorial)
ceremonies.

**asana:** (Sanskrit) "Seat; posture." In hatha yoga, asana refers to
any of numerous poses prescribed to balance and tune up the subtle
energies of mind and body for meditation and to promote health and
longevity. Examples are the shoulder-stand (sarvangasana,"whole body
pose") and the lotus pose (padmasana). Each asana possesses unique
benefits, affecting the varied inner bodies and releasing energies in
different parts of the nervous system. While the physical science of
hatha yoga can dramatically influence health and general well-being, it
is primarily a preparation for the deeper yogas and meditations. Sivaya
Subramuniyaswami has provided a system of 27 asanas to tune the nervous
system for meditation and contemplation and to mitigate the burdensome
karmas, known by the modern term "stress," built up through the
interaction with other people. His 27 asanas are performed in a
meditative sequence, not unlike a serene dance, accompanied by certain
visualizations and pranayamas. See: hatha yoga, raja yoga, yoga.

**ascent:** Rising or climbing higher. A path that leads upward.

**ascetic:** A person who leads a life of contemplation and rigorous
self-denial, shunning comforts and pleasures for religious purposes.
See: monk, nunk.

**asceticism:** The austerities of an ascetic. See: sadhana, tapas.

**ash:** See: vibhuti.

**ashtanga pranama:** (Sanskrit) "Eight-limbed salutation." See:
pranama.

**ashtavaranam:** (Sanskrit) "Eight shields." Vira Saivism's eight aids
to faith: guru, Linga, jangama (monk), vibhuti, rudraksha, paduka,
prasada (bathing water from Sivalinga or guru's feet), and Panchakshara
Mantra (Namah Sivaya). See: Vira Saivism.

**ashrama:** (Sanskrit) "Place of striving." From shram, "to exert
energy." Hermitage; order of the life. Holy sanctuary; the residence and
teaching center of a sadhu, saint, swami, ascetic or guru; often
includes lodging for students. Also names life's four stages. See:
ashrama dharma, sadhana.

**ashrama dharma:** (Sanskrit) "Laws life's orders." Meritorious way of
life particular to each of the four stages (ashramas) of life, following
which one lives in harmony with nature and life, allowing the body,
emotions and mind to develop and undergo their natural cycles in a most
positive way. The four stages are as follows. --**brahmacharya:**
(Sanskrit) Studentship, from age 12 to 24. --**grihastha:** (Sanskrit)
Householder, from 24 to 48. --**vanaprastha:** (Sanskrit) Elder advisor,
from 48 to 72. --**sannyasa:** (Sanskrit) Religious solitaire, from 72
onward. The first two ashramas make up the pravritti marga, (Sanskrit)
the way of going toward the world through the force of desire and
ambition. The last two are the nivritti marga, (Sanskrit) moving away
from the world through introspection and renunciation. See: dharma,
grihastha dharma, sannyasa dharma.

**Assam:** (Sanskrit) Indian state in the northeast corner of the
country, south of Bhutan, almost separated from the rest of India by
Bangladesh. Area 30,000 square miles, population 21 million.

**assuage:** To lessen pain or distress; to calm passions or desires.

**asteya:** (Sanskrit) "Nonstealing." See: yama-niyama.

**astikya:** (Sanskrit) "Faith." See: faith, shraddha, yama-niyama.

**astral body:** The subtle, nonphysical body (sukshma sharira) in which
the soul functions in the astral plane, the inner world also called
Antarloka. The astral body includes the pranic sheath (pranamaya kosha),
the instinctive-intellectual sheath (manomaya kosha) and the cognitive
sheath (vijnanamaya kosha)--with the pranic sheath dropping off at the
death of the physical body. See: kosha, soul.

**astral plane:** The subtle world, or Antarloka, spanning the spectrum
of consciousness from the vishuddha chakra in the throat to the patala
chakra in the soles of the feet. The astral plane includes: 1) the
higher astral plane,**Maharloka,** "plane of balance;" 2) mid-astral
plane,**Svarloka,** "celestial plane;" 3) lower astral
plane,**Bhuvarloka,** "plane of atmosphere," a counterpart or subtle
duplicate of the physical plane (consisting of the Pitriloka and
Pretaloka); and 4) the sub-astral plane,**Naraka,** consisting of seven
hellish realms corresponding to the seven chakras below the base of the
spine. In the astral plane, the soul is enshrouded in the astral body,
called sukshma sharira. See also: astral body, loka, Naraka, three
worlds.

**astrology:** Science of celestial influences. See: jyotisha, Vedanga.

**asura:** (Sanskrit) "Evil spirit; demon." (Opposite of sura: "deva;
God.") A being of the lower astral plane, Naraka. Asuras can and do
interact with the physical plane, causing major and minor problems in
people's lives. Asuras do evolve and do not remain permanently in this
state. See: Naraka.

**Ashvaghosha:** (Sanskrit) Buddhist scholar, pantheist philosopher (ca
80 bce-150 ce), and one of the great poets of Indian history. A
principal architect of the Mahayana school. See: pantheism.

**Ashvin:** (Sanskrit) Vedic heroes--twins, young, handsome, brilliant
and agile--who embody the dawn, the transition from darkness to light,
and from disease to health. They are physicians of the Gods, and honey
is one of their symbols. They also represent duality acting in unison.
See: Vedas, Rig Veda.

**atala:** (Sanskrit) "Bottomless region." The first chakra below the
muladhara, centered in the hips. Region of fear and lust. Corresponds to
the first astral netherworld beneath the earth's surface, called Put
("childless") or Atala, the first of seven hellish regions of
consciousness. See: chakra, loka, Naraka.

**atattva:** (Sanskrit) "Noncategory; beyond existence." Atattva is the
negation of the term tattva, and is used to describe the indescribable
Reality--the Absolute, Parasiva, the Self God--which transcends all 36
categories (tattvas) of manifestation. It is beyond time, form and
space. And yet, in a mystery known only to the knower--the enlightened
mystic--Parashakti-nada, the first tattva, ever comes out of Parasiva.
If it were not for Parasiva, nothing could be. Parasiva does not exist
to the outer dimensions of cosmic consciousness, but without it, the
mind itself would not exist. See: tattva.

**atha:** (Sanskrit) "Now; then; certainly." An inceptive particle and
mark of auspiciousness used to begin sacred works. For example, the
first sutra of the Yoga Sutras reads, "Now then (atha), an exposition on
yoga."

**Atharvashikha Upanishad:** (Sanskrit) A minor Upanishad dealing with
the interpretation of Aum. See: Upanishad, Vedas.

**Atharva Veda:** (Sanskrit) From "Atharva," the name of the rishi said
to have compiled this fourth Veda. The Atharva consists of 20 books and
720 hymns. Considered the last Veda recorded, it consists of mostly
original hymns (rather than replications from the Rig Veda). It is known
as the Veda of prayer, in recognition of its abundant magical charms and
spells. It also contains many Agama-like cosmological passages that
bridge the earlier Vedic hymns and formulas with the metaphysics of the
Upanishads. See: Vedas.

**atheism:** The rejection of all religion or religious belief, or
simply the belief that God or Gods do not exist. See: charvaka,
materialism, nastika.

**atman:** (Sanskrit) "The soul; the breath; the principle of life and
sensation." The soul in its entirety--as the soul body (anandamaya
kosha) and its essence (Parashakti and Parasiva). One of Hinduism's most
fundamental tenets is that we are the atman, not the physical body,
emotions, external mind or personality. In Hindu scriptures, atman
sometimes refers to the ego-personality, and its meaning must be
determined according to context. The Atma Upanishad (1-3) describes
atman, or purusha, as threefold: bahyatman, the outer or physical
person; antaratman, the inner person, excluding the physical form, who
perceives, thinks and cognizes; and Paramatman, the transcendent Self
God within. See: Paramatman, kosha, soul.

**atmartha puja:** (Sanskrit) "Personal worship rite." Home puja. See:
puja.

**atmasvarupa:** (Sanskrit) "Nature of the soul." See: atman, soul.

**atmosphere:** The pervading or surrounding spirit or influence.
General mood or environment. See: sannidhya.

**atone:** To make amends or reconcile. See: absolution, papa, penance,
sin.

**attainment:** Acquisition, achievement or realization through effort.
Spiritual accomplishment. Saiva Siddhanta notes four primary levels of
attainment: salokya (sharing God's world, the goal of charya), samipya
(nearness to God, the goal of kriya), sarupya (likeness to God, the goal
of yoga) and sayujya (union with God, the state of jnana). See: God
Realization, pada, Self Realization, siddha yoga, siddhi.

**attitude:** Disposition. State of mind. Manner of carrying oneself.
Manner of acting, thinking or feeling which reveals one's disposition,
opinions and beliefs. See: conscience.

**augural:** Having to do with divination, prediction or interpreting
omens.

**Augustine:** Catholic bishop saint (354-430) and highly influential
theologian.

**Aum:** (Sanskrit) or (Sanskrit) Often spelled Om. The mystic syllable
of Hinduism, placed at the beginning of most sacred writings. As a
mantra, it is pronounced aw (as in law), oo (as in zoo), mm. Aum
represents the Divine, and is associated with Lord Ganesha, for its
initial sound "aa," vibrates within the muladhara, the chakra at the
base of the spine upon which this God sits. The second sound of this
mantra, "oo," vibrates within the throat and chest chakras, the realm of
Lord Murugan, or Kumara, known by the Hawaiian people as the God Ku. The
third sound, "mm," vibrates within the cranial chakras, ajna and
sahasrara, where the Supreme God reigns. The dot above, called anusvara,
represents the Soundless Sound, Paranada. Aum is explained in the
Upanishads as standing for the whole world and its parts, including
past, present and future. It is from this primal vibration that all
manifestation issues forth. Aum is the primary, or mula mantra, and
often precedes other mantras. It may be safely used for chanting and
japa by anyone of any religion. Its three letters represent the three
worlds and the powers of creation, preservation and destruction. In
common usage in several Indian languages, aum means "yes, verily" or
"hail." See: nada, Pranava, sound.

**aura:** The luminous colorful field of subtle energy radiating within
and around the human body, extending out from three to seven feet. The
colors of the aura change constantly according to the ebb and flow of
one's state of consciousness, thoughts, moods and emotions. Higher,
benevolent feelings create bright pastels; base, negative feelings are
darker in color. Thus, auras can be seen and "read" by clairvoyants. The
general nature of auras varies according to individual unfoldment. Great
mystics have very bright auras, while instinctive persons are shrouded
in dull shades. The aura consists of two aspects, the outer aura and the
inner aura. The outer aura extends beyond the physical body and changes
continuously, reflecting the individual's moment-to-moment panorama of
thought and emotion. The inner aura is much more constant, as it
reflects deep-seated subconscious patterns, desires, repressions and
tendencies held in the sub-subconscious mind. Those colors which are
regularly and habitually reflected in the outer aura are eventually
recorded more permanently in the inner aura. The colors of the inner
aura permeate out through the outer aura and either shade with sadness
or brighten with happiness the normal experiences of daily life. The
inner aura hovers deep within the astral body in the chest and torso and
looks much like certain "modern-art" paintings, with heavy strokes of
solid colors here and there. In Sanskrit, the aura is called
prabhamandala, "luminous circle," or diptachakra, "wheel of light." See:
mind (five states), papa, punya.

**Aurobindo Ghosh:** (Sanskrit) A prolific Bengali writer and poet,
pantheistic philosopher and yoga mystic, widely known as Sri Aurobindo
(1872-1950). He perceived the modern global crisis as marking a period
of transition from a dark age to a more enlightened one, when Hinduism
will play a preponderant role. He founded the Auroville community in
Pondichery, based on purna (integral) yoga and contributed much to this
century's Hindu revival.

**auspicious:** Mangala. Favorable, of good omen, foreboding well. One
of the central concepts in Hindu life. Astrology defines a method for
determining times that are favorable for various human endeavors. Much
of daily living and religious practice revolves around an awareness of
auspiciousness. Endowed with great power and importance, it is
associated with times, places and persons. See: jyotisha, muhurta,
swastika, Tai Pongal.

**austerity:** Self-denial and discipline, physical or mental, performed
for various reasons including acquiring powers, attaining grace,
conquering the instinctive nature and burning the seeds of past karmas.
Ranging from simple deprivations, such as foregoing a meal, to severe
disciplines, called tapas, such as always standing, never sitting or
lying down, even for sleep. See: penance, tapas.

**authenticity:** Quality of being authentic, or genuine, trustworthy.
Reliable.

**authority:** Influence, power or right to give commands, enforce
obedience, take action or make final decisions.

**Auvaiyar:** (Tamil) A woman saint of Tamil Nadu (ca 800 ce), devotee
of Lord Ganesha and Karttikeya and one of the greatest literary figures
in ancient India. As a young girl, she prayed to have her beauty removed
so she would not be forced into marriage and could devote her full life
to God. She was a great bhakta who wrote exquisite ethical works, some
in aphoristic style and some in four-line verse. Among the most famous
are Atti Chudi, Konrai Ventan, Ulaka Niti, Muturai, and Nalvali. Her
Tamil primer is studied by children to this day. A second Saint Auvaiyar
may have lived in the ninth century [See: Timeline, p. 625.]

**Avantivarman:** (Sanskrit) King of Kashmir (855-883) during whose
reign lived Kallata, one of the great exponents of Kashmir Saivism.

**avatara:** (Sanskrit) "Descent." A God born in a human (or animal)
body. A central concept of Shaktism, Smartism and Vaishnavism. See:
incarnation, Ishta Devata, Vaishnavism.

**avidya:** (Sanskrit) Spiritual "ignorance." Wrongful understanding of
the nature of reality. Mistaking the impermanent for the everlasting.

**awareness:** Sakshin, or chit. Individual consciousness, perception,
knowing; the witness of perception, the "inner eye of the soul." The
soul's ability to sense, see or know and to be conscious of this
knowing. When awareness is indrawn (pratyak chetana), various states of
samadhi may occur. Awareness is known in the Agamas as chitshakti, the
"power of awareness," the inner self and eternal witness. See:
consciousness, sakshin.

**ayurveda:** (Sanskrit) "Science of life." A holistic system of
medicine and health native to ancient India. This sacred Vedic science
is an Upaveda of the Atharva Veda. Three early giants in this field who
left voluminous texts are Charaka, Sushruta and Vagbhata. Ayurveda
covers many areas, including: 1) chikitsa, general medicine, 2) shalya,
surgery, 3) dehavritti, physiology, 4) nidana, diagnosis, 5)
dravyavidya, medicine and pharmacology, 6) agada tantra, antidote
method, 7) stritantra, gynecology, 8) pashu vidya, veterinary science,
9) kaumara bhritya, pediatrics, 10) urdhvanga, diseases of the organs of
the head, 11) bhuta vidya, demonology, 12) rasayana, tonics,
rejuvenating, 13) vajikarana, sexual rejuvenation. Among the first known
surgeons was Sushruta (ca 600 bce), whose Sushruta Samhita is studied to
this day. (Hippocrates, Greek father of medicine, lived two centuries
later.) The aims of ayurveda are ayus, "long life," and arogya,
"diseaselessness," which facilitate progress toward ultimate spiritual
goals. Health is achieved by balancing energies (especially the doshas,
bodily humors) at all levels of being, subtle and gross, through
innumerable methods, selected according to the individual's
constitution, lifestyle and nature. Similar holistic medical systems are
prevalent among many communities, including the Chinese, American
Indians, Africans and South Americans. See: doshas.

**ayurveda vaidya:** (Sanskrit) A practitioner, or physician, of
ayurveda.

**Ayyappan:** (Tamil) The popular God of a recently formed sect that
focuses on pilgrimage to the top of Sabarimalai, a sacred hill in
Kerala, where He is said to appear at night as a divine light. Ayyappan
is revered as a son of Vishnu and Siva (Hari-Hara putra). His vahana is
the tiger.

**axiom:** A rule or maxim that is universally accepted as true.

**axis:** A real or imaginary straight line around which a planet
rotates. More generally, axis means a central line of development.


