J
=

**Jabala Upanishad:** (Sanskrit) Belongs to the Atharva Veda. This short
scripture teaches of knowledge attained in renunciation. See: Upanishad.

**Jagadacharya:** (Sanskrit) "World teacher." In 1986 the World
Religious Parliament of New Delhi named five world leaders who were most
active in spreading Sanatana Dharma outside India. The five are: H.H.
Swami Chinmayananda of Chinmaya Missions, India; Satguru Sivaya
Subramuniyaswami of Saiva Siddhanta Church and Himalayan Academy, USA;
Yogiraj Amrit Desai of Kripalu Yoga Center, USA; Pandit Tej Ramji Sharma
of Nepali Baba, Nepal; and Swami Jagpurnadas Maharaj, Mauritius.

**Jaimini:** (Sanskrit) Founder of the Mimamsa Darshana. See: shad
darshana.

**Jaiminiya Brahmana Upanishad:** (Sanskrit) A philosophical discourse
of the Sama Veda dealing with death, passage to other worlds and
reincarnation. See: Upanishad.

**Jainism: (Jaina)** (Sanskrit) An ancient non-Vedic religion of India
made prominent by the teachings of Mahavira ("Great Hero"), ca 500 bce.
The Jain Agamas teach reverence for all life, vegetarianism and strict
renunciation for ascetics. Jains focus great emphasis on the fact that
all souls may attain liberation, each by his own effort. Their great
historic saints, called Tirthankaras ("Ford-Crossers"), are objects of
worship, of whom Mahavira was the 24th and last. Jains number about six
million today, living mostly in India. See: Mahavira.

**Janaloka:** (Sanskrit) "Plane of creativity, or of liberated mortals."
The third highest of the seven upper worlds, realm of vishuddha chakra.
See: loka.

**jangama:** (Sanskrit) "Moving; wanderer." A term used by Vira
Saivites, originally to name their mendicant, renunciates who walked as
homeless sadhus, uplifting others. Now an order of Vira Saivite
teachers. See: Vira Saivism.

**japa:** (Sanskrit) "Incantation." Practice of concentrated repetition
of a mantra, often while counting the repetitions on a mala or strand of
beads. It may be done silently or aloud. Sometimes known as mantra yoga.
A major sadhana in Hindu spiritual practice, from the simple utterance
of a few names of God to extraordinary feats of repeating sacred
syllables millions of times for years on end. It is recommended as a
cure for pride and arrogance, anger and jealousy, fear and confusion. It
harmonizes the doshas and quiets the vrittis. Filling the mind with
divine syllables, awakening the divine essence of spiritual energies in
the physical body, japa brings forth the amrita. For Saivites, Namah
Sivaya in its various forms is the most treasured mantra used in japa.
The mantra Hare-Rama-Hare-Krishna is among the foremost Vaishnava
mantras. Japa yoga is said to be of 14 kinds: daily (nitya),
circumstantial (naimittika), the japa of desired results (kamya),
forbidden (nishiddha), penitential (prayashchitta), unmoving (achala),
moving (chala), voiced (vachika), whispered (upanshu), bee, or murmured
(bhramara), mental (manasa), uninterrupted (akhanda), nonuttered (ajapa)
and circumambulatory (pradakshina). See: amrita, mantra, yama-niyama,
yoga.

**jatakarma:** (Sanskrit) "Rite of birth." See: samskaras of birth.

**jati** : (Sanskrit) "Birth; genus; community or caste." See: varna
dharma.

**jayanti:** (Sanskrit) "Birthday." See: Guru Jayanti.

**jiva:** (Sanskrit) "Living, existing." From jiv, "to live." The
individual soul, atman, during its embodied state, bound by the three
malas (anava, karma and maya). The jivanmukta is one who is "liberated
while living." See: atman, evolution of the soul, jivanmukta, purusha,
soul.

**jivanmukta:** (Sanskrit) "Liberated soul." A being who has attained
nirvikalpa samadhi--the realization of the Self, Parasiva--and is
liberated from rebirth while living in a human body. (Contrasted with
videhamukta, one liberated at the point of death.) This attainment is
the culmination of lifetimes of intense striving, sadhana and tapas,
requiring total renunciation, sannyasa (death to the external world,
denoted in the conducting of one's own funeral rites), in the current
incarnation. While completing life in the physical body, the jivanmukta
enjoys the ability to reenter nirvikalpa samadhi again and again. At
this time, siddhis can be developed which are carried to the inner
worlds after mahasamadhi. Such an awakened jnani benefits the population
by simply being who he is. When he speaks, he does so without
forethought. His wisdom is beyond reason, yet it does not conflict with
reason. Nor does he arrive at what he says through the process of
reason, but through the process of ajna-chakra sight. See: jivanmukti,
jnana, kaivalya, moksha, Self Realization, Sivasayujya, videhamukti.

**jivanmukti:** (Sanskrit) "Liberation while living." The state of the
jivanmukta. Contrasted with videhamukti, liberation at the point of
death. See: death, jivanmukta, moksha, reincarnation, videhamukti.

**jivayajna:** (Sanskrit) "Self sacrifice." See: yajna.

**jnana:** (Sanskrit) "Knowledge; wisdom." The matured state of the
soul. It is the wisdom that comes as an aftermath of the kundalini
breaking through the door of Brahman into the realization of Parasiva,
Absolute Reality. The repeated samadhis of Parasiva ever deepen this
flow of divine knowing which establishes the knower in an extraordinary
point of reference, totally different from those who have not attained
this enlightenment. Jnana is the awakened, superconscious state (karana
chitta) working within the ordinary experience of the world, flowing
into daily life situations. It is the fruition of the progressive stages
of charya, kriya and yoga in the Saiva Siddhanta system of spiritual
unfoldment. Jnana is sometimes misunderstood as book knowledge, as a
maturity or awakening that comes from simply understanding a complex
philosophical system or systems. Those who define jnana in this way deny
that the path is a progression of charya-kriya-yoga-jnana or of
karma-bhakti-raja-jnana. Rather, they say that one can choose his path,
and that each leads to the ultimate goal. See: God Realization, door of
Brahman, Self Realization, samadhi.

**Jnanamrita:** (Sanskrit) A treatise of poems by Gorakshanatha on the
duties of a yogi. See: Gorakshanatha.

**jnana pada:** (Sanskrit) "Stage of wisdom." According to the Saiva
Siddhanta rishis, jnana is the last of the four successive padas
(stages) of spiritual unfoldment. It is the culmination of the third
stage, the yoga pada. Also names the knowledge section of each Agama.
See: jnana, pada.

**jnana shakti:** (Sanskrit) "Power of wisdom." One of Siva's three
primary shaktis. Also a name for Lord Karttikeya's vel. See: Karttikeya.
shakti, trishula.

**jnana yoga:** (Sanskrit) "Union of knowledge." Describes the esoteric
spiritual practices of the fully enlightened being, or jnani. An
alternative meaning, popularized by Swami Vivekananda, is the quest for
cognition through intellectual religious study, as one of four alternate
paths to truth, the other three being bhakti yoga, karma yoga and raja
yoga. See: jnana, yoga.

**Jnaneshvari:** (Sanskrit) Foremost religious treatise in the Marathi
language. Written by the Natha saint Jnaneshvar (or Jnanadeva) about
1290. It is a verse-by-verse commentary on the Bhagavad Gita.

**jnani:** (Sanskrit) "Sage." One who possesses jnana. See: jivanmukta,
jnana.

**joint family:** Kutumba or kula. The Hindu social unit consisting of
several generations of kindred living together under the same roof or in
a joining compound. Traditionally, joint families live in a large single
home, but in modern times accommodations are often in individual,
nuclear homes within a shared compound. The joint family includes the
father and mother, sons, grandsons and great-grandsons with their
spouses, as well as the daughters, granddaughters and
great-granddaughters until they are married--thus often comprising
several married couples and their children. The head of the joint
family, called kutumba mukhya (also mukhya or kartri), is the father,
supported by the mother, and in his absence, the elder son, guided by
his mother and supported by his spouse. From an early age, the eldest
son is given special training by his father to assume this future
responsibility as head of the family. In the event of the father's
death, sacred law does allow for the splitting of the family wealth
between the sons. Division of family assets may also be necessary in
cases where sons are involved in different professions and live in
different towns, when there is an inability for all to get along under
one roof, or when the family becomes unmanageably large.

The main characteristics of the joint family are that its members 1)
share a common residence, 2) partake of food prepared in the same
kitchen, 3) hold their property in common and, 4) ideally, profess the
same religion, sect and sampradaya. Each individual family of husband,
wife and children is under the guidance of the head of the joint family.
All work together unselfishly to further the common good. Each joint
family extends out from its home to include a second level of
connections as an "extended family (brihatkutumba or mahakutumba)." See:
extended family, grihastha dharma.

**juncture:** A critical point in the development of events.

**jyotisha:** (Sanskrit) From jyoti, "light." "The science of the lights
(or stars)." Hindu astrology, the knowledge and practice of analyzing
events and circumstances, delineating character and determining
auspicious moments, according to the positions and movements of heavenly
bodies. In calculating horoscopes, jyotisha uses the sidereal
(fixed-star) system, whereas Western astrology uses the tropical
(fixed-date) method.

**jyotisha shastri:** (Sanskrit) "Astrologer." A person well versed in
the science of jyotisha. See: jyotisha.

**Jyotisha Vedanga:** (Sanskrit) "Veda-limb of celestial science
(astronomy-astrology)." Ancient texts giving knowledge of astronomy and
astrology, for understanding the cosmos and determining proper timing
for Vedic rites. (Jyoti means light [of the sun, fire, etc.]) See:
jyotisha, Vedanga.


