K
=

**Kadaitswami:** (Tamil) "Marketplace swami." The 159th satguru of the
Nandinatha Sampradaya's Kailasa Parampara. Born ca 1804; attained
mahasamadhi October 13, 1891. Renouncing his career as a judge in
Bangalore, South India, Kadaitswami became a sannyasin and trained under
the "Rishi from the Himalayas," who sent him on mission to Sri Lanka. He
performed severe tapas on an island off the Jaffna coast, awakening many
siddhis. For decades he spurred the Sri Lankan Saivites to greater
spirituality through inspired talks and demonsting siddhis. He initiated
Chellappaswami as the next satguru in the parampara. Kadaitswami's
initiation name was Muthyanandaswami. See: Kailasa Parampara, Natha
Sampradaya.

**Kadavul:** (Tamil) "Beyond and within." An ancient Tamil name for Lord
Siva meaning, "He who is both immanent and transcendent, within and
beyond." See: Siva.

**Kailasa:** (Sanskrit) "Crystalline" or "abode of bliss." The
four-faced Himalayan peak in Western Tibet; the earthly abode of Lord
Siva. Associated with Mount Meru, the legendary center of the universe,
it is an important pilgrimage destination for all Hindus, as well as for
Tibetan Buddhists. Kailasa is represented in Shaktism by a certain
three-dimensional form of the Sri Chakra yantra (also called kailasa
chakra). See: Sri Chakra.

**Kailasa Parampara:** (Sanskrit) "Crystaline lineage." A spiritual
lineage of 162 siddhas, a major stream of the Nandinatha Sampradaya,
proponents of the ancient philosophy of monistic Saiva Siddhanta. The
first of these masters that history recalls was Maharishi Nandinatha (or
Nandikeshvara) 2,250 years ago, satguru to the great Tirumular, ca 200
bce, and seven other disciples (as stated in the Tirumantiram):
Patanjali, Vyaghrapada, Sanatkumara, Sivayogamuni, Sanakar, Sanadanar
and Sananthanar. Tirumular had seven disciples: Malangam, Indiran,
Soman, Brahman, Rudran, Kalanga, and Kanjamalayam, each of whom
established one or more monasteries and propagated the Agamic lore. In
the line of Kalanga came the sages Righama, Maligaideva, Nadantar,
Bhogadeva and Paramananda. The lineage continued down the centuries and
is alive today--the first recent siddha known being the Rishi from the
Himalayas, so named because he descended from those holy mountains. In
South India, he initiated Kadaitswami (ca 18101875), who in turn
initiated Chellappaswami (18401915). Chellappan passed the mantle of
authority to sage Yogaswami (18721964), who in 1949 initiated the
current satguru, Sivaya Subramuniyaswami. See: Chellapaswami,
Kadaitswami, Natha Sampradaya, Patanjali, Subramuniyaswami, Tirumular,
Vyaghrapada, Yogaswami.

**kaivalya:** (Sanskrit) "Absolute oneness, aloneness; perfect
detachment, freedom." Liberation. Kaivalya is the term used by Patanjali
and others in the yoga tradition to name the goal and fulfillment of
yoga, the state of complete detachment from transmigration. It is
virtually synonymous with moksha. Kaivalya is the perfectly transcendent
state, the highest condition resulting from the ultimate realization. It
is defined uniquely according to each philosophical school, depending on
its beliefs regarding the nature of the soul. See: moksha, samarasa,
Sivasayujya, jnana.

**Kaivalya Upanishad:** (Sanskrit) A philosophical text of the Atharva
Veda**.** This treatise teaches how to reach Siva through meditation.

**kala:** (Sanskrit) 1) "Time; to calculate." 2) "Black; of a black or
dark blue color; death."

**kala:** (Sanskrit) "Part, segment; art or skill." 1) Cultural arts.
(See: kala64). 2) A five-fold division of the cosmos based on the 36
tattvas, as explained in the Saiva Agamas. The five kalas--spheres, or
dimensions of consciousness--are: 1) Shantyatitakala, "sphere beyond
peace," the extremely rarified level of shuddha maya (actinic energy) in
which superconsciousness is expanded into endless inner space, the realm
of God Siva and the Gods; 2) Shantikala, "sphere of peace," the level
within shuddha maya where forms are made of inner sounds and colors,
where reside great devas and rishis who are beyond the reincarnation
cycles; 3) Vidyakala, "sphere of knowing," the level within
shuddhashuddha maya (actinodic energy) of subsuperconscious awareness of
forms in their totality in progressive states of manifestation, and of
the interrelated forces of the actinodic energies; 4) Pratishtakala,
"sphere of resting, tranquility," the level within ashuddha maya (odic
energy) of intellect and instinct; 5) Nivrittikala, "sphere of
perdition, destruction; returning," the level within ashuddha maya of
physical and near-physical existence, conscious, subconscious and
sub-subconscious mind. See: tattva.

**kala64 (chatuh shashti kala):** (Sanskrit) "Sixty-four arts." A
classical curriculum of sacred sciences, studies, arts and skills of
cultured living listed in various Hindu shastras. Its most well-known
appearance is in the Kama Sutra, an extensive manual devoted to sensual
pleasures. The Kama Sutra details as its primary subject matter the 64
secret arts, abhyantara kala, of erotic love. In addition to these it
lists 64 bahya kalas, or practical arts, as required study for cultured
persons. They are: 1) singing, 2) instrumental music, 3) dancing, 4)
painting, 5) forehead adornments, 6) making decorative floral and grain
designs on the floor, 7) home and temple flower arranging, 8) personal
grooming, 9) mosaic tiling, 10) bedroom arrangements, 11)creating music
with water, 12) splashing and squirting with water, 13) secret mantras,
14) making flower garlands, 15) head adornments, 16) dressing, 17)
costume decorations, 18) perfumery, 19) jewelry making, 20) magic and
illusions, 21) ointments for charm and virility, 22) manual dexterity,
23) skills of cooking, eating and drinking, 24) beverage and dessert
preparation, 25) sewing (making and mending garments), 26) embroidery,
27) playing vina and drum, 28) riddles and rhymes, 29) poetry games,
30)tongue twisters and difficult recitation, 31) literary recitation,
32) drama and story telling, 33) verse composition game, 34) furniture
caning, 35)erotic devices and knowledge of sexual arts, 36) crafting
wooden furniture, 37)architecture and house construction, 38)
distinguishing between ordinary and precious stones and metals, 39)
metal-working, 40) gems and mining, 41) gardening and horticulture, 42)
games of wager involving animals, 43) training parrots and mynas to
speak, 44) hairdressing, 45) coding messages, 46) speaking in code, 47)
knowledge of foreign languages and dialects, 48) making flower
carriages, 49) spells, charms and omens, 50)making simple mechanical
devices, 51) memory training, 52) game of reciting verses from hearing,
53) decoding messages, 54) the meanings of words, 55) dictionary
studies, 56) prosody and rhetoric, 57) impersonation, 58) artful
dressing, 59) games of dice, 60) the game of akarsha (a dice game played
on a board), 61) making dolls and toys for children, 62) personal
etiquette and animal training, 63) knowledge of dharmic warfare and
victory, and 64) physical culture.

These are among the skills traditionally taught to both genders, while
emphasizing masculinity in men and femininity in women. Their subject
matter draws on such texts as the Vedangas and Upavedas, and the Shilpa
Shastras, or craft manuals. Through the centuries, writers have
prescribed many more skills and accomplishments. These include
sculpture, pottery, weaving, astronomy and astrology, mathematics,
weights and measures, philosophy, scriptural study, agriculture,
navigation, trade and shipping, knowledge of time, logic, psychology and
ayurveda. In modern times, two unique sets of 64 kalas have been
developed, one for girls and one for boys. See: hereditary, Shilpa
Shastra.

**Kalamukha:** (Sanskrit) "Black-faced"(probably for a black mark of
renunciation worn on the forehead). A Saiva sect issued from Pashupata
Saivism at its height (ca 6001000). As no Kalamukha religious texts
exist today, this sect is known only indirectly. They were said to be
well organized in temple construction and worship, as well as eccentric
and unsocial: eating from human skulls, smearing their bodies with ashes
from the cremation ground, carrying a club, wearing matted hair, etc.
See: left-handed, Pashupata Saivism, Tantrism.

**kalasha:** (Sanskrit) "Water pot; pitcher; jar." In temple rites, a
pot of water, kalasha, topped with mango leaves and a husked coconut
represents the Deity during special pujas. Kalasha also names the
pot-like spires that adorn temple roofs.

**Kali:** (Sanskrit) "Black." Goddess. A form of Shakti in Her fierce
aspect worshiped by various sects within Shaktism. She is dark, nude,
primordial and fiercely powerful, as of a naked energy untamed. But from
the perspective of devotees, She is the incomparable protectress,
champion of sadhana and mother of liberation. The Goddess Durga, seated
on a tiger, has similar characteristics and is often identified with
Kali. See: Shakti, Shaktism.

**Kali Yuga:** (Sanskrit) "Dark Age." The Kali Yuga is the last age in
the repetitive cycle of four phases of time the universe passes through.
It is comparable to the darkest part of the night, as the forces of
ignorance are in full power and many of the subtle faculties of the soul
are obscured. See: cosmic cycle, mahapralaya, yuga.

**Kallata:** (Sanskrit) An exponent of Kashmir Saivism (ca 875) who
wrote the Spanda Karikas. Kallata was a disciple of Vasugupta. See:
Kashmir Saivism.

**kalpa:** (Sanskrit) From krlip, "arranged, ordered." 1) Rules for
ceremony or sacred living, as in the Kalpa Vedanga. 2) Determination or
resolve, as in sankalpa. 3) A vast period of time also known as a day of
Brahma, equaling 994 mahayugas, or 4,294,080,000 years. See: cosmic
cycle, Kalpa Vedanga, sankalpa, yuga.

**Kalpa Vedanga:** (Sanskrit) "Procedural or ceremonial Veda-limb." Also
known as the Kalpa Sutras--a body of three groups of auxiliary Vedic
texts: 1) the Shrauta Sutras and Shulba Sutras, on public Vedic rites
(yajna), 2) the Grihya Sutras (or Shastras), on domestic rites and
social custom, and 3) the Dharma Shastras (or Sutras), on religious law.
There are numerous sets of Kalpa Sutras, composed by various rishis.
Each set is associated with one of the four Vedas. See: Dharma Shastra,
Grihya Sutras, Shulba Shastras, Shrauta Sutras, Vedangas.

**Kalyana:** (Sanskrit) A town in Karnataka, South India.

**kama:** (Sanskrit) "Pleasure, love; desire." Cultural, intellectual
and sexual fulfillment. One of four human goals, purushartha. See: Kama
Sutras, purushartha.

**kamandalu:** (Sanskrit) "Vessel, water jar." Traditionally earthen or
wooden, carried by sannyasins, it symbolizes the renunciate's simple,
self-contained life. The tree from which kamandalus are traditionally
made is the kamandalutaru. See: sannyasa dharma, sannyasin.

**Kama Sutra(s):** (Sanskrit) "Aphorisms on pleasure." A fifth-century
text by Vatsyayana on erotics. The Kama Shutra and other Kama Shastras
are sometimes classed as an Upaveda. See: Upaveda.

**Kamika Agama:** (Sanskrit) An important scripture among the 28 Saiva
Siddhanta Agamas, widely available today. The verses from its kriya
pada, on ritual and temple construction, are a crucial reference for
South Indian priests. See: Saiva Agamas.

**Kanada:** (Sanskrit) Founder of the Vaisheshika Darshana, author of
the Vaisheshika Sutras. See: shad darshana.

**Kandar Anubhuti:** (Tamil) A highly mystical 51-verse poem in praise
of Lord Karttikeya-Murugan composed by the Tamil saint, Arunagirinathar
(ca 1500). It describes the narrator's arduous path to Ultimate Reality.

**Kannada:** One of four modern Dravidian languages, and principal
medium for Vira Saivism. It is spoken by 20 million people, mostly in
Karnataka.

**Kanphati:** (Sanskrit) (Hindi.) "Split eared," from the custom of
splitting the cartilage of the ear to insert large earrings. The name of
the ascetic order of men and women founded by Gorakshanatha (ca 950),
proponents of kundalini-hatha yoga still today. See: earrings,
Gorakshanatha, Siddha Siddhanta.

**Kapalika:** (Sanskrit) An ascetic sect which developed out of the
Pashupatas around 500 ce and largely vanished around 1400. They earned a
reputation for extreme practices. Possible predecessors of Gorakshanatha
Siddha Siddhanta yogis. See: Pashupata Saivism.

**kapha:** (Sanskrit) "Biological water." One of the three bodily
humors, called dosha, kapha is known as the water humor. Principle of
cohesion. Kapha gives bodily structure and stability, lubricates, heals
and bestows immunity. See: ayurveda, dosha.

**Kapila:** (Sanskrit) Founder (ca 500 bce) of the Sankhya philosophy,
one of the six darshanas of Hinduism. See: shad darshana.

**Karana Agama:** (Sanskrit) One of the 28 Saiva Siddhanta Agamas widely
available today. Its kriya pada forms the basis for temple rituals
performed in nearly all South Indian Siva temples. See: Saiva Agamas.

**karana chitta:** (Sanskrit) "Causal mind." The
intuitive-superconscious mind of the soul. It corresponds to the
anandamaya kosha, bliss sheath, also called karana sharira, causal body.
See: kosha, mind (five states), soul.

**Karana Hasuge:** (Sanskrit) A central Vira Saiva scripture authored by
Chennabasavanna. See: Chennabasavanna.

**karana sharira:** (Sanskrit) "Causal body," the actinic body or soul
body. See: actinic, actinodic, kosha, odic, soul, subtle body.

**Karavana Mahatmya:** (Sanskrit) See: Pashupata Saivism.

**karma:** (Sanskrit) "Action, deed." One of the most important
principles in Hindu thought, karma refers to 1) any act or deed; 2) the
principle of cause and effect; 3) a consequence or "fruit of action"
(karmaphala) or "after effect" (uttaraphala), which sooner or later
returns upon the doer. What we sow, we shall reap in this or future
lives. Selfish, hateful acts (papakarma or kukarma) will bring
suffering. Benevolent actions (punyakarma or sukarma) will bring loving
reactions. Karma is a neutral, self-perpetuating law of the inner
cosmos, much as gravity is an impersonal law of the outer cosmos. In
fact, it has been said that gravity is a small, external expression of
the greater law of karma. The impelling, unseen power of one's past
actions is called adrishta.

The law of karma acts impersonally, yet we may meaningfully interpret
its results as either positive (punya) or negative (papa)--terms
describing actions leading the soul either toward or away from the
spiritual goal. Karma is further graded as: white (shukla), black
(krishna), mixed (shukla-krishna) or neither white nor black
(ashukla-akrishna). The latter term describes the karma of the jnani,
who, as Rishi Patanjali says, is established in kaivalya, freedom from
prakriti through realization of the Self. Similarly, one's karma must be
in a condition of ashukla-akrishna, quiescent balance, in order for
liberation to be attained. This equivalence of karma is called
karmasamya, and is a factor that brings malaparipaka, or maturity of
anava mala. It is this state of resolution in preparation for samadhi at
death that all Hindus seek through making amends and settling
differences.

Karma is threefold: sanchita, prarabdha and kriyamana. --**sanchita
karma:** "Accumulated actions." The sum of all karmas of this life and
past lives. --**prarabdha karma:** "Actions begun; set in motion." That
portion of sanchita karma that is bearing fruit and shaping the events
and conditions of the current life, including the nature of one's
bodies, personal tendencies and associations.**--kriyamana karma:**
"Being made." The karma being created and added to sanchita in this life
by one's thoughts, words and actions, or in the inner worlds between
lives. Kriyamana karma is also called agami, "coming, arriving," and
vartamana, "living, set in motion." While some kriyamana karmas bear
fruit in the current life, others are stored for future births. Each of
these types can be divided into two categories: arabdha (literally,
"begun, undertaken;" karma that is "sprouting"), and anarabdha ("not
commenced; dormant"), or "seed karma."

In a famed analogy, karma is compared to rice in its various stages.
Sanchita karma, the residue of one's total accumulated actions, is
likened to rice that has been harvested and stored in a granary. From
the stored rice, a small portion has been removed, husked and readied
for cooking and eating. This is prarabdha karma, past actions that are
shaping the events of the present. Meanwhile, new rice, mainly from the
most recent harvest of prarabdha karma, is being planted in the field
that will yield a future crop and be added to the store of rice. This is
kriyamana karma, the consequences of current actions.

In Saivism, karma is one of three principal bonds of the soul, along
with anava and maya. Karma is the driving force that brings the soul
back again and again into human birth in the evolutionary cycle of
transmigration called samsara. When all earthly karmas are resolved and
the Self has been realized, the soul is liberated from rebirth. This is
the goal of all Hindus.

For each of the three kinds of karma there is a different method of
resolution. Nonattachment to the fruits of action, along with daily
rites of worship and strict adherence to the codes of dharma, stops the
accumulation of kriyamana. Prarabdha karma is resolved only through
being experienced and lived through. Sanchita karma, normally
inaccessible, is burned away only through the grace and diksha of the
satguru, who prescribes sadhana and tapas for the benefit of the
shishya. Through the sustained kundalini heat of this extreme penance,
the seeds of unsprouted karmas are fried, and therefore will never
sprout in this or future lives. See: diksha, grace.

Like the four-fold edict of dharma, the three-fold edict of karma has
both individual and impersonal dimensions. Personal karma is thus
influenced by broader contexts, sometimes known as family karma,
community karma, national karma, global karma and universal karma. See:
anava, fate, maya, moksha, papa, pasha, punya, sin, soul.

**karmasamya:** (Sanskrit) "Balance or equipoise of karma." See: karma.

**karmashaya:** (Sanskrit) "Holder of karma." Describes the body of the
soul, or anandamaya kosha. See: karma, kosha.

**karma yoga:** (Sanskrit) "Union through action." The path of selfless
service. See: yoga.

**Karnataka:** (Sanskrit) Southwest state of modern India, where
Vijayanagara flourished. Vira Saivism is centered here. Population 25
million, area 74,043 square miles.

**karnavedha:** (Sanskrit) "Ear-piercing." See: samskaras of childhood.

**Karttikeya:** (Sanskrit) Child of the Pleiades, from Krittika,
"Pleiades." Second son of Siva, the brother of Ganesha. A great Mahadeva
worshiped in all parts of India and the world. Also known as Murugan,
Kumara, Skanda, Shanmukhanatha, Subramanya and more, He is the God who
guides that part of evolution which is religion, the transformation of
the instinctive into a divine wisdom through the practice of yoga. He
holds the holy vel of jnana shakti, which is His Power to vanquish
darkness or ignorance.

**Karttikeya Stotram:** (Sanskrit) A subdivision (Rudrayamala Tantra) of
the Shakta Tantras dedicated to God Karttikeya. See: Karttikeya.

**karuna:** (Sanskrit) "Compassionate; loving, full of grace."

**Karuna Agama:** (Sanskrit) One of the 28 Agamas of Saiva Siddhanta.
See: Saiva Agamas.

**Karunakarak Kadavul:** (Tamil) Hymn by the Tamil saint, Tayumanavar
(17051742), in praise of Lord Siva. See: Tayumanavar.

**karunya:** (Sanskrit) "Compassion, kindness, love." In Saivism, an
alternate term for Siva's revealing grace, anugraha shakti. See:
anugraha shakti, grace.

**kashaya:** (Sanskrit) "Brownish-red." The color of sannyasins' robes.
See: kavi.

**Kashmir (Kashmira):** (Sanskrit) The Northernmost area of India, part
of the present-day state of Jammu and Kashmir. It figures prominently in
the history of Saivism. Area 115,000 square miles, under dispute between
India and Pakistan. Population is six million in the Indian sector.

**Kashmir Saivism:** (Sanskrit) In this mildly theistic and intensely
monistic school founded by Vasugupta around 850, Siva is immanent and
transcendent. Purification and yoga are strongly emphasized. Kashmir
Saivism provides an extremely rich and detailed understanding of the
human psyche, and a clear and distinct path of kundalini-siddha yoga to
the goal of Self Realization. The Kashmir Saivite is not so much
concerned with worshiping a personal God as he is with attaining the
transcendental state of Siva consciousness. Sadhana leads to the
assimilation of the object (world) in the subject (I) until the Self
(Siva) stands revealed as one with the universe. The
goal--liberation--is sustained recognition (pratyabhijna) of one's true
Self as nothing but Siva. There are three upaya, or stages of attainment
of God consciousness: anavopaya (yoga), shaktopaya (spiritual
discrimination), shambhavopaya (attainment through the guru's
instruction) and anupaya, or "no means" (spontaneous realization without
effort). Kashmir Saivite literature is in three broad divisions: Agama
Shastras, Spanda Shastras and Pratyabhijna Shastras. Today various
organizations promulgate the esoteric teachings. While the number of
Kashmir Saivite formal followers is uncertain, the school remains an
important influence in India. See: Saivism, upaya.

**katha:** (Sanskrit) "Story; discussion." Also, the literary form
involving the telling of stories. Kathakas are bards, storytellers. See:
folk-narratives, mythology.

**Katha Upanishad:** (Sanskrit) One of the major Upanishads, belonging
to the Taittiriya Brahmana of the Yajur Veda. This scripture contains
the famous story of Nachiketas who extracts from Yama, Lord of Death,
the knowledge of liberation to be had through realization of the
Supreme.

**Kathirgama Purana:** (Sanskrit) A secondary scripture regarding the
famous central Sri Lankan abode of Lord Murugan (Karttikeya).

**Kaundinya:** (Sanskrit) Author of a commentary on the Pashupata Sutras
(ca 500). See: Pashupata Saivism, Pashupata Sutras.

**Kaurusha:** (Sanskrit) One of four known disciples of Lakulisha. See:
Lakulisha, Pashupata Saivism.

**Kaushitaki Upanishad:** (Sanskrit) A major Upanishad belonging to the
Rig Veda. It discusses: 1) the course of souls after death, 2) the
doctrine of prana as related to the atman and 3) the attainment of
moksha.

**kavadi:** (Tamil) A penance offered to Lord Murugan-Karttikeya,
especially during Tai Pusam, consisting of carrying in procession a
heavy, beautifully decorated, wooden object from which pots of milk hang
which are to be used for His abhisheka. The penitent's tongue and other
parts of the body are often pierced with small silver spears or hooks.
See: penance.

**kavi:** (Tamil) "Ocher-saffron color." A Tamil term referring to the
color taken on by robes of sadhus who sit, meditate or live on the banks
of the Ganges. Names the color of the sannyasin's robes. The Sanskrit
equivalent is kashaya.

**Kayavarohana:** (Sanskrit) Birthplace of Lakulisha, most prominent
guru of Pashupata Saivism, in India's present-day state of Baroda. See:
Lakulisha.

**kaya siddhi:** (Sanskrit) In Siddha Siddhanta, as well as Saiva
Siddhanta and other yoga traditions, the process by which a yogi
transforms his body from physical to spiritual substance to attain
deathlessness. See: siddhi.

**Kedareshvara Temple:** (Sanskrit) A temple in Karnataka which belonged
to the Kalamukha sect of Saivism. Inscriptions upon it (1162) are a main
source of knowledge about this now nearly extinct sect. See: Kalamukha.

**Kena Upanishad:** (Sanskrit) Belongs to the Talavakara Brahmana of the
Sama Veda. It is a discourse upon Brahman, Absolute Reality and His
worship as personal God. See: Upanishad.

**Kerala:** (Sanskrit) The small Indian state, formerly called Konkan,
along the southwestern tip of India. Area 15,000 square miles,
population 25 million.

**keshanta:** (Sanskrit) "Beard-shaving." See: samskaras of adulthood.

**kindred:** Family, relatives, kin. See: joint family, extended family.

**kirtana:** (Sanskrit) "Praising." Devotional singing and dancing in
celebration of God, Gods and guru. An important form of congregational
worship in many Hindu sects. See: congregational worship, bhajana.

**knower:** One who knows. In philosophy, that within conscious beings
which understands or is conscious. See: awareness, jnana, sakshin, chit.

**konrai:** (Tamil) The Golden Shower tree, Cassia fistula; symbol of
Siva's cascading, abundant, golden grace.

**Koran:** The Islamic religion's sacred book, God's word transmitted
through the angel Gabriel to Mohammed, the prophet of Islam. Its
official version appeared around 650, 18 years after Mohammed's death.
See: Mohammed.

**kosha:** (Sanskrit) "Sheath; vessel, container; layer."
Philosophically, five sheaths through which the soul functions
simultaneously in the various planes or levels of existence. They are
sometimes compared to the layers of an onion. The koshas, in order of
increasing subtlety, are as follows.**--annamaya kosha:** "Sheath
composed of food." The physical or odic body, coarsest of sheaths in
comparison to the faculties of the soul, yet indispensable for evolution
and Self Realization, because only within it can all fourteen chakras
fully function. See: chakra.**--pranamaya kosha:** "Sheath composed of
prana (vital force)." Also known as the pranic or health body, or the
etheric body or etheric double, it coexists within the physical body as
its source of life, breath and vitality, and is its connection with the
astral body. Prana moves in the pranamaya kosha as five primary currents
or vayus, "vital airs or winds." Pranamaya kosha disintegrates at death
along with the physical body. See: prana**--manomaya kosha:**
"Mind-formed sheath." The lower astral body, from manas, "thought, will,
wish." The instinctive-intellectual sheath of ordinary thought, desire
and emotion. It is the seat of the indriyas, sensory and motor organs,
respectively called jnanendriyas and karmendriyas. The manomaya kosha
takes form as the physical body develops and is discarded in the inner
worlds before rebirth. It is understood in two layers: 1) the
odic-causal sheath (buddhi) and 2) the odic-astral sheath (manas). See:
indriya, manas.**--vijnanamaya kosha:** "Sheath of cognition." The
mental or cognitive-intuitive sheath, also called the actinodic sheath.
It is the vehicle of higher thought, vijnana--understanding, knowing,
direct cognition, wisdom, intuition and creativity.**--anandamaya
kosha:** "Body of bliss." The intuitive-superconscious sheath or
actinic-causal body. This inmost soul form (svarupa) is the ultimate
foundation of all life, intelligence and higher faculties. Its essence
is Parashakti (Pure Consciousness) and Parasiva (the Absolute).
Anandamaya kosha is not a sheath in the same sense as the four outer
koshas. It is the soul itself, a body of light, also called karana
sharira, causal body, and karmashaya, holder of karmas of this and all
past lives. Karana chitta, "causal mind," names the soul's
superconscious mind, of which Parashakti (or Satchidananda) is the
rarified substratum. Anandamaya kosha is that which evolves through all
incarnations and beyond until the soul's ultimate, fulfilled merger,
vishvagrasa, in the Primal Soul, Parameshvara. Then anandamaya kosha
becomes Sivamayakosha, the body of God Siva.

The physical body (annamaya kosha) is also called sthula sharira, "gross
body." The soul body (anandamaya kosha) is also called karana sharira,
"causal body." The pranamaya, manomaya and vijnanamaya koshas together
comprise the sukshma sharira, "subtle body," with the pranamaya shell
disintegrating at death. See: actinic, actinodic, manomaya kosha,
niyati, odic, sharira, soul, subtle body.

**Krishna:** (Sanskrit) "Black." Also related to krishtih, meaning
"drawing, attracting." One of the most popular Gods of the Hindu
pantheon. He is worshiped by Vaishnavas as the eighth avatara,
incarnation, of Vishnu. He is best known as the Supreme Personage
depicted in the Mahabharata, and specifically in the Bhagavad Gita. For
Gaudiya Vaishnavism, Krishna is the Godhead.

**Krittika Dipa:** (Sanskrit) A joyous one-day festival on the Krittika
nakshatra (Pleiades constellation), in November-December, when God Siva
is worshiped as an infinite pillar of light. Great bonfires are lit at
night on hills and in villages in India and elsewhere to represent the
divine, all-permeating light of Parashakti. See: festival.

**kriya:** (Sanskrit) "Action." In a general sense, kriya can refer to
doing of any kind. Specifically, it names religious action, especially
rites or ceremonies. In yoga terminology, kriya names involuntary
physical movements caused by the arousal of the kundalini. See: pada.

**Kriyakramadyotika:** (Sanskrit) A manual by Aghorasiva (ca 1050)
detailing Agamic Saiva ritual. It is used widely by South Indian priests
today.

**kriyamana karma:** (Sanskrit) "Actions being made." See: karma.

**kriya pada:** (Sanskrit) "Stage of religious action; worship." The
stage of worship and devotion, second of four progressive stages of
maturation on the Saiva Siddhanta path of attainment. See: pada.

**kriya shakti:** (Sanskrit) "Action power." The universal force of
doing. See: Shakti, trishula.

**kshama:** (Sanskrit) "Patience." See: yama-niyama.

**kshatriya:** (Sanskrit) "Governing; sovereign." The social class of
lawmakers, law-enforcers and the military. See: varna dharma.

**Kudala Sangamadeva:** (Sanskrit) A name of Siva meaning "Lord of
rivers' confluence."

**kula:** (Sanskrit) "Family; home; group of families." See: extended
family, joint family.

**kula guru:** (Sanskrit) The spiritual preceptor of the family or
extended family.

**Kularnava Tantra:** (Sanskrit) A leading scripture of the Kaula school
of Shaktism. It comprises 17 chapters totaling 2,058 verses which focus
on ways to liberation, with notable chapters on the guru-shishya
relationship.

**Kumara:** (Sanskrit) "Virgin youth; ever-youthful." A name of Lord
Karttikeya as a perpetual bachelor. See: Karttikeya.

**kumbha:** (Sanskrit) "Jar or pot;" "water vessel."

**kundalini:** (Sanskrit) "She who is coiled; serpent power." The
primordial cosmic energy in every individual which, at first, lies
coiled like a serpent at the base of the spine and eventually, through
the practice of yoga, rises up the sushumna nadi. As it rises, the
kundalini awakens each successive chakra. Nirvikalpa samadhi,
enlightenment, comes as it pierces through the door of Brahman at the
core of the sahasrara and enters! Kundalini shakti then returns to rest
in any one of the seven chakras. Sivasayujya is complete when the
kundalini arrives back in the sahasrara and remains coiled in this crown
chakra. See: chakra, door of Brahman, samadhi, nadi, tantrism.

**kunkuma:** (Sanskrit) "Saffron; red." The red powder, made of turmeric
and lime, worn by Hindus as the pottu, dot, at the point of the third
eye on the forehead. Names the saffron plant, Crocus sativus, and its
pollen.

**Kurma Purana:** (Sanskrit) "Tortoise story." One of the six Siva
Puranas, it glorifies the worship of Siva and Durga.

**Kurukshetra:** (Sanskrit) An extensive plain near Delhi, scene of the
great war between the Kauravas and Pandavas. See: Mahabharata, Bhagavad
Gita.

**Kushika:** (Sanskrit) One of four known disciples of Lakulisha.

**kuttuvilaku:** (Tamil) A standing lamp found in the temple, shrine
room or home. It is made of metal, with several wicks fed by ghee or
special oils. Used to light the home and used in puja. Part of temple
and shrine altars, the standing lamp is sometimes worshiped as the
divine light, Parashakti or Parajyoti. Returning from the temple and
lighting one's kuttuvilaku courts the accompanying devas to remain in
the home and channels the vibration of the temple sanctum sanctorum into
the home shrine. Called dipastambha in Sanskrit.

**kutumba:** (Sanskrit) "Joint family." See: extended family, joint
family.


