M
=

**macrocosm:** "Great world or universe." See: microcosm-macrocosm,
pinda, three worlds.

**Madhumateya:** (Sanskrit) A Saiva Siddhanta monastic order founded by
Pavanasiva, preceptor of the Kalachuri kings of Central India.

**Madhva:** (Sanskrit) South Indian Vaishnava saint (11971278) who
expounded a purely dualistic (pluralistic) Vedanta in which there is an
essential and eternal distinction between God, soul and world, and
between all beings and things. He is also one of the few Hindus to have
taught the existence of an eternal hell where lost souls would be
condemned to suffer forever. See: dvaita-advaita, Vedanta.

**maha:** (Sanskrit) An adjective or prefix meaning "great."

**Mahabharata:** (Sanskrit) "Great Epic of India." The world's longest
epic poem. It revolves around the conflict between two royal families,
the Pandavas and Kauravas, and their great battle of Kurukshetra near
modern Delhi in approximately 1424 bce. Woven through the plot are
countless discourses on philosophy, religion, astronomy, cosmology,
polity, economics and many stories illustrative of simple truths and
ethical principles. The Bhagavad Gita is one section of the work. The
Mahabharata is revered as scripture by Vaishnavites and Smartas. See:
Bhagavad Gita, Itihasa.

**Mahadeva:** (Sanskrit) "Great shining one; God." Referring either to
God Siva or any of the highly evolved beings who live in the Sivaloka in
their natural, effulgent soul bodies. God Siva in His perfection as
Primal Soul is one of the Mahadevas, yet He is unique and incomparable
in that He alone is uncreated, the Father-Mother and Destiny of all
other Mahadevas. He is called Parameshvara, "Supreme God." He is the
Primal Soul, whereas the other Gods are individual souls. It is said in
scripture that there are 330 million Gods. See: Gods, monotheism,
Parameshvara, Siva.

**Mahadeva Mountain:** (Sanskrit) See: Vasugupta.

**Mahakala:** (Sanskrit) "Great time," or "dissolver of time." One of
the names and forms of Siva. Mahakala is Time beyond time, who devours
all things and forms and, by so doing, helps the soul transcend all
dualities. Mystically, time devours itself and thus the timeless state
is achieved. See: tattva.

**mahakutumba:** (Sanskrit) "Great or extended family." See: extended
family.

**mahamandapa:** (Sanskrit) "Great hall." Main, outer assembly hall in
the temple where devotees gather for ceremony. See: mandapa, temple.

**Mahanarayana Upanishad:** (Sanskrit) A philosophical text of the
Krishna Yajur Veda.

**Mahanirvana Tantra:** (Sanskrit) "Treatise on the great emancipation."
An 11th-century advaita scripture dealing with mantra and esoteric
rituals.

**mahapralaya:** (Sanskrit) "Great dissolution." Total annihilation of
the universe at the end of a mahakalpa. It is the absorption of all
existence, including time, space and individual consciousness, all the
lokas and their inhabitants into God Siva, as the water of a river
returns to its source, the sea. Then Siva alone exists in His three
perfections, until He again issues forth creation. During this
incredibly vast period there are many partial dissolutions, pralayas,
when either the Bhuloka or the Bhuloka and the Antarloka are destroyed.
See: cosmic cycle, pralaya.

**mahaprasthana:** (Sanskrit) "Great departure." Death. See: death,
transition.

**maharaja:** (Sanskrit) "Great king." Indian monarch. Title of respect
for political or (in modern times) spiritual leaders.

**Maharashtra:** (Sanskrit) Central state of modern India whose capital
is Mumbai. Area 118,717 square miles, population 63 million.

**maharishi (maharshi):** (Sanskrit) "Great seer." Title for the
greatest and most influential of siddhas.

**Maharloka:** (Sanskrit) "Plane of greatness." From mahas, "greatness,
might, power, glory." Also called the Devaloka, this fourth highest of
the seven upper worlds is the mental plane, realm of anahata chakra.
See: loka.

**mahasakara-pinda:** (Sanskrit) "Great manifest body." In Siddha
Siddhanta Saivism, the first manifestation of Siva out of the
transcendent state. From it all of existence issues forth. See: pinda.

**mahasamadhi:** (Sanskrit) "Great enstasy." The death, or dropping off
of the physical body, of a great soul, an event occasioned by tremendous
blessings. Also names the shrine in which the remains of a great soul
are entombed.**mahasamadhi day:** Anniversary of the transition of a
great soul. See: cremation, death, reincarnation, samadhi, transition.

**Mahasivaratri:** (Sanskrit) "Siva's great night." Saivism's foremost
festival, celebrated on the night before the new moon in February-March.
Fasting and an all-night vigil are observed as well as other
disciplines: chanting, praying, meditating and worshiping Siva as the
Source and Self of all that exists. See: festival.

**mahatala:** (Sanskrit) "Vast netherworld." The sixth lowest astral
world. Region of consciencelessness. See: chakra.

**mahatma:** (Sanskrit) "Great soul." Honorific title given to people
held in high esteem, especially saints. See: atman.

**mahavakya:** (Sanskrit) "Great saying." A profound aphorism from
scripture or a holy person. Most famous are four Upanishadic
proclamations: Prajanam Brahma ("Pure consciousness is God"--Aitareya
U.), Aham Brahmasmi ("I am God"--Brihadaranyaka U.), Tat tvam asi ("Thou
art That"--Chandogya U.) and Ayam atma Brahma ("The soul is
God"--Mandukya U.).

**mahesha:** (Sanskrit) "Great God." Term used by Vira Saivites to mean
charity, seeing all as God. See: shatsthala.

**Maheshvara:** (Sanskrit) "Great Lord." In Saiva Siddhanta, the name of
Siva's energy of veiling grace, one of five aspects of Parameshvara, the
Primal Soul. Maheshvara is also a popular name for Lord Siva as Primal
Soul and personal Lord. See: Cosmic Dance, Nataraja, Parameshvara.

**Maitreya:** (Sanskrit) One of four known disciples of Lakulisha. See:
Pashupata Saivism.

**Maitri Upanishad:** (Sanskrit) Belongs to the Maitrayaniya branch of
the Krishna Yajur Veda. A later Upanishad covering Aum, outer nature,
the Self, control of the mind, etc.

**mala:** (Sanskrit) "Impurity." An important term in Saivism referring
to three bonds, called pasha--anava, karma, and maya--which limit the
soul, preventing it from knowing its true, divine nature. See:
liberation, pasha.

**mala:** (Sanskrit) "Garland." A strand of beads for holy recitation,
japa, usually made of rudraksha, tulasi, sandalwood or crystal. Also a
flower garland.

**malaparipaka:** (Sanskrit) "Maturing of the malas." See: anava, karma,
mala.

**Malati-Madhava:** (Sanskrit) A Sanskrit play by Bhavabhuti (ca 500).
Primarily a love story, it contains incidental descriptions of the
Kapalika Saivite sect of ascetics.

**malice:** Ill will; desire or intent to do harm to another, generally
without conscience. See: mahatala.

**manana:** (Sanskrit) "Thinking; deep reflection." See:
self-reflection.

**manas:** (Sanskrit) "Mind; understanding." The lower or instinctive
mind, seat of desire and governor of sensory and motor organs, called
indriyas. Manas is termed the undisciplined, empirical mind. Manas is
characterized by desire, determination, doubt, faith, lack of faith,
steadfastness, lack of steadfastness, shame, intellection and fear. It
is a faculty of manomaya kosha, the lower astral or
instinctive-intellectual sheath. See: awareness, indriya, instinctive
mind, manomaya kosha, mind (individual).

**manas chitta:** (Sanskrit) "Instinctive mind." See: manas, manomaya
kosha, instinctive mind.

**mandala:** (Sanskrit) "Circular; orb; mystic diagram." A circle. Name
of the chapters of the Rig Veda Samhita. A circular diagram without
beginning or end--which indicates the higher and the lower and other
possibilities--upon which one meditates. A tapestry, picture or grouping
of words used in meditation to enter the realms depicted.

**mandapa:** (Sanskrit) From mand, "to deck, adorn." Temple precinct; a
temple compound, open hall or chamber. In entering a large temple, one
passes through a series of mandapas, each named according to its
position, e.g., mukhamandapa, "front chamber." In some temples, mandapas
are concentrically arranged. See: mahamandapa, temple.

**mandira:** (Sanskrit) "Abode." A temple or shrine; sanctuary. See:
devamandira, temple.

**Mandukya Upanishad:** (Sanskrit) A "principal" Upanishad (belonging to
the Atharva Veda) which, in 12 concise verses, teaches of Aum and the
four states (avastha) of awareness: waking (vishva), dreaming (taijasa),
dreamless sleep (prajna) and transcendent, spiritual consciousness
(turiya).

**mangala kriya:** (Sanskrit) "Auspicious action or practice." Hindu
culture.

**Mangalavede:** (Sanskrit) A town in Karnataka, South India.

**manifest:** To show or reveal. Perceivable or knowable, therefore
having form. The opposite of unmanifest or transcendent. See: formless,
tattva.

**manifold:** Varied. Having many forms, aspects, parts.

**Manikkavasagar:** (Tamil) He of ruby-like utterances." Tamil saint who
contributed to the medieval Saivite renaissance (ca 850). He gave up his
position as prime minister to follow a renunciate life. His poetic
Tiruvasagam, "Holy Utterances"--a major Saiva Siddhanta scripture (part
of the eighth Tirumurai) and a jewel of Tamil literature--express his
aspirations, trials and yogic realizations. See: Nalvar, Tirumurai.

**manipura chakra:** (Sanskrit) "Wheeled city of jewels." Solar-plexus
center of willpower. See: chakra.

**mankolam:** (Tamil) "Mango design." The paisley, a stylized image of
the mango, symbol of auspiciousness, associated with Lord Ganesha.

**manomaya kosha:** (Sanskrit) "Mind-made sheath." The
instinctive-intellectual aspect of the soul's subtle body (sukshma
sharira), also called the odic-astral sheath. It is the sheath of
ordinary thought, desire and emotion. The manomaya kosha is made up of
odic prana and is almost an exact duplicate of the physical body.
However, changes that appear upon the physical body, such as aging,
first occur within the structure of this sheath of the astral body. This
is the sheath of the subconscious mind; it can be easily disturbed and
is sometimes called the emotional body. See: astral body, instinctive
mind, kosha, odic, soul, subtle body, vasana.

**mansahara:** (Sanskrit) "Meat-eating." (Sanskrit)**mansahari:**
(Sanskrit) "Meat-eater." Those who follow a non-vegetarian diet. See:
meat-eater, vegetarian.

**mantra:** (Sanskrit) "Mystic formula." A sound, syllable, word or
phrase endowed with special power, usually drawn from scripture. Mantras
are chanted loudly during puja to invoke the Gods and establish a force
field. Certain mantras are repeated softly or mentally for japa, the
subtle tones quieting the mind, harmonizing the inner bodies and
stimulating latent spiritual qualities. Hinduism's universal mantra is
Aum. To be truly effective, such mantras must be given by the preceptor
through initiation. See: Aum, incantation, japa, puja, yajna.

**Mantra Gopya:** (Sanskrit) The collected writings of Allama Prabhu.
See: Allama Prabhu.

**Manu Dharma Shastra:** (Sanskrit) "Sage Manu's law book." An
encyclopedic treatise of 2,685 verses on Hindu law assembled as early as
600 bce. Among its major features are the support of varna dharma,
ashrama dharma, stri dharma and seeing the Self in all beings. Despite
its caste-based restrictions, which determine one's life unrelentlingly
from birth to death, it remains the source of much of modern Hindu
culture and law. These "Laws of Manu" are the oldest and considered the
most authoritative of the greater body of Dharma Shastras. Even during
the time of the British Raj in India, law was largely based on these
texts. The text is widely available today in several languages.
(Buhler's English translation is over 500 pages.) See: caste, dharma,
Dharma Shastras, Kalpa Vedanga.

**marga:** (Sanskrit) "Path; way." From marg, "to seek." See: pada.

**marital:** Having to do with marriage. See: grihastha, griheshvara and
grihani.

**Mariyamman:** (Tamil) "Smallpox Goddess," protectress from plagues.
See: Amman, Shakti, Shaktism.

**marriage covenant:** The written (or verbal) statements of bride and
groom expressing the promises and expectations of their marriage. Known
in Sanskrit as vannishchaya, "settlement by word."

**Matanga Parameshvara Agama:** (Sanskrit) Among the 28 Saiva Siddhanta
Agamas, containing 3,500 verses, deals at length with the categories of
existence (tattvas). The Angkor Wat temple in Cambodia is thought to
have been built using the temple section of this scripture. See: Saiva
Agamas.

**material cause:** Upadana karana. The substance of creation, maya,
Siva's "mirific energy." In Saivism, material cause, maya, is threefold:
shuddha ("pure") maya, shuddhashuddha ("pure-impure") maya and ashuddha
("impure") maya. Shuddha maya, or bindu, is the material cause of the
causal plane. Shuddhashuddha maya is the material cause of the subtle
plane. Ashuddhamaya (or Prakriti) is the material cause of the gross
plane. See: cause, maya, tattva.

**materialism (materialistic):** The doctrine that matter is the only
reality, that all life, thought and feelings are but the effects of
movements of matter, and that there exist no worlds but the physical.
Materialists usually hold that there is no God--a cosmic, material,
prime mover perhaps, but no personal God. An Indian school of thought
which propounded this view was the Charvaka. See: atheism, Charvaka,
nastika, worldly.

**mati:** (Sanskrit) "Cognition, understanding; conviction." See:
yama-niyama.

**matrimonial:** Related to marriage.

**Matsyendranatha:** (Sanskrit) A patron saint of Nepal, guru of
Gorakshanatha and a mystic in the Natha tradition (ca 900). Some
consider him to have been the foremost human teacher of hatha yoga. See:
hatha yoga.

**Mattamayura Order:** (Sanskrit) A Saiva Siddhanta monastic order
founded by Purandara (successor to Rudrashambhu), centered in the
Punjab. Members of this order served as advisors to the king.

**matter:** Substance, especially of the physical world. May also refer
to all of manifest existence, including the subtle, nonphysical
dimensions. See: maya.

**mature:** Ripe; fully grown or developed.

**maya:** (Sanskrit) "Consisting of; made of," as in manomaya, "made of
mind."

**maya:** (Sanskrit) From the verb root ma, "to measure, to limit, give
form." The principle of appearance or manifestation of God's power or
"mirific energy," "that which measures." The substance emanated from
Siva through which the world of form is manifested. Hence all creation
is also termed maya. It is the cosmic creative force, the principle of
manifestation, ever in the process of creation, preservation and
dissolution. See: loka, mind (universal), mirific. The Upanishads
underscore maya's captivating nature, which blinds souls to the
transcendent Truth. In Shankara's Vedantic interpretation, maya is taken
as pure illusion or unreality. In Saivism it is one of the three bonds
(pasha) that limit the soul and thereby facilitate its evolution. For
Saivites and most other nondualists, it is understood not as illusion
but as relative reality, in contrast to the unchanging Absolute Reality.
In the Saiva Siddhanta system, there are three main divisions of maya,
the pure, the pure-impure and the impure realms. Pure or shuddha maya
consists of the first five tattvas--Siva tattva, Shakti tattva, Sadasiva
tattva, Ishvara tattva and Shuddhavidya tattva. The pure-impure realm
consists of the next seven tattvas. The impure realm consists of the
maya tattva and all of its evolutes--from the kala tattva to prithivi,
the element earth. Thus, in relation to the physical universe, maya is
the principle of ever-changing matter. In Vaishnavism, maya is one of
the nine Shaktis of Vishnu. See: loka, mind (universal), mirific,
tattva, world.

**mayura:** (Sanskrit) "Peacock." The vahana, or mount, of Lord
Karttikeya, symbolizing effulgent beauty and religion in full glory. The
peacock is able to control powerful snakes, such as the cobra,
symbolizing the soulful domination of the instinctive elements--or
control of the kundalini, which is yoga. See: Karttikeya, vahana.

**mean:** As a verb: "to signify." As an adjective: base, low-minded;
selfish.

**meat-eater:** Mansahari. Those who follow a nonvegetarian diet. They
are described in the following passage from the obscure Mansahara
Parihasajalpita Stotram. "Those who eat the flesh of other creatures are
nothing less than gristle-grinders, blood-drinkers, muscle-munchers,
sinew-chewers, carcass-crunchers, flesh-feeders--those who make their
throat a garbage pit and their stomach a graveyard--mean, angry,
loathsomely jealous, confused and beset by covetousness, who without
restraint would lie, deceive, kill or steal to solve immediate problems.
They are flesh-feeders, loathsome to the Gods, but friendly to the
asuras, who become their Gods and Goddesses, the blood-sucking monsters
who inhabit Naraka and deceptively have it decorated to look like the
pitriloka, the world of the fathers. To such beings the deluded
meat-eaters pay homage and prostrate while munching the succulent flesh
off bones." See: vegetarianism.

**mediatrix:** A go-between, intermediary or reconciler between two
parties. The feminine form of the term mediator.

**meditation:** Dhyana. Sustained concentration. Meditation describes a
quiet, alert, powerfully concentrated state wherein new knowledge and
insights are awakened from within as awareness focuses one-pointedly on
an object or specific line of thought. See: internalized worship, raja
yoga, Satchidananda.

**mediumship:** Act or practice of serving as a channel through which
beings of inner worlds communicate with humans. See: folk-shamanic,
trance.

**mendicant:** A beggar; a wandering monk, or sadhu, who lives on alms.

**menses:** A woman's monthly menstruation period, during which, by
Hindu tradition, she rests from her usual activities and forgoes public
and family religious functions.

**mental body (sheath):** The higher-mind layer of the subtle or astral
body in which the soul functions in Maharloka of the Antarloka or subtle
plane. In Sanskrit, the mental body is vijnanamaya kosha, "sheath of
cognition." See: intellectual mind, kosha, subtle body.

**mental plane:** Names the refined strata of the subtle world. It is
called Maharloka or Devaloka, realm of anahata chakra. Here the soul is
shrouded in the mental or cognitive sheath, called vijnanamaya kosha.

**merge:** To lose distinctness or identity by being absorbed. To unite
or become one with.

**merger of the soul:** See: evolution of the soul, vishvagrasa.

**meritorious:** Having merit, deserving of praise or reward. See:
punya.

**mesmerizing:** Hypnotizing; spell-binding; fascinating.

**metamorphosis:** Complete transformation, as in a caterpillar's
becoming a butterfly. See: kundalini, reincarnation.

**metaphysics:** 1) The branch of philosophy dealing with first causes
and nature of reality. 2) The science of mysticism. See: darshana,
mysticism.

**Meykandar:** (Tamil) "Truth seer." The 13th-century Tamil theologian,
author (or translator from the Raurava Agama) of the Sivajnanabodham.
Founder of the Meykandar Sampradaya of pluralistic Saiva Siddhanta. See:
Saiva Siddhanta, Sivajnanabodham.

**Meykandar Shastras:** Fourteen Tamil works on Saiva Siddhanta written
during the 13th and 14th centuries by seven authors--Meykandar,
Arulnandi, Uyyavanda Deva I and II, Umapati, Sivajnana Yogin and
Manavasagam Kadandar. See: Saiva Siddhanta, Sivajnanabodham.

**microcosm-macrocosm:** "Little world" or "miniature universe" as
compared with "great world." Microcosm refers to the internal source of
something larger or more external (macrocosm). In Hindu cosmology, the
outer world is a macrocosm of the inner world, which is its microcosm
and is mystically larger and more complex than the physical universe and
functions at a higher rate of vibration and even a different rate of
time. The microcosm precedes the macrocosm. Thus, the guiding principle
of the Bhuloka comes from the Antarloka and Sivaloka. Consciousness
precedes physical form. In the tantric tradition, the body of man is
viewed as a microcosm of the entire divine creation.
"Microcosm-macrocosm" is embodied in the terms pinda and anda. See: apex
of creation, pinda, quantum, tattva, tantra.

**milestone:** An event which serves as a significant marker in the
progress of a project, history, etc.

**milieu:** Environment; social or cultural setting.

**millennium:** A period of 1,000 years.**millennia:** Plural of
millenium.

**Mimamsa:** (Sanskrit) "Inquiry." See: shad darshana.

**mind (five states):** A view of the mind in five parts.**--conscious
mind:** Jagrat chitta ("wakeful consciousness"). The ordinary, waking,
thinking state of mind in which the majority of people function most of
the day.**--subconscious mind:** Samskara chitta ("impression mind").
The part of mind "beneath" the conscious mind, the storehouse or
recorder of all experience (whether remembered consciously or not)--the
holder of past impressions, reactions and desires. Also, the seat of
involuntary physiological processes.**--subsubconscious mind:** Vasana
chitta ("mind of subliminal traits"). The area of the subconscious mind
formed when two thoughts or experiences of the same rate of intensity
are sent into the subconscious at different times and, intermingling,
give rise to a new and totally different rate of vibration. This
subconscious formation later causes the external mind to react to
situations according to these accumulated vibrations, be they positive,
negative or mixed.**--superconscious mind:** Karana chitta. The mind of
light, the all-knowing intelligence of the soul. The psychological term
is turiya, "the fourth," meaning the condition beyond the states of
wakefulness (jagrat), "dream" (svapna), and "deep sleep" (sushupti). At
its deepest level, the superconscious is Parashakti, or Satchidananda,
the Divine Mind of God Siva. In Sanskrit, there are numerous terms for
the various levels and states of superconsciousness. Specific
superconscious states such as: vishvachaitanya ("universal
consciousness"), advaita chaitanya ("nondual consciousness"), adhyatma
chetana ("spiritual consciousness").**--subsuperconscious mind:**
Anukarana chitta. The superconscious mind working through the conscious
and subconscious states, which brings forth intuition, clarity and
insight. See: chitta, consciousness, samskara, Satchidananda, vasana.

**mind (individual):** At the microcosmic level of individual souls,
mind is consciousness and its faculties of memory, desire, thought and
cognition. Individual mind is chitta (mind, consciousness) and its
three-fold expression is called antahkarana, "inner faculty" composed
of: 1) buddhi ("intellect, reason, logic," higher mind); 2) ahamkara
("I-maker," egoity); 3) manas ("lower mind," instinctive-intellectual
mind, the seat of desire). From the perspective of the 36 tattvas
(categories of existence), each of these is a tattva which evolves out
of the one before it. Thus, from buddhi comes ahamkara and then manas.
Manas, buddhi and ahamkara are faculties of the manomaya kosha (astral
or instinctive-intellectual sheath). Anukarana chitta,
subsuperconsciousness, the knowing mind, is the mind-state of the
vijnanamaya kosha (mental or intuitive-cognitive sheath). The aspect of
mind corresponding directly to the anandamaya kosha (causal body) is
karana chitta, superconsciousness. See: ahamkara, antahkarana, buddhi,
chitta, manas, mind (universal).

**mind (three phases):** A perspective of mind as instinctive,
intellectual and superconscious.**--instinctive mind.** Manas chitta,
the seat of desire and governor of sensory and motor
organs.**--intellectual mind.** Buddhi chitta, the faculty of thought
and intelligence.**--superconscious mind:** Karana chitta, the strata of
intuition, benevolence and spiritual sustenance. Its most refined
essence is Parasakti, or Satchidananda, all-knowing, omnipresent
consciousness, the One transcendental, self-luminous, divine mind common
to all souls. See: awareness, consciousness, mind (five states).

**mind (universal):** In the most profound sense, mind is the sum of all
things, all energies and manifestations, all forms, subtle and gross,
sacred and mundane. It is the inner and outer cosmos. Mind is maya. It
is the material matrix. It is everything but That, the Self within,
Parasiva, which is timeless, formless, causeless, spaceless, known by
the knower only after Self Realization. The Self is the indescribable,
unnameable, Ultimate Reality. Mind in its subtlest form is
undifferentiated Pure Consciousness, primal substance (called Parashakti
or Satchidananda), out of which emerge the myriad forms of existence,
both psychic and material. See: chitta, consciousness, maya, tattva,
world.

**minister:** Someone charged with a specific function on behalf of a
religious or political body, especially in serving the spiritual needs
of the people. In Hinduism, this term may be applied to temple priests,
monks, preceptors, scriptural scholars and others.

**minutiae:** Small or relatively unimportant details.

**Mirabai:** (Sanskrit) A Vaishnava saint (ca 1420), poetess and mystic,
said to be a Rajput princess who abandoned the world in total surrender
to Lord Krishna. Her life story and songs are popular today, especially
in Gujarat.

**mirific:** "Wonder-making; magical; astonishing." See: maya, material
cause.

**misconception:** A wrong idea or concept; misunderstanding, avidya.
See: avidya, illusion.

**mitahara:** (Sanskrit) "Measured eating; moderate appetite." A
requisite to good health and an essential for success in yoga. The ideal
portion per meal is described as no more than would fill the two hands
held side by side and slightly cupped piled high, an amount called a
kudava. All the six tastes should be within these foods (sweet, salty,
sour, pungent, bitter and astringent), and the foods should be well
cooked and highly nutritious. See: yama-niyama.

**modaka:** (Sanskrit) "Sweets." A round lemon-sized sweet made of rice,
coconut, sugar, etc. It is a favorite treat of Ganesha. Esoterically, it
corresponds to siddhi (attainment or fulfillment), the gladdening
contentment of pure joy, the sweetest of all things sweet. See: Ganesha.

**moksha:** (Sanskrit) "Liberation." Release from transmigration,
samsara, the round of births and deaths, which occurs after karma has
been resolved and nirvikalpa samadhi--realization of the Self,
Parasiva--has been attained. Same as mukti. See: jivanmukta, kaivalya,
kundalini, nirvikalpa samadhi, Parasiva, raja yoga, videhamukti.

**monastic:** A monk or nun (based on the Greek monos, "alone"). A man
or woman who has withdrawn from the world and lives an austere,
religious life, either alone or with others in a monastery. (Not to be
confused with monistic, having to do with the doctrine of monism.) Terms
for Hindu monastics include sadhaka, sadhu, muni, tapasvin, vairagi,
udasin and sannyasin. (Feminine: sadhika, sadhvi, muni, tapasvini,
vairagini, and sannyasini.) A monastery-dweller is a mathavasi, and
sadhu is a rough equivalent for mendicant. See: monk, sannyasin,
sannyasini, vairagi.

**monism:** "Doctrine of oneness." 1) The philosophical view that there
is only one ultimate substance or principle. 2) The view that reality is
a unified whole without independent parts. See: dvaita-advaita,
pluralism.

**monistic theism:** Advaita Ishvaravada. Monism is the doctrine that
reality is a one whole or existence without independent parts. Theism is
the belief that God exists as a real, conscious, personal Supreme Being.
Monistic theism is the dipolar doctrine, also called panentheism, that
embraces both monism and theism, two perspectives ordinarily considered
contradictory or mutually exclusive, since theism implies dualism.
Monistic theism simultaneously accepts that God has a personal form,
that He creates, pervades and is all that exists--and that He ultimately
transcends all existence and that the soul is, in essence, one with God.
Advaita Siddhanta (monistic Saiva Siddhanta, or Advaita Ishvaravada
Saiva Siddhanta) is a specific form of monistic theism. See: advaita,
Advaita Ishvaravada, Advaita Siddhanta, dvaita-advaita, panentheism,
theism.

**monk:** A celibate man wholly dedicated to religious life, either
cenobitic (residing with others in a monastery) or anchoritic (living
alone, as a hermit or mendicant). Literally, "one who lives alone" (from
the Greek monos, "alone"). Through the practice of yoga, the control and
transmutation of the masculine and feminine forces within himself, the
monk is a complete being, free to follow the contemplative and mystic
life toward realization of the Self within. Benevolent and strong,
courageous, fearless, not entangled in the thoughts and feelings of
others, monks are affectionately detached from society, defenders of the
faith, kind, loving and ever-flowing with timely wisdom. A synonym for
monastic. Its feminine counterpart is nunk. See: monastic, sannyasin,
nunk.

**monotheism:** "Doctrine of one God." Contrasted with polytheism,
meaning belief in many Gods. The term monotheism covers a wide range of
philosophical positions, from exclusive (or pure) monotheism, which
recognizes only one God (such as in Semitic faiths), to inclusive
monotheism, which also accepts the existence of other Gods. Generally
speaking, the sects of Hinduism are inclusively monotheistic in their
belief in a one Supreme God, and in their reverence for other Gods, or
Mahadevas. However, such terms which arose out of Western philosophy do
not really describe the fullness of Hindu thinking. Realizing this, the
author of The Vedic Experience, Raimundo Panikkar, has offered a new
word: cosmotheandrism, "world-God-man doctrine," which describes a
philosophy that views God, soul and world (Pati, pashu, pasha) as an
integrated, inseparable unity. See: Advaita Ishvaravada, monistic
theism, Pati-pashu-pasha.

**mortal:** Subject to death. Opposite of immortal. See: amrita, death.

**mortal sin:** See: sin.

**Mrigendra Agama:** (Sanskrit) First subsidiary text (Upagama) of the
Kamika Agama, one of the 28 Saiva Siddhanta Agamas. It is especially
valuable because its jnana pada (philosophical section) is complete and
widely available. Other noted sections are on hand gestures (mudra) used
in puja and on establishing temporary places (yagashala) of special
worship. See: pada, Saiva Agamas.

**mudra:** (Sanskrit) "Seal." Esoteric hand gestures which express
specific energies or powers. Usually accompanied by precise
visualizations, mudras are a vital element of ritual worship (puja),
dance and yoga. Among the best-known mudras are: 1) abhaya mudra
(gesture of fearlessness), in which the fingers are extended, palm
facing forward; 2) anjali mudra (gesture of reverence); 3) jnana mudra
(also known as chin mudra and yoga mudra), in which the thumb and index
finger touch, forming a circle, with the other fingers extended; 4)
dhyana mudra (seal of meditation), in which the two hands are open and
relaxed with the palms up, resting on the folded legs, the right hand
atop the left with the tips of the thumbs gently touching. See: abhaya
mudra, anjali mudra, hatha yoga, namaskara.

**muhurta:** (Sanskrit) "Moment." 1) A period of time. 2) A certain
division of a day or night. Muhurtas vary slightly in length as the
lengths of days and nights change through the year. There are at least
three muhurta systems. The first defines one muhurta as 1/8th of a day
or night (= 1.5 hours in a 12-hour night), the second as 1/15th of a day
or night (= 48 minutes), and the third as 1/16th of a day or night (= 45
minutes). 3) Muhurta also refers to the astrological science of
determining the most auspicious periods for specific activities. See:
brahma muhurta, auspiciousness, sandhya upasana.

**mukhya:** (Sanskrit) "Head; foremost." From mukha, "face,
countenance." Leader, guide; such as the family head, kutumba mukhya (or
pramukha). See: extended family, joint family.

**mukti:** (Sanskrit) "Release." A synonym for moksha. See: moksha.

**Mukti Upanishad:** (Sanskrit) A 14th-century writing dealing in part
with yoga.

**mula:** (Sanskrit) "Root." The root, base or bottom or basis of
anything, as in muladhara chakra. Foundational, original or causal, as
in mulagrantha, "original text."

**mula mantra:** (Sanskrit) "Root mystic formula." See: Aum.

**muladhara chakra:** (Sanskrit) "Root support center," from mula,
"root," and adhara, "supporting." Four-petaled psychic center at the
base of the spine; governs memory. See: chakra.

**multitude:** A very large number of things or people.

**Mundaka Upanishad:** (Sanskrit) Belongs to the Atharva Veda and
teaches the difference between the intellectual study of the Vedas and
their supplementary texts and the intuitive knowledge by which God is
known.

**muni:** (Sanskrit) "Sage." A sage or sadhu, especially one vowed to
complete silence or who speaks but rarely and who seeks stillness of
mind. A hermit. The term is related to mauna, "silence." In the hymns of
the Rig Veda, munis are mystic shamans associated with the God Rudra.

**murti:** (Sanskrit) "Form; manifestation, embodiment,
personification." An image or icon of God or one of the many Gods used
during worship. Murtis range from aniconic (avyakta, "nonmanifest"),
such as the Sivalinga, to vyakta "fully manifest," e.g., anthropomorphic
images such as Nataraja. In-between is the partially manifest
(vyaktavyakta), e.g., the mukha linga, in which the face of Siva appears
on the Sivalinga. Other Deity representations include symbols, e.g., the
banyan tree, and geometric designs such as yantras and mandalas. Another
important term for the Deity icon or idol is pratima, "reflected image."
See: aniconic, Ishta Devata, teradi.

**Murugan:** (Tamil) "Beautiful one," a favorite name of Karttikeya
among the Tamils of South India, Sri Lanka and elsewhere. See:
Karttikeya.

**muse:** To think deeply.

**Mushika:** (Sanskrit) From mush, "to steal." The mouse, Lord Ganesha's
mount, traditionally associated with abundance. Symbolically, the mouse
carries Lord Ganesha's grace into every corner of the mind. See:
Ganesha, vahana.

**Muslim:** "True believer." A follower of Islam. See: Islam.

**mutual:** Said of something which is thought, done or felt by two or
more people toward each other. Shared.

**mysticism:** Spirituality; the pursuit of direct spiritual or
religious experience. Spiritual discipline aimed at union or communion
with Ultimate Reality or God through deep meditation or trance-like
contemplation. From the Greek mystikos, "of mysteries." Characterized by
the belief that Truth transcends intellectual processes and must be
attained through transcendent means. See: clairaudient, clairvoyance,
psychic, trance.

**myth:** Traditional story, usually ancient and of no known author,
involving Gods, devas and heroes, and serving to illustrate great
principles of life, customs, the origin of the universe, etc. See: folk
narratives, katha.

**mythology:** Body of tales and legends. All the myths of a specific
people, culture or religion. India's mythology is among the world's most
bountiful. See: folk narratives, katha.


