N
=

**nada:** (Sanskrit) "Sound; tone, vibration." Metaphysically, the
mystic sounds of the Eternal, of which the highest is the transcendent
or Soundless Sound, Paranada, the first vibration from which creation
emanates. Paranada is so pure and subtle that it cannot be identified to
the denser regions of the mind. From Paranada comes Pranava, Aum, and
further evolutes of nada. These are experienced by the meditator as the
nadanadi shakti, "the energy current of sound," heard pulsing through
the nerve system as a constant high-pitched hum, much like a tambura, an
electrical transformer, a swarm of bees or a shruti box. Listening to
the inner sounds is a contemplative practice, called nada upasana,
"worship through sound," nada anusandhana, "cultivation of inner sound,"
or nada yoga. The subtle variations of the nadanadi shakti represent the
psychic wavelengths of established guru lineages of many Indian
religions. Nada also refers to other psychic sounds heard during deep
meditation, including those resembling various musical instruments. Most
commonly, nada refers to ordinary sound. See: Aum, nadi, pranava, sound.

**nadanadi shakti:** (Sanskrit) "Energy current of sound." See: nada.

**nadi:** (Sanskrit) "Conduit." A nerve fiber or energy channel of the
subtle (inner) bodies of man. It is said there are 72,000. These
interconnect the chakras. The three main nadis are named ida, pingala
and sushumna.**--ida:** (Sanskrit) Also known as chandra ("moon") nadi,
it is pink in color and flows downward, ending on the left side of the
body. This current is feminine in nature and is the channel of
physical-emotional energy.**--pinga-a:** Also known as surya ("sun")
nadi, it is blue in color and flows upward, ending on the right side of
the body. This current is masculine in nature and is the channel of
intellectual-mental energy.**--sushumna:** (Sanskrit) The major nerve
current which passes through the spinal column from the muladhara chakra
at the base to the sahasrara at the crown of the head. It is the channel
of kundalini. Through yoga, the kundalini energy lying dormant in the
muladhara is awakened and made to rise up this channel through each
chakra to the sahasrara chakra. See: chakra, kundalini, raja yoga,
tantrism.

**naga:** (Sanskrit) "Serpent," often the cobra; symbol of the kundalini
coiled on the four petals of the muladhara chakra. See: kundalini,
muladhara chakra.

**naivedya:** (Sanskrit) Food offered to the Deity at the temple or home
altar. An important element in puja. See: prasada, puja.

**nakshatra:** (Sanskrit) "Star cluster." Central to astrological
determinations, the nakshatras are 27 star-clusters, constellations,
which lie along the ecliptic, or path of the sun. An individual's
nakshatra, or birth star, is the constellation the moon was aligned with
at the time of birth. See: jyotisha.

**Nalvar:** (Tamil) "Four devout beings." Four renowned saints of the
Saiva religion (7th to 9th century): Appar, Sundarar, Sambandar and
Manikkavasagar--devotional mystics whose lives and teachings helped
catalyze a resurgence of Saivism in Tamil Nadu. All but Manikkavasagar
are among the Nayanars, 63 saints canonized by Sekkilar in his
Periyapuranam (ca 1140). These four are also known as the Samayacharyas,
"teachers of the faith." Their devotional poems are embodied in the
Tirumurai, along with the writings of other Nayanars. Numerous South
Indian temples celebrate their historic pilgrimages from shrine to
shrine where they beseeched the grace of Siva through heartfelt song.
Nalvar is a term not to be confused with Alvar, naming certain Vaishnava
saints of the same period. See: Alvar, Nayanar, Tirumurai.

**namadiksha:** (Sanskrit) "Name initiation." Also known as namakarana
samskara. See: samskaras of childhood.

**Namah Sivaya:** (Sanskrit) "Adoration (or homage) to Siva." The
supreme mantra of Saivism, known as the Panchakshara or "five
syllables." Na is the Lord's veiling grace; Ma is the world; Shi is
Siva; Va is His revealing grace; Ya is the soul. The letters also
represent the physical body: Na the legs, Ma the stomach, Shi the
shoulders, Va the mouth and Ya the eyes. Embodying the essence of Saiva
Siddhanta, it is found in the center of the central Veda (the Yajur) of
the original three Vedas (Rig, Yajur and Sama). Namastaraya namah
shambhave cha mayobhave cha, namah shankaraya cha mayaskaraya cha, namah
sivaya cha sivayataraya cha. "Homage to the source of health and to the
source of delight. Homage to the maker of health and to the maker of
delight. Homage to the Auspicious, and to the more Auspicious" (Krishna
Yajur Veda, Taittiriya Samhita 4.5.8). See: mantra, japa.

**namakarana:** (Sanskrit) "Name giving." See: samskaras of childhood.

**namaskara:** (Sanskrit) "Reverent salutations." Traditional Hindu
verbal greeting and mudra where the palms are joined together and held
before the heart or raised to the level of the forehead. The mudra is
also called anjali. It is a devotional gesture made equally before a
temple Deity, holy person, friend or momentary acquaintance. The hands
held together connects the right side of the body with the left, and
brings the nerve and nadi currents into poised balance, into a
consciousness of the sushumna, awakening the third eye within the
greeter to worship God in the greeted. See: anjali mudra, pranama.

**namaste:** (Sanskrit) "Reverent salutations to you." A traditional
verbal greeting. A form of namas, meaning "bowing, obeisance." See:
namaskara.

**Namo Narayanaya:** (Sanskrit) "Salutations to Lord Vishnu." The great
mantra of the Vaishnava faith. Also a popular greeting among
Vaishnavites and Smartas. See: Vaishnavism, Vishnu.

**Nandi:** (Sanskrit) "The joyful." A white bull with a black tail, the
vahana, or mount, of Lord Siva, symbol of the powerful instinctive force
tamed by Him. Nandi is the perfect devotee, the soul of man, kneeling
humbly before God Siva, ever concentrated on Him. The ideal and goal of
the Siva bhakta is to behold Siva in everything. See: vahana.

**Nandikeshvara:** (Sanskrit) "Lord of Nandi." A name of Siva. Also
another name for Nandinatha, the first historically known guru of the
Nandinatha Sampradaya. See: Kailasa Parampara, Natha Sampradaya.

**Nandikeshvara Kashika:** (Sanskrit) The only surviving work of
Nandikeshvara (ca 250 bce). Its 26 verses are the earliest extant
exposition of advaitic Saivism, aside from the Saiva Agamas.

**Nandinatha:** (Sanskrit) A synonym of Nandikeshvara. See: Kailasa
Parampara.

**Nandinatha Sampradaya:** (Sanskrit) See: Natha Sampradaya.

**Narada Sutra(s):** (Sanskrit) A Vaishnava text of 84 aphorisms in
which Sage Narada explains bhakti yoga (ca 1200).

**Narada Parivrajaka:** (Sanskrit) An Upanishad of the Atharva Veda
which teaches of asceticism, sannyasa, true brahminhood, and more.

**Naraka:** (Sanskrit) Abode of darkness. Literally, "pertaining to
man." The lower worlds. Equivalent to the Western term hell, a gross
region of the Antarloka. Naraka is a congested, distressful area where
demonic beings and young souls may sojourn until they resolve the
darksome karmas they have created. Here beings suffer the consequences
of their own misdeeds in previous lives. Naraka is understood as having
seven regions, called tala, corresponding to the states of consciousness
of the seven lower chakras as follows: 1) Put, "childless"--atala
chakra, "wheel of the bottomless region." Fear and lust (located in the
hips). 2) Avichi, "joyless"--vitala chakra: "wheel of negative region."
Center of anger (thighs). 3) Samhata, "abandoned"--sutala chakra: "Great
depth." Region of jealousy (knees). 4) Tamisra, "darkness"--talatala
chakra: "wheel of the lower region." Realm of confused thinking
(calves). 5) Rijisha, "expelled"--rasatala chakra: "wheel of
subterranean region." Selfishness (ankles). 6) Kudmala,
"leprous"--mahatala chakra: "wheel of the great lower region." Region of
consciencelessness (feet). The intensity of "hell" begins at this deep
level. 7) Kakola, "black poison"--patala chakra, "wheel of the fallen or
sinful level." Region of malice (soles of the feet).

The seven-fold hellish region in its entirety is also called patala,
"fallen region." Scriptures offer other lists of hells, numbering 7 or
21. They are described as places of torment, pain, darkness, confusion
and disease, but none are places where souls reside forever. Hinduism
has no eternal hell. See: hell, loka, purgatory (also, individual tala
entries).

**Narasinha Purvatapaniya:** (Sanskrit) "The ascetic's surrender to
Narasinha (incarnation of Vishnu as half-man, half-lion)." An Upanishad
of the Atharva Veda which deals with worship of Vishnu.

**Narayana:** (Sanskrit) "Abode of men." A name of Lord Vishnu. See:
Vishnu.

**Narayanakantha:** (Sanskrit) Great exponent of Saiva Siddhanta (ca
1050).

**nastika:** (Sanskrit) "One who denies; unbeliever." Opposite of
astika, "one who asserts." The terms astika (orthodox) and nastika
(unorthodox) are a traditional classification of Indian schools of
thought. Nastika refers to all traditions that reject and deny the
scriptural authority of the Vedas. This includes Sikhism, Jainism,
Buddhism, the Charvaka materialists and others. Astika refers to those
schools that accept the revealed authority of the Vedas as supreme
scripture. This includes the four major sects: Saivism, Shaktism,
Vaishnavism and Smartism. See: atheism, Charvaka, materialism.

**Nataraja:** (Sanskrit) "King of Dance," or "King of Dancers." God as
the Cosmic Dancer. Perhaps Hinduism's richest and most eloquent symbol,
Nataraja represents Siva, the Primal Soul, Parameshvara, as the power,
energy and life of all that exists. This is Siva's intricate state of
Being in Manifestation. The dance of Siva as Natesha, Lord of Dancers,
is the dance of the entire cosmos, the rhythmic movements in all. All
that is, whether sentient or insentient, pulsates in His body. Nataraja
is art and spirituality in perfect oneness, chosen to depict the Divine
because in dance that which is created is inseparable from its creator,
just as the universe and soul cannot be separated from God. Nataraja is
also stillness and motion wrought together. The stillness speaks of the
peace and poise that lies within us all, at the center. The intense
motion, depicted by His hair flying wildly in all directions, is an
intimation of the fury and ferocity, the violent vigor, which fills this
universe wherein we dwell. The implication of these opposites is that
God contains and allows them both, that there is divine purpose at work
in our life, whether we find ourselves engaged in its beauty or its
"madness." Dance and dancer are one; not an atom moves on any plane of
existence but by His Will. Thus, this elegant symbol embodies the
underlying unity of all.

Siva's Dance, or all that happens, is composed of an ever-flowing
combination of His five potent actions, panchakritya: 1)**srishti:**
creation, or emanation, represented by His upper right hand and the
damaru (drum), upon which he beats Paranada, the Primal Sound from which
issue forth the rhythms and cycles of creation; 2)**sthiti:**
preservation, represented by His lower right hand in a gesture of
blessing, abhaya mudra, saying "fear not;" 3)**samhara:** destruction,
dissolution or absorption, represented by the fire in His upper left
hand, posed in ardhachandra mudra, "half-moon gesture;" 4)**tirobhava:**
obscuring grace, the power which hides the truth, thereby permitting
experience, growth and eventual fulfillment of destiny, represented by
His right foot upon the prostrate person (Apasmarapurusha), the
principle of ignorance, or anava; 5)**anugraha:** revealing grace--which
grants knowledge and severs the soul's bonds--represented by Siva's
raised left foot, and by His lower left hand, held in gajahasta
("elephant trunk") mudra, inviting approach. These five cosmic
activities are sometimes personalized respectively as Brahma, Vishnu,
Rudra, Maheshvara and Sadasiva--or as Sadyojata (creation), Vamadeva
(preservation), Aghora (reabsorption), Tatpurusha (obscuration) and
Ishana (granting grace).

The ring of fire (prabhamandala), in which Siva dances is the hall of
consciousness, chitsabha; in other words, the light-filled heart of man,
the central chamber of the manifest cosmos. Siva dances the universe
into and out of existence, veiling Ultimate Reality for most, unveiling
it for devotees who draw near and recognize Parasiva, Ultimate Reality,
in the chamber of their own inner being. Yea, all are dancing with Siva.
See: nada, Parameshvara, Parashakti, Parasiva, Sadasiva.

**Natchintanai:** (Tamil) "Good thoughts." The collected songs of Sage
Yogaswami (1872
1964) of Jaffna, Sri Lanka, extolling the power of the satguru, worship
of Lord Siva, the path of dharma and the attainment of Self Realization.
See: Kailasa Parampara.

**Natha:** (Sanskrit) "Master, lord; adept." Names an ancient Himalayan
tradition of Saiva-yoga mysticism, whose first historically known
exponent was Nandikeshvara (ca 250 bce). Natha--Self-Realized
adept--designates the extraordinary ascetic masters (or devotees) of
this school. Through their practice of siddha yoga they have attained
tremendous powers, siddhis, and are sometimes referred to as siddha
yogis (accomplished or fully enlightened ones). The words of such beings
naturally penetrate deeply into the psyche of their devotees, causing
mystical awakenings. Like all tantrics, Nathas have refused to recognize
caste distinctions in spiritual pursuits. Their satgurus initiate from
the lowest to the highest, according to spiritual worthiness. Natha also
refers to any follower of the Natha tradition. The Nathas are considered
the source of hatha as well as raja yoga. See: Kailasa Parampara, Natha
Sampradaya, siddha yoga.

**Natha Matha:** (Sanskrit) "Adepts' monastery." As a proper noun, a
synonym for Siddha Siddhanta. See: Siddha Siddhanta.

**Natha Sampradaya:** (Sanskrit) "Transmitted doctrine (or theology) of
the masters." Sampradaya means a living stream of tradition or theology.
Natha Sampradaya is a philosophical and yogic tradition of Saivism whose
origins are unknown. This oldest of Saivite sampradayas existing today
consists of two major streams: the Nandinatha and the Adinatha. The
Nandinatha Sampradaya has had as exemplars Maharishi Nandinatha and his
disciples: Patanjali (author of the Yoga Sutras) and Tirumular (author
of Tirumantiram). Among its representatives today are the successive
siddhars of the Kailasa Parampara. The Adinatha lineage's known
exemplars are Maharishi Adinatha, Matsyendranatha and Gorakshanatha, who
founded a well-known order of yogis. See: Kailasa Parampara, Natha,
Saivism, sampradaya.

**Nayanar:** (Tamil) "One who shows the way." The 63 canonized Tamil
saints of South India, as documented in the Periyapuranam by Sekkilar
(ca 1140). All but a few were householders, honored as exemplars of
radical devotion to Lord Siva, though their biographies are perhaps
historically inaccurate and the actions of some were violent, even
heinous. Several contributed to the Saiva Siddhanta scriptural
compendium called Tirumurai. See: Nalvar, Tirumurai.

**neo-Indian religion:** Navabharata Dharma. A modern form of liberal
Hinduism that carries forward basic Hindu cultural values--such as
dress, diet and the arts--while allowing religious values to subside. It
emerged after the British Raj, when India declared itself an
independent, secular state. It was cultivated by the Macaulay education
system, implanted in India by the British, which aggressively undermined
Hindu thought and belief. Neo-Indian religion encourages Hindus to
follow any combination of theological, scriptural, sadhana and worship
patterns, regardless of sectarian or religious origin. Extending out of
and beyond the Smarta system of worshiping the Gods of each major sect,
it incorporates holy icons from all religions, including Jesus, Mother
Mary and Buddha. Many Navabharatis choose to not call themselves Hindus
but to declare themselves members of all the world's religions. See:
panchayatana puja, Smartism, Smarta Sampradaya, syncretism,
universalist.

**Nepal:** (Sanskrit) Ancient land between India and Tibet--50,000
square miles, population 24 million. It was the birthplace of Buddha and
Sata, the original home of Matsyendranatha and is renowned for its
Pashupatinatha Siva temple. Hinduism is the state religion.

**neti neti:** (Sanskrit) "Not this, not that." An Upanishadic formula
connoting, through negation, the undefinable and inconceivable nature of
the Absolute. It is an affirmation which the meditating yogi applies to
each thought and phase of the mind as he penetrates deeper and deeper in
his quest for Truth. Ultimately he transcends all "this-ness" to realize
That which is beyond the mind. See: kundalini, samadhi, raja yoga.

**neuter:** Having no sex or gender.

**neutron star:** A star which has collapsed in on itself and is
extremely dense. A neutron star the size of an orange would weigh more
than the entire earth.

**new age:** According to Webster's New World Dictionary: "Of or
pertaining to a cultural movement popular in the 1980s [and 90s]
characterized by a concern with spiritual consciousness, and variously
combining belief in reincarnation and astrology with such practices as
meditation, vegetarianism and holistic medicine."

**New Year:** The majority of Hindus in India celebrate the New Year
according to traditional, pre-colonial calendars, several of which are
still in use. There are, therefore, various New Year's days in different
states of India, the two major ones being Dipavali in October-November,
observed in North India, and the day when the sun enters Mesha (Aries)
in April, celebrated in Tamil Nadu, Bengal and Nepal.

**Nimbarka:** (Sanskrit) Mystic, philosopher and founder of the Minandi
Vaishnava school of Vedanta (ca 1150). He acclaimed the guru's grace as
the only true means to salvation. See: Vedanta.

**Nirguna Brahman:** (Sanskrit) "God without qualities." See: Brahman.

**Nirukta Vedanga:** (Sanskrit) "Etymology Veda-limb." Auxiliary Vedic
texts which discuss the origin and development of words; among the four
linguistic skills taught for mastery of the Vedas and the rites of
yajna. Nirukta relies upon ancient lexicons, nighantu, as well as
detailed hymn indices, anukramani. Five nighantus existed at the time of
Yaska (320 bce), whose treatise is regarded a standard work on Vedic
etymology. See: Vedanga.

**nirvahana:** (Sanskrit) "End; completion." Conclusion.

**nirvani and upadeshi:** (Sanskrit) Nirvani means "extinguished one,"
and upadeshi means "teacher." In general, nirvani refers to a liberated
soul, or to a certain class of monk. Upadeshi refers to a teacher,
generally a renunciate. In Dancing with Siva, these two terms have
special meaning, similar to the Buddhist arhat and bodhisattva, naming
the two earthly modes of the realized, liberated soul. After full
illumination, the jivanmukta has the choice to return to the world to
help others along the path. This is the way of the upadeshi (akin to
bodhisattva), exemplified by the benevolent satguru who leads seekers to
the goal of God Realization. He may found and direct institutions and
monastic lineages. The nirvani (akin to arhat) abides at the pinnacle of
consciousness, shunning all worldly involvement. He is typified by the
silent ascetic, the reclusive sage. See: satguru, vishvagrasa.

**nirvikalpa samadhi:** (Sanskrit) "Enstasy (samadhi) without form or
seed." The realization of the Self, Parasiva, a state of oneness beyond
all change or diversity; beyond time, form and space. Vi means "to
change, make different." Kalpa means "order, arrangement; a period of
time." Thus vikalpa means "diversity, thought; difference of perception,
distinction." Nir means "without." See: enstasy, kalpa, raja yoga,
samadhi.

**nishchitartha:** (Sanskrit) "Engagement (to be married); resolution of
aim." Synonym for vagdana. See: marriage covenant, samskaras of
adulthood.

**Nityananda:** (Sanskrit) The reclusive sage (?--1961) known as
Bhagavan, "the exalted one," who lived an extraordinary mystic life near
Mumbai, India, and initiated a number of disciples, including Swami
Muktananda.

**nivedana:** (Sanskrit) "Announcement, presentation, making known."

**niyama:** (Sanskrit) "Restraint." See: yama-niyama.

**niyati:** (Sanskrit) "Necessity, restriction; the fixed order of
things, destiny." A synonym for karma, niyati is the eighth tattva. It
is part of the soul's five-fold "sheath," pancha kanchuka (or
vijnanamaya kosha), along with kala (time), kala (creativity), vidya
(knowing) and raga (attachment, desire). The soul thus encased is called
purusha. See: karma, tattva.

**nondual (nondualism):** See: dvaita-advaita, monistic theism, Vedanta.

**nonhuman birth:** The phenomenon of the soul being born as nonhuman
life forms, explained in various scriptures. For example, Saint
Manikkavasagar's famous hymn (Tiruvasagam 8.14): "I became grass and
herbs, worm and tree. I became many beasts, bird and snake. I became
stone and man, goblins and sundry celestials. I became mighty demons,
silent sages and the Gods. Taken form in life, moveable and immovable,
born in all, I am weary of birth, my Great Lord." The Upanishads, too,
describe the soul's course after death and later taking a higher or
lower birth according to its merit or demerit of the last life (Kaush.
U. 1.2, Chand. U. 5.35.10, Brihad. U. 6.2).

These statements are sometimes misunderstood to mean that each soul must
slowly, in sequential order incarnate as successively higher beings,
beginning with the lowest organism, to finally obtain a human birth. In
fact, as the Upanishads explain, after death the soul, reaching the
inner worlds, reaps the harvest of its deeds, is tested and then takes
on the appropriate incarnation--be it human or nonhuman--according to
its merit or demerit. Souls destined for human evolution are human-like
from the moment of their creation in the Sivaloka. This is given outer
expression in the Antarloka and Bhuloka, on earth or other similar
planets, as the appropriate sheaths are developed. However, not all
souls are human souls. There are many kinds of souls, such as genies,
elementals and certain Gods, who evolve toward God through different
patterns of evolution than do humans.

One cause of unclarity is to confuse the previously mentioned scriptural
passages with the theory of biological evolution developed by Charles
Darwin (18091882), which states that plant and animal species develop or
evolve from earlier forms due to hereditary transmission of variations
that enhance the organism's adaptability and chances of survival. These
principles are now considered the kernel of biology. Modern scientists
thus argue that the human form is a development from earlier primates,
including apes and monkeys. The Darwinian theory is reasonable but
incomplete as it is based in a materialistic conception of reality that
does not encompass the existence of the soul. While the Upanishadic
evolutionary vision speaks of the soul's development and progress
through reincarnation, the Darwinian theory focuses on evolution of the
biological organism, with no relation to a soul or individual being.
See: evolution of the soul, kosha, reincarnation, soul.

**noninjurious:** Which does not cause harm or
injury.**--noninjuriousness:** A translation of ahimsa, the principle of
not causing harm or injury to living beings, whether by thought, word or
deed. See: ahimsa.

**nonperseverance:** The act, practice or attitude of not persisting,
giving up too easily. See: yama-niyama.

**nonviolence:** See: ahimsa.

**Northern Saivism:** A name for Kashmir Saivism. See: Kashmir Saivism.

**notable:** Worthy of being noted. Remarkable.

**novelty:** Newness. The constant changes and enchantments of life.

**novitiate:** Same as novice. A newcomer to a monastic or religious
community, on probation, before taking final vows.

**nucleus of the soul:** See: atman, impersonal being, soul.

**nunk:** A contemporary word coined by Catholic theologian Raimundo
Panikkar to describe women contemplatives or female monks, in contrast
to the word nun which commonly describes a religious teacher or
service-oriented woman under vows. A nunk is a celibate woman following
strict, perhaps austere and usually solitary, spiritual disciplines and
lifestyle. By balancing the masculine and feminine energies within
herself through sadhana and yoga, she is a complete being, detached from
the thoughts and feelings of others, free to follow the contemplative
and mystical life in pursuit of the Self within. To accomplish this, she
works to permanently conquer her feminine instincts and the emotional
tendencies of a woman's body. She strives to transmute her sexuality
into the Divine, giving up her womanliness so thoroughly that she is
indistinguishable from a monk. In Hinduism, nunks may be sannyasinis,
yoginis or sadhikas. See: monastic, sannyasin, monk.

**nurturance:** Same as nurture, to nourish. The act or process or
furnishing the essentials to growth, development or education.

**Nyaya:** (Sanskrit) "System; rule; logic." See: Gautama, shad
darshana.


