O
=

**objective:** 1) Quality of thinking or perception relating to the
object as it truly is. Not biased or colored by one's personal point of
view or prejudices, which then would be subjective thinking. 2) A
target, goal or anything sought for or aimed at. Cf: subjective.

**oblation:** An offering or sacrifice ceremoniously given to a God or
guru. See: sacrifice, yajna.

**obscuration:** Same as obscuring grace. See: grace, Nataraja**.**

**obscuring grace:** See: grace, Nataraja.

**obstacle:** See: upasarga.

**obstinate (obstinacy):** Overly determined to have one's own way.
Stubborn.

**occult:** Hidden, or kept secret; revealed only after initiation. See:
mysticism.

**odic:** Magnetic--of or pertaining to consciousness within ashuddha
maya, the realm of the physical and lower astral planes. Odic force in
its rarified state is prakriti, the primary gross energy of nature,
manifesting in the three gunas: sattva, rajas and tamas. It is the force
of attraction and repulsion between people, people and their things, and
manifests as masculine (aggressive) and feminine (passive), arising from
the pingala and ida currents. These two currents (nadi) are found within
spine of the subtle body. Odic force is a magnetic, sticky, binding
substance that people seek to develop when they want to bind themselves
together, such as in partnerships, marriage, guru-shishya relationships
and friendships. Odic energy is the combined emanation of the pranamaya
and annamaya koshas. The term odic is the adjective form of od
(pronounced like mode), defined in the Oxford English Dictionary as "a
hypothetical force held by Baron von Reichenbach (1788-1869) to pervade
all nature, manifesting itself in certain persons of sensitive
temperament (streaming from their fingertips), and exhibited especially
by magnets, crystals, heat, light and chemical action; it has been held
to explain the phenomena of mesmerism and animal magnetism." See:
actinic, actinodic, guna, kosha, odic, subtle body, tattva.

**offset:** Made up for, compensated for, counterbalanced by.

**offspring:** The young of animals. Children. Sanskrit: apatya.

**olai:** (Tamil) "Leaf." An ancient form of Indian books used in South
India, made of strips of fronds from the palmyra (trindruma) and talipot
(talapatra, "fan-leaf") palms. Prepared birch bark (bhurja pattra) was
the medium in the North. The pages were loosely tied, with cord passed
between one or two holes and usually bound between wooden covers. Ink,
made from lampblack or charcoal, was applied with a reed pen. Or, more
commonly in the South, the letters were scribed with a stylus, then
rubbed with powdered lampblack. These books are small in size, averaging
about 2 inches high and 8 inches wide and up to 11 or 12 inches thick,
wound with string and generally protected in colored cloth. See:
grantha.

**old soul:** One who has reincarnated many times, experienced much and
is therefore further along the path. Old souls may be recognized by
their qualities of compassion, self-effacement and wisdom. See:
evolution of the soul, soul.

**Om:** (Sanskrit) "Yes, verily." The most sacred mantra of Hinduism. An
alternate transliteration of Aum (the sounds A and U blend to become O).
See: Aum.

**ominous:** Foreboding; frightening, sinister.

**omnipotent:** All-powerful. Able to do anything.

**omnipresent:** Present everywhere and in all things.

**omniscient:** Having infinite knowledge, all-knowing.

**oneness:** Quality or state of being one. Unity, identity, especially
in spite of appearances to the contrary--e.g., the oneness of soul and
God. See: monism.

**ontology:** The branch of metaphysics dealing with the nature of
reality.

**orbit:** The path taken by a celestial object gravitating around
another.

**ordain (ordination):** To confer the duties and responsibilities,
authority and spiritual power of a religious office, such as priest,
minister or satguru, through religious ceremony or mystical initiation.
See: diksha.

**original sin:** See: sin.

**orthodox:** "Straight opinion." Conforming to established doctrines or
beliefs. Opposite of heterodox, "different opinion." See: astika.

**outgrow (outgrown):** To grow faster or larger than and, therefore, to
lose or be rid of in the process of growing.

**outstretch:** To extend, to stretch out, as one's arms or a large
cloth.

**overshadow:** To cast a shadow over or be more important than; to
dominate.

**overwhelm:** To overcome or overpower as with great force or emotion.


