P
=

**pada:** (Sanskrit) "A step, pace, stride; footstep, trace."

**pada:** (Sanskrit) "The foot (of men and animals); quarter-part,
section; stage; path." Names the major sections of the Agamic texts and
the corresponding stages of practice and unfoldment on the path to
moksha. According to Saiva Siddhanta, there are four padas, which are
successive and cumulative; i.e. in accomplishing each one the soul
prepares itself for the next. (In Tamil, Saiva Siddhanta is also known
as Nalu-pada, "four-stage," Saivam.)**--charya pada:** "Good conduct
stage." Stage one, learning to live righteously, serve selflessly,
performing karma yoga. It is also known as dasa marga, "path of the
slave," a time when the aspirant relates to God as a servant to a
master. Traditional acts of charya include cleaning the temple, lighting
lamps and collecting flowers for worship. Worship at this stage is
mostly external.**--kriya pada:** "Religious action; worship stage."
Stage of bhakti yoga, of cultivating devotion through performing puja
and regular daily sadhana. It is also known as the satputra marga, "true
son's way," as the soul now relates to God as a son to his father. A
central practice of the kriya pada is performing daily puja.**--yoga
pada:** "Stage of union." Having matured in the charya and kriya padas,
the soul now turns to internalized worship and raja yoga under the
guidance of a satguru. It is a time of sadhana and serious striving when
realization of the Self is the goal. It is the sakha marga, "way of the
friend," for now God is looked upon as an intimate friend.**--jnana
pada:** "Stage of wisdom." Once the soul has attained Realization, it is
henceforth a wise one, who lives out the life of the body, shedding
blessings on mankind. This stage is also called the San Marga, "true
path," on which God is our dearest beloved. The Tirumantiram describes
the fulfillment of each stage as follows. In charya, the soul forges a
kindred tie in "God's world" (salokya). In kriya it attains "nearness"
(samipya) to Him. In yoga it attains "likeness" (sarupya) with Him. In
jnana the soul enjoys the ultimate bliss of identity (sayujya) with
Siva. See: jnana, nirvani and upadeshi.

**padapuja:** (Sanskrit) "Foot worship." Ceremonial worship of the
guru's sandals or holy feet, often through ablution with precious
substances and offering of fruit and flowers. After the ceremony, the
water of the bath, the fruit and other precious substances are partaken
of as prasada by the devotees. See: guru, guru bhakti, paduka, prasada,
ucchishta.

**padartha:** (Sanskrit) "Constituent substance." Primary categories or
essential elements of existence, defined differently or uniquely by each
philosophical school. For example, in the Sankhya Darshana, the
padarthas are purusha (spirit) and prakriti (matter). According to
Advaita Vedanta, they are chit (spirit) and achit (nonspirit), which
from an absolute perspective are taken as the One padartha, Brahman. In
Shakta and Saiva traditions, the padarthas are Pati (God), pashu (soul)
and pasha (world, or bonds).

**paddhati:** (Sanskrit) "Foot-path; track; guide." The name of a class
of expository writings, e.g., Gorakshanatha's Siddha Siddhanta Paddhati,
and the many paddhatis that are guidebooks for ritual temple rites.
There are paddhatis for the Vedas and for the Agamas.

**padma:** (Sanskrit) The lotus flower, Nelumbo nucifera, symbol of
spiritual development and the chakras. Because it grows out of mud and
rises to perfect purity and glory, it is an apt representation of
spiritual unfoldment.

**Padma Purana:** (Sanskrit) One of the six main Vishnu Puranas.

**paduka:** (Sanskrit) "Sandals." Sri Paduka refers to the sandals of
the preceptor, the traditional icon of the guru, representing his
venerable feet and worshiped as the source of grace. Paduka also names
one of Vira Saivism's eight aids (ashtavarana) to faith--the practice of
drinking the water from the ceremonial washing of the Sivalinga or the
guru's feet. See: guru bhakti, padapuja, prasada, satguru, ucchishta.

**pagan:** Term used negatively by Semitic faiths to indicate a follower
of another religion, or of no religion. Also names the pre-Christian
religion of Europe, akin to shamanism and other of the world's
indigenous faiths, which have survived to this day despite organized
persecution. Pagans are gradually surfacing again, and have acknowledged
their kinship with Hinduism. See: mysticism, shamanism.

**pageantry:** A spectacular and grand representation, elaborately
decorated show, procession, drama, etc. See: festival.

**Paingala Upanishad:** (Sanskrit) Belongs to the Shukla Yajur Veda. A
12-verse dialog between Sage Yajnavalkya and his disciple Paingala
covering a wide range of topics, including liberation and the five
sheaths of man.

**panchabhuta:** (Sanskrit) "Five elements." Earth, water, fire, air and
ether. Also called mahabhuta. See: indriya, tattva.

**panchachara:** (Sanskrit) "Five rules." The five Vira Saivite codes of
conduct.**--Lingachara:** Daily worship of the
Sivalinga. --**sadachara:** attention to vocation and
duty.**--Sivachara:** Acknowledging Siva as the one God and observing
equality among members.**--bhrityachara:** Humility toward all
creatures.**--ganachara:** defense of the community and its tenets.

**Pancha Ganapati Utsava:** (Sanskrit) "Five-fold Ganapati festival." A
modern five-day festival observed from the 21st through 25th of
December. Pancha (five) denotes Ganesha's five faces, each representing
a specific power (shakti). One face is worshiped each day, creating 1)
harmony in the home, 2) concord among relatives, neighbors and friends,
3) good business and public relations, 4) cultural upliftment and 5)
heartfelt charity and religiousness. The festival, a favorite among
children, was conceived in 1985 by Satguru Sivaya Subramuniyaswami along
with elders of various Hindu sects. It is a time of sharing gifts,
renewing ties of family and friendship while focusing inwardly on this
great God of abundance. See: Ganesha.

**Panchakshara Mantra:** (Sanskrit) "Five-syllabled incantation."
Saivism's most sacred mantra. See: Namah Sivaya.

**Panchamukha Ganapati:** (Sanskrit) "Five-faced Ganapati." A special
form of Lord Ganesha with five faces; similar to Siddhi Ganapati.

**pancha nitya karma(s):** (Sanskrit) "Five constant duties." A
traditional regimen of religious practice for Hindus: 1) dharma
(virtuous living), 2) upasana (worship), 3) utsava (holy days), 4)
tirthayatra (pilgrimage) and 5) samskaras (sacraments.) See: dharma,
festival, samskara, tirthayatra.

**Pancharatra:** (Sanskrit) An ancient name of Vaishnavism. The term
literally means "five nights," but may be a corruption of pancharatha
("five vehicles, ways or paths"), thought to indicate five ancient sects
in the vicinity of Mathura that eventually merged into one with the
worship of Krishna.

**Pancharatra Agama(s):** (Sanskrit) The most popular of the two major
groups of Vaishnava Agamas (the other being the Vaikasana Agamas).

**Panchartha Bhashya:** (Sanskrit) Commentary by Kaundinya (ca 100) on
Lakulisha's Pashupata Sutras, one of the few extant philosophical texts
of Pashupata Saivism. It was rediscovered in 1930. See: Pashupata
Saivism.

**pancha shraddha:** (Sanskrit) "Five faiths." A concise summary of
Hindu belief exactly correlated to the "five constant practices," pancha
nitya karmas. The pancha shraddha are 1) sarva Brahman: God is All in
all, soul is divine; 2) mandira: belief in temples and divine beings; 3)
karma: cosmic justice; 4) samsaramoksha: rebirth brings enlightenment
and liberation; 5) Vedas and satguru: the necessity of scripture and
preceptor. See: pancha nitya karma.

**Panchatantra:** (Sanskrit) The collection of animal stories used by
sage Vishnu Sharma to teach the king's sons the "art of practical life."
They were written down in Sanskrit in about 200 bce, but existed
previously as part of oral tradition. The engaging stories have migrated
all over the world to reappear in Aesop's Fables, Arabian Nights,
Canterbury Tales and in ancient Chinese and Japanese works. See:
folk-narratives, mythology.

**panchayatana puja:** (Sanskrit) "Five-shrine worship." A system of
personal worship, thought to have developed after the 7th century, in
the Smarta brahminical tradition, and which is now part of orthodox
daily practice for Smartas. The ritual involves the worship of five
Deities: Vishnu, Siva, Surya, Ganesha and Shakti. The five are
represented by small murtis, or by five kinds of stones, or by five
marks drawn on the floor. One is placed in the center as the devotee's
preferred God, Ishta Devata, and the other four in a square around it.
Kumara, often added as a sixth Deity, is generally situated behind the
Ishta Devata. Philosophically, all are seen by Smartas as equal
reflections of the one Saguna Brahman, rather than as distinct beings.
This arrangement is also represented in Smarta temples, with one in a
central sanctum, and the others installed in smaller shrines. Each God
may be worshiped in any of His/Her traditional aspects or incarnations,
allowing for much variety (e.g., Shakti as Lakshmi, Vishnu as Rama, and
Siva as Bhairava). With the addition of the sixth Deity, Kumara, the
system is known as shanmata, "six-fold path." This system has laid the
foundation for the modern secular or neo-Indian religion, in which
Hindus freely add Jesus, mother Mary, Mohammed, Buddha or any other holy
personage to their altars. This modern approach has no basis in
traditional scripture of any kind. See: Ishta Devata, neo-Indian
religion, shanmata sthapanacharya, Smartism.

**pandit (pandita):** (Sanskrit) "Learned one." Hindu religious scholar
or theologian, a man well versed in philosophy, liturgy, religious law
and sacred science.

**panentheism:** "All-in-God doctrine." The view that the universe is
part of the being of God, as distinguished from pantheism ("all-is-God
doctrine"), which identifies God with the total reality. In contrast,
panentheism holds that God pervades the world, but is also beyond it. He
is immanent and transcendent, relative and Absolute. This embracing of
opposites is called dipolar. For the panentheist, God is in all, and all
is in God. Panentheism is the technical term for monistic theism. See:
Advaita Ishvaravada, dvaita-advaita, monistic theism, pantheism.

**pantheism:** "All-is-God doctrine." A term applied to a variety of
philosophical position in which God and the world are identical. To the
pantheist, God is not a Personal Lord, nor a transcendent or formless
Being, but is the totality of all existence, including universal laws,
movement, matter, etc. See: monistic theism, panentheism.

**papa:** (Sanskrit) "Wickedness; sin, crime." 1) Bad or evil. 2)
Wrongful action. 3) Demerit earned through wrongdoing. Papa includes all
forms of wrongdoing, from the simplest infraction to the most heinous
crime, such as premeditated murder. Each act of papa carries its karmic
consequence, karmaphala, "fruit of action," for which scriptures
delineate specific penance for expiation. Those who have awakened
psychic sight can clearly see papa in the inner subconscious aura as a
colorful, sticky, astral substance. Papa is seen as dark unrelated
colors, whereas its counterpart, punya, is seen as pastels. The color
arrangements are not unlike modern art murals. Papa colors can produce
disease, depression, loneliness and such, but can be dissolved through
penance (prayashchitta), austerity (tapas) and good deeds (sukritya).

There are specific consequences, karmaphala, "fruit of action," that
result from each type of transgression of dharma. For example, a man who
steals from his neighbors creates a cosmic debt which may be repaid
later by having his own possessions taken away. There are also specific
penances, prayashchitta, that can be performed for atonement and the
accrual of punya (merit) to balance out the papa, the negative karma of
the wrongful act. Such disciplines are provided in the various Dharma
Shastras and prescribed by knowing preceptors, panditas, shastris,
swamis, yogis and village elders according to the varna and education of
the individual.

For example, the Laws of Manu give several types of penance for the
crime of murder, including 1) making a forest hut and subsisting there
on alms for twelve years and using a human skull as one's emblem; or 2)
walking 100 yojanas (900 miles), while reciting the Vedas, eating little
and remaining continent. A contemporary example: if a man fells a large
healthy tree, he may atone by planting ten trees and ensuring that at
least one grows to replace it.

The degree of papa accrued from an action depends on various factors,
including the karma, dharma and spiritual advancement of the individual,
the intent or motivation, as well as the time and place of the action
(for example, unvirtuous deeds carry great demerit when performed in
holy places). Papa is the opposite of punya (merit, virtue). See: evil,
karma, penance, punya, sin.

**papa-duhkha:** (Sanskrit) "Sin and suffering." See: karma, papa, sin.

**papman:** (Sanskrit) "Evil; sin." See: evil, papa, Satan, sin.

**para:** (Sanskrit) "Supreme; beyond." A term referring to the highest
dimension of whatever it precedes--as in Parasiva or Parabrahman.
(Sometimes para, as in Parashakti.)

**parable:** A short, simple story illustrating a moral or religious
principle.

**Parabrahman:** (Sanskrit) "Supreme (or transcendent) God." A synonym
for Nirguna Brahman, Absolute Reality, beyond time, form and space. Same
as Parasiva. See: Brahman, Parasiva.

**paradox:** "Side-by-side opinion or thought." An apparent
contradiction according to conventional logic and reason.

**Parakhya Agama:** (Sanskrit) A subsidiary Saiva Agamic text (Upagama).

**parama:** (Sanskrit) "Highest; supreme." See: para.

**paramaguru:** (Sanskrit) "Senior preceptor." The guru of a disciple's
guru.

**paramahamsa:** (Sanskrit) "Supreme swan." From hamsa, meaning swan or,
more precisely, the high-flying Indian goose, Anser Indicus. A class of
liberated renunciates. See: hamsa.

**Paramatman:** (Sanskrit) "Supreme Self," or "transcendent soul."
Parasiva, Absolute Reality, the one transcendent Self of every soul.
Contrasted with atman, which includes all three aspects of the soul:
Parasiva, Parashakti and anandamaya kosha. See: atman, kosha, soul.

**Parameshvara:** (Sanskrit) "Supreme Lord or Ruler." God Siva in the
third perfection as Supreme Mahadeva, Siva-Shakti, mother of the
universe. In this perfection as Personal, father-mother God, Siva is a
person--who has a body, with head, arms and legs, etc.--who acts, wills,
blesses, gives darshana, guides, creates, preserves, reabsorbs, obscures
and enlightens. In Truth, it is Siva-Shakti who does all. The term
Primal Soul, Paramapurusha, designates Parameshvara as the original,
uncreated soul, the creator of all other souls. Parameshvara has many
other names and epithets, including those denoting the five divine
actions--Sadasiva, the revealer; Maheshvara, the obscurer; Brahma, the
creator; Vishnu the preserver; and Rudra the destroyer. See: Nataraja,
Sadasiva.

**parampara:** (Sanskrit) "Uninterrupted succession." A lineage. See:
guru parampara.

**parartha puja:** (Sanskrit) "Public liturgy and worship." See: puja.

**Parashakti:** (Sanskrit) "Supreme power; primal energy." God Siva's
second perfection, which is impersonal, immanent, and with form--the
all-pervasive, Pure Consciousness and Primal Substance of all that
exists. There are many other descriptive names for
Parashakti--Satchidananda ("existence-consciousness-bliss"), light,
silence, divine mind, superconsciousness and more. Parashakti can be
experienced by the diligent yogi or meditator as a merging in, or
identification with, the underlying oneness flowing through all form.
The experience is called savikalpa samadhi. See: raja yoga, Shakti,
Satchidananda, tattva.

**Parasamvid:** (Sanskrit) In Siddha Siddhanta the highest,
transcendental state of Siva. A synonym of Parasiva.

**Parasiva:** (Sanskrit) "Transcendent Siva." The Self God, Siva in His
first perfection, Absolute Reality. God Siva as That which is beyond the
grasp of consciousness, transcends time, form and space and defies
description. To merge with Him in mystic union is the goal of all
incarnated souls, the reason for their living on this planet, and the
deepest meaning of their experiences. Attainment of this is called Self
Realization or nirvikalpa samadhi. See: samadhi, Siva.

**Parvati:** (Sanskrit) "Mountain's daughter." One of many names for the
Universal Mother. Prayers are offered to Her for strength, health and
eradication of impurities. Mythologically, Parvati is wedded to Siva.
See: Goddess, Shakti.

**pasha** : (Sanskrit) "Tether; noose." The whole of existence, manifest
and unmanifest. That which binds or limits the soul and keeps it (for a
time) from manifesting its full potential. Pasha refers to the soul's
three-fold bondage of anava, karma and maya. See: liberation, mala,
Pati-pashu-pasha.

**pashu:** (Sanskrit) "Cow, cattle, kine; fettered individual." Refers
to animals or beasts, including man. In philosophy, the soul. Siva as
lord of creatures is called Pashupati. See: pasha, Pati-pashu-pasha.

**pashupalaka:** (Sanskrit) "Herdsman." A person who protects, nourishes
and guards. A name for a Hindu chaplain or missionary.

**Pashupata Saivism:** (Sanskrit) Monistic and theistic, this school of
Saivism reveres Siva as Supreme Cause and Personal Ruler of soul and
world, denoted in His form as Pashupati, "Lord of souls." This school
centers around the ascetic path, emphasizing sadhana, detachment from
the world and the quest for "internal kundalini grace." The Karavana
Mahatmya recounts the birth of Lakulisha (ca 200 bce), a principal
Pashupata guru, and refers to the temple of Somanatha as one of the most
important Pashupata centers. Lakulisha propounded a Saiva monism, though
indications are that Pashupata philosophy was previously dualistic, with
Siva as efficient cause of the universe but not material cause. It is
thought to be the source of various ascetic streams, including the
Kapalikas and the Kalamukhas. This school is represented today in the
broad sadhu tradition, and numerous Pashupata sites of worship are
scattered across India. See: Saivism.

**Pashupata Sutra(s):** (Sanskrit) The recently rediscovered (1930)
central scripture of the Pashupata school of Saivism, attributed to
Lakulisha. It covers asceticism at great length, and the five subjects
of Pashupata theology: effect, cause, meditation, behavior and
dissolution of sorrow. It urges the ascetic to go unrecognized and even
invite abuse. See: Pashupata Saivism.

**Pashupati:** (Sanskrit) "Herdsman; lord of animals." An ancient name
for Siva, first appearing in the Atharva Veda. This form of Siva, seated
in yogic pose, was found on a seal from the 6,000-year-old Indus Valley
civilization. See: Pashupata Saivism, Saivism.

**Pashupatinatha mandira:** (Sanskrit) Foremost temple of Nepal, linked
to the ancient Pashupata sect of Saivism.

**patala:** (Sanskrit) "Fallen or sinful region." The seventh chakra
below the muladhara, centered in the soles of the feet. Corresponds to
the seventh and lowest astral netherworld beneath the earth's surface,
called Kakola ("black poison") or Patala. This is the realm in which
misguided souls indulge in destruction for the sake of destruction, of
torture, and of murder for the sake of murder. Patala also names the
netherworld in general, and is a synonym for Naraka. See: chakra, loka,
Naraka.

**Patanjali:** (Sanskrit) "Possessed of reverence." A Saivite Natha
siddha (ca 200 bce) who codified the ancient yoga philosophy which
outlines the path to enlightenment through purification, control and
transcendence of the mind. One of the six classical philosophical
systems (darshanas) of Hinduism, known as Yoga Darshana. His great work,
the Yoga Sutras, comprises 200 aphorisms delineating ashtanga
(eight-limbed), raja (kingly) or siddha (perfection) yoga. Still today
it is the foremost text on meditative yoga. See: Kailasa Parampara, raja
yoga, shad darshana, yoga.

**path:** Marga or pantha. A trail, road or way. In Hinduism there are
various ways that the term path is used.**--path of
enlightenment/salvation/moksha:** The way to the ultimate goals of Self
Realization and liberation.**--universal path:** The spiritual path
conceived as being followed by all of existence, marching on its way to
Godhood.**--path of dharma:** Following principles of good conduct and
virtue.**--the two paths:** The way of the monk and that of the
householder, a choice to be made by each Hindu young
man.**--peerless/highest path:** The spiritual path (or the path of
renunciation) as the noblest of human undertakings.**--the straight
path:** The way that goes directly to the goal, without distraction or
karmic detour.**--on the path:** someone who is seriously studying,
striving and performing sadhana to perfect the inner and outer
nature.**--our right path in life:** The best way for us personally to
proceed; personal dharma, svadharma. --**"Truth is one, paths are
many:"** Hinduism's affirmation for tolerance. It accepts that there are
various ways to proceed toward the ultimate goal. See: dharma, pada.

**pathaka:** (Sanskrit) "Reader, reciter." An inspired reader of
scripture and sacred literature.

**Pati:** (Sanskrit) "Master; lord; owner." A name for God Siva
indicating His commanding relationship with souls as caring ruler and
helpful guide. In Saiva Siddhanta the term is part of the analogy of
cowherd (pati), cows (pashu, souls) and the tether (pasha--anava, karma
and maya) by which cows are tied. See: Pati-pashu-pasha, Siva.

**Pati-pashu-pasha:** (Sanskrit) Literally: "master, cow and tether."
These are the three primary elements (padartha, or tattvatrayi) of Saiva
Siddhanta philosophy: God, soul and world--Divinity, man and
cosmos--seen as a mystically and intricately interrelated unity. Pati is
God, envisioned as a cowherd. Pashu is the soul, envisioned as a cow.
Pasha is the all-important force or fetter by which God brings souls
along the path to Truth. The various schools of Hinduism define the
rapport among the three in varying ways. For pluralistic Saiva
Siddhantins they are three beginningless verities, self-existent,
eternal entities. For monistic Saiva Siddhantins, pashu and pasha are
the emanational creation of Pati, Lord Siva, and He alone is eternal
reality. See: pasha, Saiva Siddhanta, soul.

**Paushkara Agama:** (Sanskrit) Subsidiary text (Upagama) of the Matanga
Parameshvara Saiva Agama, containing 977 verses divided into 90
chapters. A mostly philosophic treatise dealing with God, soul and world
and the instruments of knowledge.

**penance:** Prayashchitta. Atonement, expiation. An act of devotion
(bhakti), austerity (tapas) or discipline (sukritya) undertaken to
soften or nullify the anticipated reaction to a past action. Penance is
uncomfortable karma inflicted upon oneself to mitigate one's karmic
burden caused by wrongful actions (kukarma). It includes such acts as
prostrating 108 times, fasting, self-denial, or carrying kavadi (public
penance), as well as more extreme austerities, or tapas. Penance is
often suggested by spiritual leaders and elders. Penitence or
repentance, suffering regret for misdeeds, is called anutapa, meaning
"to heat." See: evil, kavadi, papa, prayashchitta, sin, tapas.

**pendant:** An ornament or piece of jewelry attached to a necklace.
See: wedding pendant.

**perfections:** Describes a quality, nature or dimension that is
perfect. God Siva's three perfections are Parasiva, Parashakti and
Parameshvara. Though spoken of as three-fold for the sake of
understanding, God Siva ever remains a one transcendent-immanent Being.
See: Siva.

**Periyapuranam:** (Tamil) (Sanskrit) Twelfth book of the Tirumurai.
Story of the 63 Saiva Nayanar saints of Tamil Nadu, written by Sekkilar
(ca 1140). See: Tirumurai.

**personal dharma:** Svadharma. An individual's unique path in life in
conformance with divine law. See: dharma.

**Personal God:** See: Ishta Devata, Parameshvara.

**perspective:** Point of view in understanding or evaluation.

**pilgrimage:** Tirthayatra. Journeying to a holy temple, near or far,
performed by all Hindus at least once each year. See: tirthayatra.

**pinda:** (Sanskrit) "Roundish mass; body; part of the whole,
individual; microcosm." In worship rites, small balls of rice set aside
daily in remembrance of ancestors. Philosophically, and emphasized in
Siddha Siddhanta, the human body as a replica of the macrocosm,
mahasakara pinda, also called Brahmanda (cosmic egg), or simply anda
(egg). Within the individual body of man is reflected and contained the
entire cosmos. Each chakra represents a world or plane of consciousness
with the highest locus in the head and the lowest in the feet.
"Microcosm-macrocosm" is embodied in the terms pinda-anda. Siddha
Siddhanta Paddhati lists six pindas, from the garbhapinda, "womb-born
body," to parapinda, "transcendental body." See: Brahmanda,
microcosm-macrocosm.

**pingala:** (Sanskrit) "Tawny channel." The masculine psychic current
flowing along the spine. See: kundalini, nadi, raja yoga.

**pir:** "Holy father." Muslim title for a religious leader; applied to
leaders of a few Gorakshanatha monasteries.

**pitha:** (Sanskrit) "Seat; pedestal." 1) The base or pedestal of the
Sivalinga, or of any Deity idol. 2) A religious seat, such as the throne
of the abbot of a monastery. 3) An aadheenam, ashrama or matha
established around such a seat of spiritual authority. See: Sivalinga.

**Pitriloka:** (Sanskrit) "World of ancestors." The upper region of
Bhuvarloka. See: loka.

**pitta:** (Sanskrit) "Bile; fire." One of the three bodily humors,
called doshas, pitta is known as the fire humor. It is the ayurvedic
principle of bodily heat-energy. Pitta dosha governs nutritional
absorption, body temperature and intelligence. See: ayurveda, dosha.

**plague:** To distress, afflict, trouble or torment.

**plane:** A stage or level of existence; e.g., the causal plane
(Sivaloka). See: loka.

**Pleiades:** A cluster of stars in the Taurus constellation, six of
which are now visible from Earth. This group of stars is known in
Sanskrit as Krittika, an important nakshatra for Lord Karttikeya and
believed to be this Deity's place of origin before He came to the star
system of Earth. See: Karttikeya.

**pliant:** Flexible, adaptable, not rigid.

**Plotinus:** Egyptian-born philosopher (205270), one of the Western
world's greatest known mystics, who extended and revived the work of the
Greek philosopher Plato in the Roman Empire. His philosophy, known as
Neo-Platonism, posits concentric levels of reality, not unlike the Hindu
cosmology of lokas, with a central source of sublime existence and
values and an outer sheath of physical matter. Man, he said, is a
microcosm of this system, capable of attaining the sublime inner state
through enstasy. He practiced and taught ahimsa, vegetarianism, karma,
reincarnation and belief in Supreme Being as both immanent and
transcendent. His writings, in six volumes, are called the Ennead. He
was apparently familiar with Hindu wisdom through reading Life of
Apollonius, a biography which narrated a young Greek renunciate's
travels through India.

**pluralism (pluralistic):** Doctrine that holds existence to be
composed of three or more distinct and irreducible components, such as
God, souls and world. See: dvaita-advaita.

**pluralistic realism:** A term for pluralism used by various schools
including Meykandar Saiva Siddhanta, emphasizing that the components of
existence are absolutely real in themselves and not creations of
consciousness or God.

**polygamy:** Practice of having more than one spouse.

**polytheism:** Belief in or worship of many Gods. See: monotheism.

**pomp:** A dignified or brilliant display. Splendor and pageantry.

**pontifical:** Having to do with pontiffs, or high priests. Having all
the dignity, respect and influence of a spiritual leader endowed with
great honor and authority. See: ordination, Shankaracharya pitha.

**potent:** Having power, authority. Effective, able.

**potentialities:** A state of latency, something that has power but is
not developed or manifest, such as a talent yet to be matured.

**pradakshina:** (Sanskrit) "Moving rightward." Worshipful
circumambulation, walking clockwise around the temple sanctum or other
holy place, with the intention of shifting the mind from worldly
concerns to awareness of the Divine. Clockwise has esoteric significance
in that the chakras of muladhara and above spin clockwise, while those
below spin counterclockwise, taking one down into the lower regions of
selfishness, greed, conflict and turmoil.

**pradosha:** (Sanskrit) The auspicious 3-hour period, 1H hours before
and after sunset. Pradosha especially refers to this period on the 13th
(trayodashi) tithi of each fortnight, an optimum time of the month for
meditation. Its observance, prepared for by fasting, is called pradosha
vrata. See: fast, tithi.

**pragmatic:** Practical. Concerned with application, not theory or
speculation.

**prakriti:** (Sanskrit) "Primary matter; nature." In the 25-tattva
Sankhya system--which concerns itself only with the tangible spectrum of
creation--prakriti, or pradhana, is one of two supreme beginningless
realities: matter and spirit, prakriti and purusha, the female and male
principles. Prakriti is the manifesting aspect, as contrasted with the
quiescent unmanifest--purusha, which is pure consciousness. In Shaktism,
prakriti, the active principle, is personified as Devi, the Goddess, and
is synonymous with Maya. Prakriti is thus often seen, and depicted so in
the Puranas, as the Divine Mother, whose love and care embrace and
comfort all beings. In Saivite cosmology, prakriti is the 24th of 36
tattvas, the potentiality of the physical cosmos, the gross energy from
which all lower tattvas are formed. Its three qualities are sattva,
rajas and tamas. See: odic, purusha, tattva.

**pralaya:** (Sanskrit) "Dissolution, reabsorption; destruction; death."
A synonym for samhara, one of the five functions of Siva. Also names the
partial destruction or reabsorption of the cosmos at the end of each eon
or kalpa. There are three kinds of periods of dissolution: 1) laya, at
the end of a mahayuga, when the physical world is destroyed; 2) pralaya,
at the end of a kalpa, when both the physical and subtle worlds are
destroyed; and 3) mahapralaya at the end of a mahakalpa, when all three
worlds (physical, subtle and causal) are absorbed into Siva. See: cosmic
cycle, mahapralaya.

**pramukha:** (Sanskrit) "Turning the face toward." Head; foremost."
Leader, guide; such as the family head, kutumba pramukha. See: joint
family.

**prana:** (Sanskrit) Vital energy or life principle. Literally, "vital
air," from the root pran, "to breathe." Prana in the human body moves in
the pranamaya kosha as five primary life currents known as vayus, "vital
airs or winds." These are prana (outgoing breath), apana (incoming
breath), vyana (retained breath), udana (ascending breath) and samana
(equalizing breath). Each governs crucial bodily functions, and all
bodily energies are modifications of these. Usually prana refers to the
life principle, but sometimes denotes energy, power or the animating
force of the cosmos. See: kosha, tattva.

**Pranagnihotra Upanishad:** (Sanskrit) A minor Upanishad which explains
how to transform the external ritual of the fire sacrifice into
pranagnihotra, "the sacrifice offered in the prana fire" of one's own
being.

**Pranalinga:** (Sanskrit) "Living mark." Personally experiencing God in
the Sivalinga. A term used especially in Vira Saivism. See: Sivalinga,
Vira Saivism.

**pranamaya kosha:** (Sanskrit) "Life-energy sheath." See: kosha, prana.

**pranama:** (Sanskrit) "Obeisance; bowing down." Reverent salutation in
which the head or body is bowed.**--ashtanga pranama:** "Eight-limbed
obeisance." The full prostration for men, in which the hands, chest,
forehead, knees and feet touch the ground. (Same as shashtanga
pranama.)**--panchanga pranama:** "Five-limbed obeisance." The woman's
form of prostration, in which the hands, head and legs touch the ground
(with the ankles crossed, right over the left). A more exacting term for
prostration is pranipata, "falling down in obeisance." See: bhakti,
namaskara, prapatti.

**pranatyaga:** (Sanskrit) "Abandoning life force." A term for suicide
but without the connotation of violence expressed in the more common
terms svadehaghata, "murdering one's body," and atmaghata,
"self-murder." See: death, suicide.

**Pranava:** (Sanskrit) "Humming." The mantra Aum, denoting God as the
Primal Sound. It can be heard as the sound of one's own nerve system,
like the sound of an electrical transformer or a swarm of bees. The
meditator is taught to inwardly transform this sound into the inner
light which lights the thoughts, and bask in this blissful
consciousness. Pranava is also known as the sound of the nadanadi
shakti. See: Aum, Siva Consciousness.

**pranayama:** (Sanskrit) "Breath control." See: raja yoga.

**pranic body:** The subtle, life-giving sheath called pranamaya kosha.
See: kosha.

**prapatti:** (Sanskrit) "Throwing oneself down." Bhakti--total,
unconditional submission to God, often coupled with the attitude of
personal helplessness, self-effacement and resignation. A term
especially used in Vaishnavism to name a concept extremely central to
virtually all Hindu schools. In Saiva Siddhanta, bhakti is all important
in the development of the soul and its release into spiritual maturity.
The doctrine is perhaps best expressed in the teachings of the four
Samayacharya saints, who all shared a profound and mystical love of Siva
marked by 1) deep humility and self-effacement, admission of sin and
weakness; 2) total surrender in God as the only true refuge and 3) a
relationship of lover and beloved known as bridal mysticism, in which
the devotee is the bride and Siva the bridegroom. The practice of yoga,
too, is an expression of love of God in Saiva Siddhanta, and it is only
with God's grace that success is achieved. Rishi Tirumular states:
"Unless your heart melts in the sweet ecstasy of love--my Lord, my
treasure-trove, you can never possess" (Tirumantiram 272). It is in this
concept of the need for self-effacement and total surrender, prapatti,
that the members of all sects merge in oneness, at the fulfillment of
their individual paths. Similarly, they all meet in unity at the
beginning of the path with the worship of Lord Ganesha. See: bhakti,
grace, pada, surrender.

**prarabdha karma:** (Sanskrit) "Action that has been unleashed or
aroused." See: karma.

**prasada:** (Sanskrit) "Clarity, brightness; grace." 1) The virtue of
serenity and graciousness. 2) Food offered to the Deity or the guru, or
the blessed remnants of such food. 3) Any propitiatory offering. See:
sacrament, Vira Saivism.

**Prashna Upanishad:** (Sanskrit) Belongs to the Atharva Veda and is
divided into six sections addressing six questions asked of sage
Pippalada by his disciples, regarding life, Realization and the mantra
Aum.

**prashnottaram:** (Sanskrit) "Question-answer (prashna-uttaram)." A
term used in Dancing with Siva for catechism, an interrogatory summation
of religious doctrine.

**Pratyabhijna:** (Sanskrit) "Recognition or recollection," from
"knowledge" (jnana) which "faces" (abhi) the knower and toward which he
eventually "turns" (prati). A concept of Kashmir Saivism which denotes
the devotee's recognition, as a result of the guru's grace, of the Truth
that ever was--that Siva is indeed everywhere, and the soul is already
united with Him.

**Pratyabhijna Darshana:** (Sanskrit) The philosophical name for Kashmir
Saivism.

**Pratyabhijna Sutra(s):** (Sanskrit) A foundational Kashmir Saiva
scripture, 190 sutras.

**pratyahara:** (Sanskrit) "Withdrawal." The drawing in of forces. In
yoga, the withdrawal from external consciousness. (Also a synonym for
pralaya.) See: raja yoga, mahapralaya, meditation.

**prayashchitta:** (Sanskrit) "Predominant thought or aim." Penance.
Acts of atonement. See: penance, papa, punya.

**prayojaka:** (Sanskrit) "Facilitator; employer; manager." A person who
instigates, promotes. Also a name for a coordinator of religious
outreach activities and literature distribution.

**prayopavesha:** (Sanskrit) "Resolving to die through fasting."
Self-willed death by fasting. See: death, suicide.

**precede:** To come before in time, importance, influence or rank.

**precinct:** An enclosed or delimited area. Also the grounds
surrounding a religious edifice.

**precursor:** Forerunner. A person or thing that goes before.

**Premaiva Sivamaya, Satyam eva Parasivah:** (Sanskrit) "God Siva is
immanent love and transcendent Reality." A Saivite Hindu affirmation of
faith. See: affirmation.

**prenatal:** Existing or occurring before physical birth, or relating
to the time before birth. See: samskaras of birth.

**preservation:** The act of maintaining or protecting. One of the five
cosmic powers. See: Nataraja.

**preside:** To be chairman at a gathering, in a position of authority
within a group. To have charge of; to dominate.

**Pretaloka:** (Sanskrit) "World of the departed." The realm of the
earth-bound souls. This lower region of Bhuvarloka is an astral
duplicate of the physical world. See: loka.

**prevail:** To be strong and victorious; overcome all obstacles. To
exist widely.

**Primal Soul:** The uncreated, original, perfect soul--Siva
Parameshvara--who emanates from Himself the inner and outer universes
and an infinite plurality of individual souls whose essence is identical
with His essence. God in His personal aspect as Lord and Creator,
depicted in many forms: Nataraja by Saivites, Vishnu by Vaishnavites,
Devi by Shaktas. See: Nataraja, Parameshvara.

**Primal Sound:** In Hinduism, sound is the first manifestation, even
before light, in the creative scheme of things. The Primal Sound is also
known as Pranava, the sound of the mula mantra, "Aum." See: sound.

**Primal Substance:** The fundamental energy and rarified form from
which the manifest world in its infinite diversity is derived. See:
Parashakti.

**principle:** An essential truth, law or rule upon which others are
based.

**pristine:** Pure, unspoiled; original condition.

**procreation:** The process of begetting offspring.

**procurer:** Provider.

**progeny:** Offspring, children; descendants.

**prohibit (prohibition):** To forbid or prevent by authority.

**prominent:** Conspicuous, noticeable at once. Widely known.

**promiscuity:** The state or character of engaging in sex
indiscriminantly or with many persons.

**prone:** Tending or inclined toward.

**pronged:** Having one or several pointed ends.

**propel:** To push, impel, or drive forward.

**prophecy:** Divination. Act or practice of predicting the future.

**propound:** To set forth. To put forward for consideration.

**protocol:** Customs of proper etiquette and ceremony, especially in
relation to religious or political dignitaries.

**protrude:** To jut out or project.

**province:** Sphere, area or division.

**prow:** The forward part of a ship; any similar projecting or leading
part.

**prudent:** Careful. Showing wisdom and good judgment in practical
matters.

**psalm:** A sacred hymn, song or poem.

**psychic:** "Of the psyche or soul." Sensitive to spiritual processes
and energies. Inwardly or intuitively aware of nonphysical realities;
able to use powers such as clairvoyance, clairaudience and precognition.
Nonphysical, subtle; pertaining to the deeper aspects of man. See:
mysticism, odic.

**puja:** (Sanskrit) "Worship, adoration." An Agamic rite of worship
performed in the home, temple or shrine, to the murti, sri paduka, or
other consecrated object, or to a person, such as the satguru. Its inner
purpose is to purify the atmosphere around the object worshiped,
establish a connection with the inner worlds and invoke the presence of
God, Gods or one's guru. During puja, the officiant (pujari) recites
various chants praising the Divine and beseeching divine blessings,
while making offerings in accordance with established traditions. Puja,
the worship of a murti through water, lights and flowers in temples and
shrines, is the Agamic counterpart of the Vedic yajna rite, in which
offerings are conveyed through the sacred homa fire. These are the two
great streams of adoration and communion in Hinduism. Central steps of
puja include: 1) achamana, water sipping for purification; 2) Ganapati
prarthana, prayers to Ganesha; 3) sankalpa, declaration of intent; 4)
ghanta, ringing bell, inviting devas and dismissing asuras; 5) avahana,
inviting the Deity ; 6) mantras and dhyana, meditating on the Deity; 7)
svagata, welcoming; 8) namaskara, obeisance; 9) arghyam, water
offerings; 10) pradakshina, circumambulation; 11) abhisheka, bathing the
murti; 12) dhupa, incense-offering; 13) dipa, offering lights; 14)
naivedya, offering food; 15)archana, chanting holy names; 16) arati,
final offering of lights; 17) prarthana, personal requests; 18)
visarjana, dismissal-farewell. Also central are pranayama (breath
control), guru vandana (adoration of the preceptor), nyasa (empowerment
through touching) and mudra (mystic gestures). Puja offerings also
include pushpa (flowers), arghya (water), tambula (betel leaf) and
chandana (sandalpaste). --a**tmartha puja:** Karana Agama, v. 2, states:
Atmartha cha parartha cha puja dvividhamuchyate, "Worship is two-fold:
for the benefit of oneself and for the benefit of others." Atmartha puja
is done for oneself and immediate family, usually at home in a private
shrine.**--parartha puja:** "Puja for others." Parartha puja is public
puja, performed by authorized or ordained priests in a public shrine or
temple. See: pujari, yajna.

**pujari:** (Sanskrit) "Worshiper." A general term for Hindu temple
priests, as well as anyone performing puja. Pujari (sometimes pujari) is
the Hindi form of the Sanskrit pujaka; pusari in Tamil. Archaka is
another term for the officiant priest in the southern tradition.
Purohita is a Smarta brahmin priest who specializes in domestic rites.
See: puja.

**pulsate:** To beat or throb in rhythm, as the heart.

**pundit:** See: pundit.

**punarjanma:** (Sanskrit) "Reincarnation." From punah, "again and
again," and janma, "taking birth." See: reincarnation.

**Punjab:** (Sanskrit) The area of ancient India between the Indus and
Sutlej, below Kashmir. It is now divided between India and Pakistan. It
was a center of Saivism until Muslim invasions. The modern Indian state
is 19,445 square miles in area with a population of 18 million.

**punsavana:** (Sanskrit) "Male rite; bringing forth a male."
Traditional sacrament performed during early pregnancy in prayer of a
son. See: samskaras of birth.

**punya:** (Sanskrit) "Holy; virtuous; auspicious." 1) Good or
righteous. 2) Meritorious action. 3) Merit earned through right thought,
word and action. Punya includes all forms of doing good, from the
simplest helpful deed to a lifetime of conscientious beneficence. Each
act of punya carries its karmic consequence, karmaphala, "fruit of
action"--the positive reward of actions, words and deeds that are in
keeping with dharma. Awakened psychics who have developed clairvoyant
sight can clearly see the punya accrued in the inner subconscious aura
as a colorful, free-flowing, astral, light-energy, pranic substance.
Punya is seen as light-hued, pastel colors, whereas its counterpart,
papa, is seen as shades of darker colors which are usually static and
immovable. These arrangements of the papa shades and punya hues are not
unlike the free-expression paintings found in modern art. Punya colors
produce inner contentment, deep joy, the feeling of security and
fearlessness. Papa can be dissolved and punya created through penance
(prayashchitta), austerity (tapas) and good deeds (sukritya). Punya is
earned through virtuous living, following the multi-faceted laws of
dharma. Punya depends on purity of acts according to various factors
including 1) the karma and evolution of the individual, 2) degree of
sacrifice and unselfish motivation and 3) time and place. For example,
virtuous deeds, sadhana, tapas and penance have greater merit when
performed in holy places and at auspicious times. The Tirukural (105)
states that "Help rendered another cannot be measured by the extent of
the assistance given. Its true measure is the worth of the recipient."
In other words, a small act done for a great and worthy soul carries
more punya than even a large act performed for a lesser person.
(Opposite of papa.) See: aura, karma, papa, penance.

**Purana:** (Sanskrit) "Ancient (lore)." Hindu folk narratives
containing ethical and cosmological teachings relative to Gods, man and
the world. They revolve around five subjects: primary creation,
secondary creation, genealogy, cycles of time and history. There are 18
major Puranas which are designated as either Saivite, Vaishnavite or
Shakta. See: folk narratives, mythology.

**Pure Consciousness:** See: Parashakti, Satchidananda, tattva.

**purgatory:** A state or place of temporary punishment or expiation. A
hellish condition that is not eternal. Purgatory is actually more
fitting than the term hell as an equivalent for the Sanskrit Naraka.
See: hell, loka, Naraka.

**puritan:** A person who is overly strict or rigid regarding morals and
religion.

**purity-impurity: Sh** aucha-ashaucha. Purity and its opposite,
pollution, are a fundamental part of Hindu culture. While they imply a
strong sense of physical cleanliness, their more important meanings
extend to social, ceremonial, mental, emotional, psychic and spiritual
contamination. Freedom from all forms of contamination is a key to Hindu
spirituality, and is one of the yamas. Physical purity requires a clean
and well-ordered environment, yogic purging of the internal organs and
frequent cleansing with water. Mental purity derives from meditation,
right living and right thinking. Emotional purity depends on control of
the mind, clearing the subconscious and keeping good company. Spiritual
purity is achieved through following the yamas and niyamas, study of the
Vedas and other scriptures, pilgrimage, meditation, japa, tapas and
ahimsa. Ritual purity requires the observance of certain prayashchittas,
or penances, for defilement derived from foreign travel, contact with
base people or places, conversion to other faiths, contact with bodily
wastes, attending a funeral, etc. Purity is of three forms--purity in
mind, speech and body, or thought, word and deed. Purity is the pristine
and natural state of the soul. Impurity, or pollution, is the obscuring
of this state by adulterating experience and beclouding conceptions. In
daily life, the Hindu strives to protect this innate purity by wise
living, following the codes of dharma. This includes harnessing the
sexual energies, associating with other virtuous Hindu devotees, never
using harsh, angered or indecent language, and keeping a clean and
healthy physical body. See: dharma, papa, penance, punya, yama-niyama.

**purnima:** (Sanskrit) "Full." Full moon. See: Guru Purnima.

**purohita:** (Sanskrit) "Front-most; leader; family priest."A Smarta
brahmin priest who specializes in home ceremonies. See: Smarta, pujari.

**pursue (pursuit):** To go with determination after a goal. To follow.

**purusha:** (Sanskrit) "The spirit that dwells in the body/in the
universe." Person; spirit; man. Metaphysically, the soul, neither male
nor female. Also used in Yoga and Sankhya for the transcendent Self. A
synonym for atman. Purusha can also refer to the Supreme Being or Soul,
as it sometimes does in the Upanishads. In the Rig Veda hymn "Purusha
Sukta," Purusha is the cosmic man, having a thousand heads, a thousand
eyes, a thousand feet and encompassing the earth, spreading in all
directions into animate and inanimate things. In the Sankhya system,
purusha is one of two supreme, beginningless realities: spirit and
matter, purusha and prakriti, the male and female principles. It is the
quiescent unmanifest, pure consciousness, contrasted with Prakriti, the
manifesting, primal nature from which the cosmos unfolds. In Saiva
cosmology, purusha is the 25th of 36 tattvas, one level subtler than
prakriti. Beyond these lie the subtle realms of shuddha maya.
Transcending all the tattvas is Parasiva. See: atman, jiva, prakriti,
soul, tattva.

**purusha dharma:** (Sanskrit) "A man's code of duty and conduct." See:
dharma.

**purushartha:** (Sanskrit) "Human wealth or purpose." The four pursuits
in which humans may legitimately engage, also called chaturvarga,
"four-fold good"--a basic principle of Hindu ethics.**--dharma:**
"Righteous living." The fulfillment of virtue, good works, duties and
responsibilities, restraints and observances--performing one's part in
the service and upliftment of society. This includes pursuit of truth
under a guru of a particular parampara and sampradaya. Dharma is of four
primary forms. It is the steady guide for artha and kama. See:
dharma.**--artha:** "Wealth." Material welfare and abundance, money,
property, possessions. Artha is the pursuit of wealth, guided by dharma.
It includes the basic needs--food, money, clothing and shelter--and
extends to the wealth required to maintain a comfortable home, raise a
family, fulfill a successful career and perform religious duties. The
broadest concept of wealth embraces financial independence, freedom from
debt, worthy children, good friends, leisure time, faithful servants,
trustworthy employees, and the joys of giving, including tithing
(dashamamsha), feeding the poor, supporting religious mendicants,
worshiping devoutly, protecting all creatures, upholding the family and
offering hospitality to guests. Artha measures not only riches but
quality of life, providing the personal and social security needed to
pursue kama, dharma and moksha. It allows for the fulfillment of the
householder's five daily sacrifices, pancha mahayajna: to God,
ancestors, devas, creatures and men. See: yajna.**--kama:** "Pleasure,
love; enjoyment." Earthly love, aesthetic and cultural fulfillment,
pleasures of the world (including sexual), the joys of family,
intellectual satisfaction. Enjoyment of happiness, security, creativity,
usefulness and inspiration. See: Kama Sutras.**--moksha:** "Liberation."
Freedom from rebirth through the ultimate attainment, realization of the
Self God, Parasiva. The spiritual attainments and superconscious joys,
attending renunciation and yoga leading to Self Realization. Moksha
comes through the fulfillment of dharma, artha and kama (known in Tamil
as aram, porul and inbam, and explained by Tiruvalluvar in Tirukural) in
the current or past lives, so that one is no longer attached to worldly
joys or sorrows. It is the supreme goal of life, called paramartha. See:
liberation, moksha.


