R
=

**race:** Technically speaking, each of the five races of man
(Caucasoid, Congoid, Mongoloid, Australoid and Capoid) is a Homo sapiens
subspecies. A subspecies is a branch showing slight but significant
differences from another branch living in a different area. Few traits
are unique to any one race. It is the combination of several traits that
indicate racial identity. Accurate race determination can be made by
blood analysis or by measuring and comparing certain body dimensions.
Ninety-eight percent of all Hindus belong to the Caucasoid race. There
are also large numbers of Hindu Mongoloids in Nepal and Assam and some
Australoids, such as the Gond and Bhil tribes of India. North and South
Indians are among Earth's 2.5 billion Caucasoids, whose traits include
straight to wavy hair, thin lips, small to medium teeth, blue to dark
brown eyes and a high incident of A2-Rh and Gm blood genes. Skin color,
often erroneously attached to the idea of race, is now known to be
adaptation to climate: over generations, people in northern climates
have developed lighter complexions than their southern brothers.

**Radhakrishnan, Dr. S.:** (Sanskrit) (1888-1975) A President of India
(1962 to 1967), an outstanding philosopher, prolific writer, compelling
speaker and effective spokesman of Hinduism. Along with Vivekananda,
Tagore, Aurobindo and others, he helped bring about the current Hindu
revival. He made Hinduism better known and appreciated at home and
abroad, especially in the intellectual world. He was a foremost
proponent of panentheism. See: Vedanta.

**rage:** Uncontrolled anger. Fuming fit of fury. See: vitala chakra.

**Rahu:** (Sanskrit) "The seizer." In Hindu astrology, Rahu is one of
the nine important planets (graha), but is an invisible or "astral" one,
along with its counterpart, Ketu. Physically speaking, it is one of two
points in the heavens where the moon crosses the ecliptic or path of the
sun. The point where the moon crosses the ecliptic moving from south to
north is Rahu, the north node. The south node is Ketu. Rahu and Ketu are
depicted as a serpent demon who encircles the earth. Ketu is the
dragon's tail and Rahu is the head. Both are believed to cause general
consternation among people. See: jyotisha.

**rajanya:** (Sanskrit) "Ruling." A synonym for kshatriya. See: varna
dharma.

**rajas:** (Sanskrit) "Passion; activity." See: guna.

**raja yoga:** (Sanskrit) "King of yogas." Also known as ashtanga yoga,
"eight-limbed yoga." The classical yoga system of eight progressive
stages to Illumination as described in various yoga Upanishads, the
Tirumantiram and, most notably, the Yoga Sutras of Patanjali. The eight
limbs are as follows. 1)**--yama:** "Restraint." Virtuous and moral
living, which brings purity of mind, freedom from anger, jealousy and
subconscious confusion which would inhibit the process of meditation.
2) --**niyama** : (Sanskrit) "Observance." Religious practices which
cultivate the qualities of the higher nature, such as devotion,
cognition, humility and contentment--giving the refinement of nature and
control of mind needed to concentrate and ultimately plunge into
samadhi. 3) --a**sana:** "Seat or posture." A sound body is needed for
success in meditation. This is attained through hatha yoga, the postures
of which balance the energies of mind and body, promoting health and
serenity, e.g., padmasana, the "lotus pose," for meditation. The Yoga
Sutras indicate that asanas make the yogi impervious to the impact of
the pairs of opposites (dvandva), heat-cold, etc. 4) --**pranayama:**
"Mastering life force." Breath control, which quiets the chitta and
balances ida and pingala. Science of controlling prana through breathing
techniques in which lengths of inhalation, retention and exhalation are
modulated. Pranayama prepares the mind for deep meditation.
5) --**pratyahara:** "Withdrawal." The practice of withdrawing
consciousness from the physical senses first, such as not hearing noise
while meditating, then progressively receding from emotions, intellect
and eventually from individual consciousness itself in order to merge
into the Universal. 6) --**dharana:** "Concentration." Focusing the mind
on a single object or line of thought, not allowing it to wander. The
guiding of the flow of consciousness. When concentration is sustained
long and deeply enough, meditation naturally follows. 7) --**dhyana:**
"Meditation." A quiet, alert, powerfully concentrated state wherein new
knowledge and insight pour into the field of consciousness. This state
is possible once the subconscious mind has been cleared or quieted.
8) --**samadhi:** "Enstasy," which means "standing within one's self."
"Sameness, contemplation." The state of true yoga, in which the
meditator and the object of meditation are one. See: asana, samadhi,
yoga.

**Rama:** (Sanskrit) Venerated hero of the Ramayana epic, and one of the
two most popular incarnations of Vishnu, along with Krishna. His worship
is almost universal among Vaishnavas, and extensive among Smartas and
other liberal Hindus. He was a great worshiper of Siva, and a Siva
temple, called Rameshvaram, was built in his name at the southern tip of
India.

**Ramakantha I:** (Sanskrit) A great exponent of Saiva Siddhanta, ca
950. In the lineage of Aghorasiva.

**Ramakantha II:** (Sanskrit) Great exponent of Saiva Siddhanta, ca
1150. Aghorasiva's teacher.

**Ramakrishna:** (Sanskrit) (18361886) One of the great saints and
mystics of modern Hinduism, a champion and exemplar of monistic
theism--fervent devotee of Mother Kali and staunch monist who taught
oneness and the pursuit of nirvikalpa samadhi, realization of the
Absolute. He was guru to the great Swami Vivekananda (18631902), who
internationalized Hindu thought and philosophy.

**Ramanuja:** (Sanskrit) Philosopher (10171137), saint, great bhakta,
founder of one of five major Vaishnava schools, and considered the
greatest critic of advaita. In his famous Sri Bhashya on the Brahma
Sutras, he countered Shankara's absolute monism point-by-point with his
qualified monism, called Vishishtadvaita Vedanta. See: shad darshana,
Vedanta.

**Ramaraja:** (Sanskrit) (14781565). The last king of South India's
Vijayanagara empire.

**Ramayana:** (Sanskrit) "Vehicle of Rama." One of India's two grand
epics (Itihasa) along with the Mahabharata. It is Valmiki's tragic love
story of Rama and Sita, whose exemplary lives have helped set high
standards of dignity and nobility as an integral part of Hindu dharma.
Astronomical data in the story puts Rama's reign at about 2015 bce. See:
Rama.

**Ramprasad:** (Sanskrit) Great Bengali devotional saint-poet (17181775)
who wrote hymns to Shakti.

**rasatala:** (Sanskrit) "Subterranean region." The fifth chakra below
the muladhara, centered in the ankles. Corresponds to the fifth astral
netherworld beneath the earth's surface, called Rijisha ("expelled") or
Rasatala. Region of selfishness, self-centeredness and possessiveness.
Rasa means "earth, soil; moisture." See: chakra, loka, Naraka.

**rationalize:** To excuse through reason. To make plausible
explanations for.

**Raurava Agama:** (Sanskrit) Among the 28 Saiva Siddhanta Agamas, this
scripture was conveyed by Lord Siva to sage Ruru (hence the name). Its
extensive kriya pada section details the structure of the Siva temple
and its annexes.

**Ravana:** (Sanskrit) Villain of the Ramayana epic. A legendary king of
Sri Lanka, adversary of Rama, eventually defeated by Rama and his
armies.

**reabsorption (reabsorb):** Taking in again, as water is squeezed from
and then drawn back into a sponge. See: cosmic cycle, mahapralaya,
pralaya.

**reaction:** A response to an action.

**reaffirmation:** A new affirming or a declaration about a thing as
being true or still pertinent. See: affirmation.

**reality:** See: Absolute Reality, relative.

**realm:** A kingdom, region or area. See: loka.

**reap:** To cut for harvest. To gain as a result of actions or effort.

**rebellious:** Resisting authority or any form of control.

**rebound:** To bounce back.

**recluse:** A person who retreats from the world and lives in
seclusion.

**reconcile (reconciliation):** To settle or resolve, as a dispute. To
make consistent or compatible, e.g., two conflicting ideas.

**redeem:** To recover, to set free from penalty or deliver from
sin.**--redemption:** Act of redeeming. See: absolution, penance.

**reembody:** To come into a body again. To reincarnate.

**reincarnation:** "Re-entering the flesh." Punarjanma; metempsychosis.
The process wherein souls take on a physical body through the birth
process. Reincarnation is one of the fundamental principles of Hindu
spiritual insight, shared by the mystical schools of nearly all
religions, including Jainism, Sikhism, Buddhism (and even by
Christianity until it was cast out by the Nicene Council in 787). It is
against the backdrop of this principle of the soul's enjoying many lives
that other aspects of Hinduism can be understood. It is a repetitive
cycle, known as punarjanma, which originates in the subtle plane
(Antarloka), the realm in which souls live between births and return to
after death. Here they are assisted in readjusting to the "in-between"
world and eventually prepared for yet another birth. The quality and
nature of the birth depends on the merit or demerit of their past
actions (karma) and on the needs of their unique pattern of development
and experience (dharma). The mother, the father and the soul together
create a new body for the soul. At the moment of conception, the soul
connects with and is irrevocably bound to the embryo. As soon as the egg
is fertilized, the process of human life begins. It is during the
mid-term of pregnancy that the full humanness of the fetus is achieved
and the soul fully inhabits the new body, a stage which is acknowledged
when the child begins to move and kick within the mother's womb.
(Tirumantiram, 460: "There in the pregnant womb, the soul lay in
primordial quiescence [turiya] state. From that state, Maya [or
Prakriti] and Her tribe aroused it and conferred consciousness and
maya's evolutes eight--desires and the rest. Thus say scriptures holy
and true.") Finally, at birth the soul emerges into earth consciousness,
veiled of all memory of past lives and the inner worlds. The cycle of
reincarnation ends when karma has been resolved and the Self God
(Parasiva) has been realized. This condition of release is called
moksha. Then the soul continues to evolve and mature, but without the
need to return to physical existence. How many earthly births must one
have to attain the unattainable? Many thousands to be sure, hastened by
righteous living, tapas, austerities on all levels, penance and good
deeds in abundance. See: evolution of the soul, karma, moksha, nonhuman
birth, samsara, soul.

**relative:** Quality or object which is meaningful only in relation to
something else. Not absolute.**--relative reality:** Maya. That which is
ever changing and changeable. Describes the nature of manifest
existence, indicating that it is not an illusion but is also not
Absolute Reality, which is eternal and unchanging. See: Absolute
Reality, maya.

**religion:** From Latin religare, "to bind back." Any system of belief
in and worship of suprahuman beings or powers and/or of a Supreme Being
or Power. Religion is a structured vehicle for soul advancement which
often includes theology, scripture, spiritual and moral practices,
priesthood and liturgy. See: Hinduism.

**relinquish:** To give up, let go of or abandon. See: sacrifice, tyaga.

**remorse:** Deep, painful regret or guilt over a wrong one has done.
Moral anguish. See: absolution, hri, penance.

**remote:** Distant, secluded; hidden away or difficult to reach.

**renaissance:** "Rebirth or new birth." A renewal, revival or
reawakening.

**render:** To cause to be or to become.

**renowned:** Famous.

**renunciation:** See: sannyasa, tyaga, vairagya.

**Renukacharya:** (Sanskrit) A Vira Saiva philosopher and saint.

**replenish:** To fill up or cause to be full again.

**repose:** To rest peacefully.**--to repose in one's realization:** To
cease outward activity and enjoy communion with the Divine.

**repudiation:** The act of publicly rejecting a thing, habit or way of
being.

**rescind:** To cancel or revoke.

**resemble:** To look like, or have similar traits and qualities.

**resent (resentment):** A feeling of ill-will, indignation or hostility
from a sense of having been wronged.

**residue:** Remainder. That which is left over after a process.

**resplendence:** Radiance; brilliance.

**restive:** Nervous, unruly, eager to go forward; hard to control.

**restraints:** See: yama-niyama**.**

**retaliation:** Paying back an injury, returning like for like, hurt
for hurt. Getting even; vengeance.

**revealing grace:** See: anugraha shakti, grace.

**rigorous:** Very strict or severe.

**Rig Veda:** (Sanskrit) "Veda of verse (rik)." The first and oldest of
the four Veda compendia of revealed scriptures (shruti), including a
hymn collection (Samhita), priestly explanatory manuals (Brahmanas),
forest treatises (Aranyakas) elaborating on the Vedic rites, and
philosophical dialogs (Upanishads). Like the other Vedas, the Rig Veda
was brought to earth consciousness not all at once, but gradually, over
a period of perhaps several thousand years. The oldest and core portion
is the Samhita, believed to date back, in its oral form, as far as 8,000
years, and to have been written down in archaic Sanskrit some 3,000
years ago. It consists of more than 10,000 verses, averaging three or
four lines (riks), forming 1,028 hymns (suktas), organized in ten books
called mandalas. It embodies prayerful hymns of praise and invocation to
the Divinities of nature and to the One Divine. They are the spiritual
reflections of a pastoral people with a profound awe for the powers of
nature, each of which they revered as sacred and alive. The rishis who
unfolded these outpourings of adoration perceived a well-ordered cosmos
in which dharma is the way of attunement with celestial worlds, from
which all righteousness and prosperity descends. The main concern is
man's relationship with God and the world, and the invocation of the
subtle worlds into mundane existence. Prayers beseech the Gods for happy
family life, wealth, pleasure, cattle, health, protection from enemies,
strength in battle, matrimony, progeny, long life and happiness, wisdom
and realization and final liberation from rebirth. The Rig Veda Samhita,
which in length equals Homer's Iliad and Odyssey combined, is the most
important hymn collection, for it lends a large number of its hymns to
the other three Veda Samhitas (the Sama, Yajur and Atharva).
Chronologically, after the Samhitas came the Brahmanas, followed by the
Aranyakas, and finally the Upanishads, also called the Vedanta, meaning
"Veda's end." See: shruti, Vedas.

**rishi:** (Sanskrit) "Seer." A term for an enlightened being,
emphasizing psychic perception and visionary wisdom. In the Vedic age,
rishis lived in forest or mountain retreats, either alone or with
disciples. These rishis were great souls who were the inspired conveyers
of the Vedas. Seven particular rishis (the sapta-rishis) mentioned in
the Rig Veda are said to still guide mankind from the inner worlds. See:
shruti.

**rita:** (Sanskrit) "Sacred order, cosmic law; truth." See: dharma.

**rite (or ritual):** A religious ceremony. See: sacrament, sacrifice,
samskara.

**rites of passage:** Sacraments marking crucial stages of life. See:
samskara.

**ritukala:** (Sanskrit) "Fit or proper season." Time of menses. A
traditional ceremony marking a young lady's coming of age. Ritu also
carries the meaning of "fertile time." See: samskaras of adulthood.

**Rudra:** (Sanskrit) "Controller of awesome powers;" or "red, shining
one." The name of Siva as the God of dissolution, the universal force of
reabsorption. Rudra-Siva is revered both as the "terrifying one" and the
"lord of tears," for He wields and controls the terrific powers which
may cause lamentation among humans. See: Nataraja.

**rudraksha:** (Sanskrit) "Eye of Rudra;" or "red-eyed." From rud, "to
cry," and aksha, meaning "eye." Marble-sized, multi-faced, reddish-brown
seeds from the Eleocarpus ganitrus, or blue marble tree, which are
sacred to Siva and a symbol of His compassion for humanity. Garlands,
rudraksha mala, of larger seeds are worn around the neck by monks; and
nonmonastics, both men and women, often wear a single bead on a cord at
the throat. Smaller beads (usually numbering 108) are strung together
for japa (recitation). Indian legend records that God shed a tear when
looking down upon the sorrowful plight of humanity. That tear fell to
Earth and from it grew the first rudraksha tree. Thus its seeds are worn
by Hindus as a symbol of Siva's love and compassion. See: japa, mantra.

**Rudrashambhu:** (Sanskrit) Principal guru in the Amardaka order of
Saiva monastics, about 775 in Ujjain, one of Saivism's holiest cities.
The sect served as advisors to the king until Muslim domination around
1300.

**Rudrayamala Tantra:** (Sanskrit) Little known text dealing with
worship.


