S
=

**sacrament:** 1) Holy rite, especially one solemnized in a formal,
consecrated manner which is a bonding between the recipient and God,
Gods or guru. This includes rites of passage (samskara), ceremonies
sanctifying crucial events or stages of life. 2) Prasada. Sacred
substances, grace-filled gifts, blessed in sacred ceremony or by a holy
person. See: prasada, samskara.

**sacred thread:** Yajnopavita. See: upanayana.

**sacrifice:** Yajna. 1) Making offerings to a Deity as an expression of
homage and devotion. 2) Giving up something, often one's own possession,
advantage or preference, to serve a higher purpose. The literal meaning
of sacrifice is "to make sacred," implying an act of worship. It is the
most common translation of the term yajna, from the verb yuj, "to
worship." In Hinduism, all of life is a sacrifice--called jivayajna, a
giving of oneself--through which comes true spiritual fulfillment.
Tyaga, the power of detachment, is an essential quality of true
sacrifice. See: tyaga, yajna.

**sadachara:** (Sanskrit) "Good conduct; virtue, morality." It is
embodied in the principles of dharma. See: dharma, yama-niyama, pada.

**Sadasiva:** (Sanskrit) "Ever-auspicious." A name of the Primal Soul,
Siva, a synonym for Parameshvara, which is expressed in the physical
being of the satguru. Sadasiva especially denotes the power of revealing
grace, anugraha shakti, the third tattva, after which emerge Siva's
other four divine powers. This five-fold manifestation or expression of
God's activity in the cosmos is depicted in Hindu mantras, literature
and art as the five-faced Sadasivamurti. Looking upward is Ishana,
"ruler" (the power of revealment). Facing east is Tatpurusha, "supreme
soul" (the power of obscuration). Westward-looking is Sadyojata,
"quickly birthing" (the power of creation). Northward is Vamadeva,
"lovely, pleasing" (the power of preservation). Southward is Aghora,
"nonterrifying" (the power of reabsorption). The first four faces
revealed the Vedas. The fifth face, Ishana, revealed the Agamas. These
five are also called Sadasiva, the revealer; Maheshvara, the obscurer;
Brahma, the creator; Vishnu, the preserver; and Rudra, the destroyer.
See: Parameshvara, tattva.

**sadhaka:** (Sanskrit) From sadh, "going straight to the goal." A
spiritual aspirant; a devotee who performs sadhana. A serious seeker who
has undertaken spiritual disciplines, is usually celibate and under the
guidance of a guru. He wears white and may be under simple vows, but is
not a yogi or sannyasin. See: sadhana.

**sadhana marga:** (Sanskrit) "The way of sadhana." A term used by Sage
Yogaswami to name his prescription for seekers of Truth--a path of
intense effort, spiritual discipline and consistent inner
transformation, as opposed to theoretical and intellectual learning.
See: mysticism, pada, sadhana, spiritual unfoldment.

**sadhana:** (Sanskrit) "Means of attainment." Self-effort, spiritual
discipline; the way." Religious or spiritual disciplines, such as puja,
yoga, meditation, japa, fasting and austerity. The effect of sadhana is
the building of willpower, faith and confidence in oneself and in God,
Gods and guru. The effect of sadhana is the building of willpower, faith
and confidence in oneself and in God, Gods and guru. Sadhana harnesses
and transmutes the instinctive-intellectual nature, allowing progressive
spiritual unfoldment into the superconscious realizations and innate
abilities of the soul. See: purity-impurity, pada, raja yoga, sadhana
marga, spiritual unfoldment.

**sadhu:** (Sanskrit) "Virtuous one; straight, unerring." A holy man
dedicated to the search for God. A sadhu may or may not be a yogi or a
sannyasin, or be connected in any way with a guru or legitimate lineage.
Sadhus usually have no fixed abode and travel unattached from place to
place, often living on alms. There are countless sadhus on the roads,
byways, mountains, riverbanks, and in the ashramas and caves of India.
They have, by their very existence, a profound, stabilizing effect on
the consciousness of India and the world. See: vairagi.

**sadhvi:** (Sanskrit) Feminine counterpart of sadhu. See: sadhu.

**Saguna Brahman:** (Sanskrit) "God with qualities." The Personal Lord.
See: Brahman, Parameshvara.

**sahasra lekhana sadhana:** (Sanskrit) "Thousand-times writing
discipline." The spiritual practice of writing a sacred mantra 1,008
times.

**sahasrara chakra:** (Sanskrit) "Thousand-spoked wheel." The cranial
psychic force center. See: chakra.

**Saiva Agamas:** (Sanskrit) The sectarian revealed scriptures of the
Saivas. Strongly theistic, they identify Siva as the Supreme Lord,
immanent and transcendent. They are in two main divisions: the 64
Kashmir Saiva Agamas and the 28 Saiva Siddhanta Agamas. The latter group
are the fundamental sectarian scriptures of Saiva Siddhanta. Of these,
ten are of the Sivabheda division and are considered dualistic: 1)
Kamika, 2) Yogaja, 3) Chintya, 4)Karana, 5) Ajita, 6) Dipta, 7) Sukshma,
8) Sahasraka, 9) Amshumat and 10)Suprabheda. There are 18 in the
Rudrabheda group, classed as dual-nondual: 11) Vijaya, 12) Nihshvasa,
13) Svayambhuva, 14) Anala, 15) Vira (Bhadra), 16) Raurava, 17) Makuta,
18) Vimala, 19) Chandrajnana (or Chandrahasa), 20) Mukhabimba (or
Bimba), 21) Prodgita (or Udgita), 22)Lalita, 23) Siddha, 24) Santana,
25) Sarvokta (Narasimha), 26) Parameshvara, 27) Kirana and 28) Vatula
(or Parahita). Rishi Tirumular, in his Tirumantiram, refers to 28 Agamas
and mentions nine by name. Eight of these--Karana, Kamika, Vira,
Chintya, Vatula, Vimala, Suprabheda and Makuta--are in the above list of
28 furnished by the French Institute of Indology, Pondicherry. The
ninth, Kalottara, is presently regarded as an Upagama, or secondary
text, of Vatula. The Kamika is the Agama most widely followed in Tamil
Saiva temples, because of the availability of Aghorasiva's
manual-commentary (paddhati) on it. Vira Saivites especially refer to
the Vatula and Vira Agamas. The Saiva Agama scriptures, above all else,
are the connecting strand through all the schools of Saivism. The Agamas
themselves express that they are entirely consistent with the teachings
of the Veda, that they contain the essence of the Veda, and must be
studied with the same high degree of devotion. See: Agamas, Vedas.

**Saiva:** (Sanskrit) "Auspicious." Of or relating to Saivism or its
adherents, of whom there are about 400 million in the world today. Same
as Saivite. See: Saivism.

**Saiva Siddhanta:** (Sanskrit) "Final conclusions of Saivism." The most
widespread and influential Saivite school today, predominant especially
among the Tamil people in Sri Lanka and South India. It is the
formalized theology of the divine revelations contained in the
twenty-eight Saiva Agamas. The first known guru of the Shuddha ("pure")
Saiva Siddhanta tradition was Maharishi Nandinatha of Kashmir (ca bce
250), recorded in Panini's book of grammar as the teacher of rishis
Patanjali, Vyaghrapada and Vasishtha. Other sacred scriptures include
the Tirumantiram and the voluminous collection of devotional hymns, the
Tirumurai, and the masterpiece on ethics and statecraft, the Tirukural.
For Saiva Siddhantins, Siva is the totality of all, understood in three
perfections: Parameshvara (the Personal Creator Lord), Parashakti (the
substratum of form) and Parasiva (Absolute Reality which transcends
all). Souls and world are identical in essence with Siva, yet also
differ in that they are evolving. A pluralistic stream arose in the
middle ages from the teachings of Aghorasiva and Meykandar. For
Aghorasiva's school (ca 1150) Siva is not the material cause of the
universe, and the soul attains perfect "sameness" with Siva upon
liberation. Meykandar's (ca 1250) pluralistic school denies that souls
ever attain perfect sameness or unity with Siva. See: Saivism.

**Saiva Vishishtadvaita:** (Sanskrit) The philosophy of Siva Advaita.
See: Siva Advaita.

**Saivism (Saiva):** (Sanskrit) The religion followed by those who
worship Siva as supreme God. Oldest of the four sects of Hinduism. The
earliest historical evidence of Saivism is from the 8,000-year-old Indus
Valley civilization in the form of the famous seal of Siva as Lord
Pashupati, seated in a yogic pose. In the Ramayana, Lord Rama worshiped
Siva, as did his rival Ravana. Buddha in 624 bce was born into a Saivite
family, and records of his time speak of the Saiva ascetics who wandered
the hills looking much as they do today. There are many schools of
Saivism, six of which are Saiva Shiddhanta, Pashupata Saivism, Kashmir
Saivism, Vira Saivism, Siddha Siddhanta and Siva Advaita. They are based
firmly on the Vedas and Saiva Agamas, and thus have much in common,
including the following principle doctrines: 1) the five powers of
Siva--creation, preservation, destruction, revealing and concealing
grace; 2) The three categories: Pati, pashu and pasha ("God, souls and
bonds"); 3) the three bonds: anava, karma and maya; 4) the three-fold
power of Siva: iccha shakti, kriya shakti and jnana shakti; 5) the
thirty-six tattvas, or categories of existence; 6) the need for
initiation from a satguru; 7) the power of mantra; 8) the four padas
(stages): charya (selfless service), kriya (devotion), yoga
(meditation), and jnana (illumination); 9) the belief in the
Panchakshara as the foremost mantra, and in rudraksha and vibhuti as
sacred aids to faith; 10) the beliefs in satguru (preceptor), Sivalinga
(object of worship) and sangama (company of holy persons). See:
individual school entries, Saivism (six schools).

**Saivism (six schools):** Through history Saivism has developed a vast
array of lineages. Philosophically, six schools are most notable: Saiva
Siddhanta, Pashupata Saivism, Kashmir Saivism, Vira Saivism, Siddha
Siddhanta and Siva Advaita. Saiva Siddhanta first distinguished itself
in the second century bce through the masterful treatise of a Himalayan
pilgrim to South India, Rishi Tirumular. It is Saivism's most widespread
and influential school. Pashupata Saivism emerged in the Himalayan hills
over 25 centuries ago. Ancient writings chronicle it as a Siva ascetic
yoga path whose most renowned guru was Lakulisha. Kashmir Saivism, a
strongly monistic lineage, arose from the revelatory aphorisms of Sri
Vasugupta in the tenth century. Vira Saivism took shape in India's
Karnataka state in the 12th-century under the inspiration of Sri
Basavanna. It is a dynamic, reformist sect, rejecting religious
complexity and stressing each devotee's personal relationship with God.
Siddha Siddhanta, also known as Gorakshanatha Saivism, takes its name
from the writings of the powerful 10th-century yogi, Sri Gorakshanatha,
whose techniques for Siva identity attracted a large monastic and
householder following in North India and Nepal. Siva Advaita is a
Saivite interpretation of the Vedanta Sutras, based on the writings of
Srikantha, a 12th-century scholar who sought to reconcile the Upanishads
with the Agamas. See: individual school entries.

**Saivite (Saiva):** (Sanskrit) Of or relating to Saivism or its
adherents, of whom there are about 400 million in the world today. See:
Hinduism, Saivism.

**sakha marga:** (Sanskrit) "Friend's path." See: attainment, pada.

**sakshin:** (Sanskrit) "Witness." Awareness, the witness consciousness
of the soul. Known as nef in the mystical Natha language of Shum. See:
awareness, consciousness (individual), chit, Shum, soul.

**Sama Veda:** (Sanskrit) "Song of wisdom." Third of the four Vedas.
Ninety percent of its 1,875 stanzas are derived from the Rig Veda. It is
a collection of hymns specially arranged and notated for chanting with a
distinctive melody and cadence by the Udgata priests during yajna, fire
ceremony, together with stanzas from the Yajur Veda. This Veda forms the
oldest known form of Indian music. See: Shruti, Vedas.

**samadhi:** (Sanskrit) "Enstasy," which means "standing within one's
Self." "Sameness; contemplation; union, wholeness; completion,
accomplishment." Samadhi is the state of true yoga, in which the
meditator and the object of meditation are one. Samadhi is of two
levels. The first is savikalpa samadhi ("enstasy with form or seed"),
identification or oneness with the essence of an object. Its highest
form is the realization of the primal substratum or pure consciousness,
Satchidananda. The second is nirvikalpa samadhi ("enstasy without form
or seed"), identification with the Self, in which all modes of
consciousness are transcended and Absolute Reality, Parasiva, beyond
time, form and space, is experienced. This brings in its aftermath a
complete transformation of consciousness. In Classical Yoga, nirvikalpa
samadhi is known as asamprajnata samadhi, "supraconscious
enstasy"--samadhi, or beingness, without thought or cognition, prajna.
Savikalpa samadhi is also called samprajnata samadhi, "conscious
enstasy." (Note that samadhi differs from samyama--the continuous
meditation on a single subject or mystic key [such as a chakra] to gain
revelation on a particular subject or area of consciousness. As
explained by Patanjali, samyama consists of dharana, dhyana and
samadhi.) See: enstasy, kundalini, Parasiva, raja yoga, samarasa,
Satchidananda, Self Realization, trance.

**samarasa:** (Sanskrit) "Even essence" or "same taste." In Siddha
Siddhanta, a term describing the state attained by a yogi in which he
consciously experiences the world and daily life while never losing his
perspective of the essential unity of God, soul and world. Similar in
concept to sayujya samadhi. See: jnana, kaivalya, samadhi, Siddha
Siddhanta, Sivasayujya.

**samavartana:** (Sanskrit) "Returning home." The ceremony marking a
youth's completion of Vedic studies. See: samskaras.

**Sambandar:** (Tamil) Child saint of the 7th-century Saivite
renaissance. Composed many Devaram hymns in praise of Siva, reconverted
at least one Tamil king who had embraced Jainism, and vehemently sought
to counter the incursion of Buddhism, bringing the Tamil people back to
Saivism. See: Nalvar, Nayanar, Tirumurai.

**samhara:** (Sanskrit) "Dissolution; destruction." See: mahapralaya,
Nataraja.

**samhita:** (Sanskrit) "Collection." 1) Any methodically arranged
collection of texts or verses. 2) The hymn collection of each of the
four Vedas. 3) A common alternate term for Vaishnava Agamas. See: Vedas.

**sampradaya:** (Sanskrit) "Tradition," "transmission;" a philosophical
or religious doctrine or lineage. A living stream of tradition or
theology within Hinduism, passed on by oral training and initiation. The
term derives from the verb samprada, meaning "gift, grant, bestowing or
conferring; handing down by tradition; bequeathing." Sampradaya is thus
a philosophy borne down through history by verbal transmission. It is
more inclusive than the related term parampara which names a living
lineage of ordained gurus who embody and carry forth a sampradaya. A
sampradaya may be represented by many paramparas. See: parampara.

**samsara:** (Sanskrit) "Flow." The phenomenal world. Transmigratory
existence, fraught with impermanence and change. The cycle of birth,
death and rebirth; the total pattern of successive earthly lives
experienced by a soul. A term similar to punarjanma (reincarnation), but
with broader connotations. See: evolution of the soul, karma,
punarjanma, reincarnation.

**samsari:** (Sanskrit) "One in samsara; wanderer." A soul during
transmigration, immersed in or attached to mundane existence, hence not
striving for liberation (moksha). A samsari is someone who is not "on
the path." See: materialism, samsara, San Marga, worldly.

**samskara:** (Sanskrit) "Impression, activator; sanctification,
preparation." 1) The imprints left on the subconscious mind by
experience (from this or previous lives), which then color all of life,
one's nature, responses, states of mind, etc. 2) A sacrament or rite
done to mark a significant transition of life. These make deep and
positive impressions on the mind of the recipient, inform the family and
community of changes in the lives of its members and secure inner-world
blessings. The numerous samskaras are outlined in the Grihya Shastras.
Most are accompanied by specific mantras from the Vedas. See: mind (five
states), sacrament.

**samskaras of birth:** From the rite of conception to the blessings of
the new-born child.**--garbhadhana:** "Womb-placing." Rite of
conception, where physical union is consecrated with the intent of
bringing into physical birth an advanced soul.**--punsavana:**
(Sanskrit) "Male rite; bringing forth a male." A rite performed during
the third month of pregnancy consisting of prayers for a son and for the
well-being of mother and child. A custom, found in all societies, based
on the need for men to defend the country, run the family business and
support the parents in old age. The need for male children in such
societies is also based on the fact that women outlive men and leave the
family to join their husband's family.**--simantonnayana:**
"Hair-parting." A ceremony held between the fourth and seventh months in
which the husband combs his wife's hair and expresses his love and
support.**--jatakarma:** "Rite of birth." The father welcomes and
blesses the new-born child and feeds it a taste of ghee and honey. See:
samskara.

**samskaras of childhood:** From naming to education.**--namakarana:**
"Name-giving" and formal entry into one or another sect of Hinduism,
performed 11 to 41 days after birth. The name is chosen according to
astrology, preferably the name of a God or Goddess. At this time,
guardian devas are assigned to see the child through life. One who
converts to or adopts Hinduism later in life would receive this same
sacrament.**--annaprashana:** (Sanskrit) "Feeding." The ceremony marking
the first taking of solid food, held at about six months.
(Breast-feeding generally continues).**--karnavedha:** "Ear-piercing."
The piercing of both ears, for boys and girls, and the inserting of gold
earrings, held during the first, third or fifth year. See:
earrings.**--chudakarana:** (Sanskrit) "Head-shaving." The shaving of
the head, for boys and girls, between the 31st day and the fourth
year.**--vidyarambha:** (Sanskrit) Marks the beginning of formal
education. The boy or girl ceremoniously writes his/her first letter of
the alphabet in a tray of uncooked rice.**--upanayana:** Given to boys
at about 12 years of age, marks the beginning of the period of
brahmacharya and formal study of scripture and sacred lore, usually with
an acharya or guru.**--samavartana:** Marks the end of formal religious
study. See: samskara.

**samskaras of adulthood:** From coming-of-age to
marriage.**--ritukala:** (Sanskrit) "Fit or proper season." Time of
menses. A home blessing marking the coming of age for
girls.**--keshanta:** Marking a boy's first beard-shaving, at about 16
years. Both of the above are home ceremonies in which the young ones are
reminded of their brahmacharya, given new clothes and jewelry and
joyously admitted into the adult community as young
adults.**--nishchitartha** "Settlement of aim." Also called vagdana,
"word-giving." A formal engagement or betrothal ceremony in which a
couple pledge themselves to one another, exchanging rings and other
gifts.**--vivaha:** Marriage." An elaborate and joyous ceremony
performed in presence of God and Gods, in which the homa fire is
central. To conclude the ceremony, the couple take seven steps to the
Northeast as the groom recites: "One step for vigor, two steps for
vitality, three steps for prosperity, four steps for happiness, five
steps for cattle, six steps for seasons, seven steps for friendship. To
me be devoted (Hiranyakeshi Grihya Sutras 1.6.21.2 VE)." See: samskara.

**samskaras of later life: --vanaprastha ashrama:** Age 48 marks the
entrance into the elder advisor stage, celebrated in some communities by
special ceremony.**--sannyasa ashrama vrata:** The advent of withdrawal
from social duties and responsibilities at age 72 is sometimes ritually
acknowledged (different from sannyasa diksha). See: sannyasa
dharma.**--antyeshti:** (Sanskrit) The various funeral rites performed
to guide the soul in its transition to inner worlds, including
preparation of the body, cremation, bone-gathering, dispersal of ashes,
home purification. See: cremation, death, pinda, shraddha,
bone-gathering, samskara, shashtyabda purti, transition.

**San Marga:** (Sanskrit) "True path." The straight spiritual path
leading to the ultimate goal, Self Realization, without detouring into
unnecessary psychic exploration or pointless development of siddhis. A
San Margi is a person "on the path," as opposed to a samsari, one
engrossed in worldliness. San Marga also names the jnana pada. See:
pada, sadhana marga, samsari.

**San Marga Sanctuary:** A meditation tirtha at the foot of the extinct
volcano, Mount Waialeale, on Hawaii's Garden Island, Kauai. Here
pilgrims follow the H-mile path, San Marga, to a natural Sivalinga, walk
the path of the Tamil Nayanars around picturesque lotus lakes and ponds
and visit the six shrines of the Kailasa Parampara on the banks of
Saravanabhava Lake in Rishi Valley. Paths lead visitors to the sacred
Wailua River, then up stone stairs to the Chola-style white-granite
Iraivan Temple, hand-carved in Bangalore, India. In the sanctum
sanctorum, the Supreme God, Siva (Parameshvara-Parashakti-Parasiva),
will be enshrined as a massive 700-pound, single-pointed earthkeeper
quartz crystal. San Marga Sanctuary, founded in 1970, is among many
public services of Saiva Siddhanta Church, one of America's senior Hindu
religious institutions. See: Subramuniyaswami, tirtha.

**Sanatana Dharma:** (Sanskrit) "Eternal religion" or "everlasting
path." It is a original designation for the Hindu religion. See:
Hinduism.

**Sanatkumara:** (Sanskrit) "Ever-youthful; perpetual virgin boy." See:
Karttikeya.

**sanchita karma:** (Sanskrit) "Accumulated action." The accumulated
consequence of an individual's actions in this and past lives. See:
karma.

**sanctify:** To make holy.

**sanctum sanctorum:** "Holy of holies." Garbhagriha. The most sacred
part of a temple, usually a cave-like stone chamber, in which the main
icon is installed. See: darshana, garbhagriha, temple.

**sandalwood:** Chandana. The Asian evergreen tree Santalum album. Its
sweetly fragrant heartwood is ground into the fine, tan-colored paste
distributed as prasada in Saivite temples and used for sacred marks on
the forehead, tilaka. Sandalwood is also prized for incense, carving and
fine cabinetry.

**sandhya upasana:** (Sanskrit) "Worship at time's junctures." Drawing
near to God at the changes of time--worship and sadhana performed in the
home at dawn, noon and dusk. See: sadhana.

**sangama:** (Sanskrit) "Association; fellowship." Coming together in a
group, especially for religious purposes. Also a town in Karnataka,
South India, where the Krishna and Malaprabha rivers meet; an ancient
center of Kalamukha Saivism where the Vira Saivite preceptor Basavanna
lived and studied as a youth. See: congregational worship.

**sankalpa:** (Sanskrit) "Will; purpose; determination." A solemn vow or
declaration of purpose to perform any ritual observance. Most commonly,
sankalpa names the mental and verbal preparation made by a temple priest
as he begins rites of worship. During the sankalpa, he informs all three
worlds what he is about to do. He recites the name of the Deity, and the
present time and place according to precise astrological notations and
announces the type of ritual he is about to perform. Once the sankalpa
is made, he is bound to complete the ceremony. See: puja.

**Sankhya:** (Sanskrit) "Enumeration, reckoning." See: prakriti,
purusha, shad darshana, tattva.

**sannidhana:** (Sanskrit) "Nearness; proximity; taking charge of." A
title of heads of monasteries: Guru Mahasannidhana. See: sannidhya.

**sannidhya:** (Sanskrit) "(Divine) presence; nearness, proximity." The
radiance and blessed presence of shakti within and around a temple or a
holy person.

**sannyasa ashrama:** (Sanskrit) "Renunciate stage." The period of life
after age 72. See: ashrama.

**sannyasa dharma:** (Sanskrit) "Renunciate life." The life, way and
traditions of those who have irrevocably renounced duties and
obligations of the householder path, including personal property,
wealth, ambitions, social position and family ties, in favor of the
full-time monastic quest for divine awakening, Self Realization and
spiritual upliftment of humanity. Traditionally, this dharma is
available to those under age 25 who meet strict qualifications.
Alternately, the householder may embrace sannyasa dharma after age 72
through the customary initiatory rites given by a sannyasin and then
diligently pursuing his spiritual sadhana in a state of genuine
renunciation and not in the midst of his family. These two forms of
sannyasa are not to be confused with simply entering the sannyasa
ashrama, the last stage of life. See: sannyasa, sannyasa diksha,
sannyasin, videhamukti.

**sannyasa diksha:** (Sanskrit) "Renunciate initiation." This diksha is
a formal rite, or less often an informal blessing, entering the devotee
into renunciate monasticism, binding him for life to certain vows which
include chastity, poverty and obedience, and directing him on the path
to Self Realization. Strictest tradition requires that lifetime
renunciates be single men and that they enter training in their order
before age 25. However, there are certain orders which accept men into
sannyasa after age 25, provided they have been in college and not in the
world after that time. Others will accept widowers; and a few initiate
women. Such rules and qualifications apply primarily to cenobites, that
is, to those who will live and serve together in an ashrama or
monastery. The rules pertaining to homeless anchorites are, for obvious
reasons, more lenient. See: sannyasa dharma, videhamukti.

**sannyasa:** (Sanskrit) "Renunciation." "Throwing down or abandoning."
Sannyasa is the repudiation of the dharma, including the obligations and
duties, of the householder and the acceptance of the even more demanding
dharma of the renunciate. The ancient shastras recognize four
justifiable motivations for entering into sannyasa: vidvat, vividisha,
markata and atura. Vidvat ("knowing; wise") sannyasa is the spontaneous
withdrawal from the world in search for Self Realization which results
from karma and tendencies developed in a previous life. Vividisha
("discriminating") sannyasa is renunciation to satisfy a yearning for
the Self developed through scriptural study and practice. Markata
sannyasa is taking refuge in sannyasa as a result of great sorrow,
disappointment or misfortune in worldly pursuits. (Markata means
"monkey-like," perhaps implying the analogy of a monkey clinging to its
mother.) Atura ("suffering or sick") sannyasa is entering into sannyasa
upon one's deathbed, realizing that there is no longer hope in life.
See: sannyasa dharma, sannyasa diksha, videhamukti.

**Sannyasa Upanishad:** (Sanskrit) An Upanishad of the Atharva Veda. It
deals with the transition to the vanaprastha and sannyasa ashramas.

**sannyasin:** (Sanskrit) "Renouncer." One who has taken sannyasa
diksha. A Hindu monk, swami, and one of a world brotherhood (or holy
order) of sannyasins. Some are wanderers and others live in monasteries.
The seasoned sannyasin is truly the liberated man, the spiritual
exemplar, the disciplined yogi and ultimately the knower of Truth, freed
to commune with the Divine and bound to uplift humanity through the
sharing of his wisdom, his peace, his devotion and his illumination,
however great or small. The sannyasin is the guardian of his religion,
immersed in it constantly, freed from worldliness, freed from
distraction, able to offer his work and his worship in unbroken
continuity and one-pointed effectiveness. He undertakes certain
disciplines including the purification of body, mind and emotion. He
restrains and controls the mind through his sadhana, tapas and
meditative regimen. He unfolds from within himself a profound love of
God and the Gods. His practice of upasana, worship, is predominantly
internal, seeking God Siva within. See: sannyasa, sannyasa dharma,
sannyasa diksha, swami.

**Sanskrit (Sanskrita):** (Sanskrit) "Well-made; refined, perfected."
The classical sacerdotal language of ancient India, considered a pure
vehicle for communication with the celestial worlds. It is the primary
language in which Hindu scriptures are written, including the Vedas and
Agamas. Employed today as a liturgical, literary and scholarly language,
but no longer used as a spoken vernacular.

**sant:** (Sanskrit) "Saint." A Hindi or vernacular term derived from
the Sanskrit sat, meaning "truth; reality."

**santosha:** (Sanskrit) "Contentment." See: yama-niyama.

**Sarasvati:** (Sanskrit) "The flowing one." Shakti, the Universal
Mother; Goddess of the arts and learning, mythological consort of the
God Brahma. Sarasvati, the river Goddess, is usually depicted wearing a
white sari and holding a vina, sitting upon a swan or lotus flower.
Prayers are offered to her for refinements of art, culture and learning.
Sarasvati also names one of seven sacred rivers (Sapta Sindhu) mentioned
in the Rig Veda. Parts of the Indus Valley civilization thrived along
the river until it dried up in 1900bce. Its course was lost and thought
a myth by some until recently discovered in images taken by a French
satellite. In addition, one of the ten dashanami swami orders is the
Sarasvati. See: Goddess, Shakti.

**Saravana:** (Sanskrit) "Thicket of reeds." Mythologically, a sacred
Himalayan pond where Lord Karttikeya was nurtured; esoterically
understood as the lake of divine essence, or primal consciousness. See:
Karttikeya.

**sari:** (Hindi, (Sanskrit) ) The traditional outer garment of a Hindu
woman, consisting of a long, unstitched piece of cloth, usually colorful
cotton or silk, wrapped around the body, forming an ankle-length skirt,
and around the bosom and over the shoulder.

**sarvabhadra:** (Sanskrit) "All is auspicious; the goodness of all."
Bhadra indicates that which is "blessed, auspicious, dear, excellent."
Sarva ("all") bhadra thus denotes the cognition that everything in the
universe is a manifestation of Divinity, that it is holy, good and
purposeful. See: auspiciousness, grace, Sivamaya, world.

**Sarvajnanottara Agama:** (Sanskrit) This text is not among the
traditional list of Agamas and subsidiary scriptures. But it is thought
to be a second version of Kalajnam, a subsidiary text of Vatula Agama.
The available sections deal with right knowledge.

**sat:** (Sanskrit) "True, existing, real, good; reality, existence,
truth." See: Satchidananda.

**Satan:** The devil; evil personified. A being who in Christian and
other Semitic religions opposes God's will and tempts souls into
wickedness. In Hinduism, all is seen as the manifestation of God, and
there is no Satan. See: asura, hell, Naraka.

**Satchidananda (Sachchidananda):** (Sanskrit)
"Existence-consciousness-bliss." A synonym for Parashakti. Lord Siva's
Divine Mind and simultaneously the pure superconscious mind of each
individual soul. It is perfect love and omniscient, omnipotent
consciousness, the fountainhead of all existence, yet containing and
permeating all existence. It is also called pure consciousness, pure
form, substratum of existence, and more. One of the goals of the
meditator or yogi is to experience the natural state of the mind,
Satchidananda, holding back the vrittis through yogic practices. In
Advaita Vedanta, Satchidananda is considered a description of the
Absolute (Brahman). Whereas in monistic, or shuddha, Saiva Siddhanta it
is understood as divine form--pure, amorphous matter or energy--not as
an equivalent of the Absolute, formless, "atattva," Parasiva. In this
latter school, Parasiva is radically transcendent, and Satchidananda is
known as the primal and most perfectly divine form to emerge from the
formless Parasiva. See: atattva, Parashakti, tattva.

**satguru (sadguru):** (Sanskrit) "True weighty one." A spiritual
preceptor of the highest attainment--one who has realized the ultimate
Truth, Parasiva, through nirvikalpa samadhi--a jivanmukta able to lead
others securely along the spiritual path. He is always a sannyasin, an
unmarried renunciate. All Hindu denominations teach that the grace and
guidance of a living satguru is a necessity for Self Realization. He is
recognized and revered as the embodiment of God, Sadasiva, the source of
grace and of liberation. See: guru bhakti, guru, guru-shishya
relationship, padapuja.

**satgurunatha:** (Sanskrit) "Lord and true guru." A highly respectful
and honorific term for one's preceptor. See: satguru.

**satsanga:** (Sanskrit) "Holy gathering." Association of a group of
devotees for non-temple worship and religious study.

**sattva guna:** (Sanskrit) "Purity." The quality of goodness or purity.
See: guna.

**satya:** (Sanskrit) "Truthfulness." See: yama-niyama.

**Satyaloka:** (Sanskrit) "Plane of reality, truth." Also called
Brahmaloka; the realm of sahasrara chakra, it is the highest of the
seven upper worlds. See: loka.

**saucha:** (Sanskrit) "Purity." See: purity-impurity, yama-niyama.

**saumanasya:** (Sanskrit) "Benevolence, causing gladness or
cheerfulness of mind, right understanding (related to the term soma)."
See: chakra.

**savikalpa samadhi:** (Sanskrit) "Enstasy with form or seed." See:
enstasy, raja yoga, samadhi.

**sayujya:** (Sanskrit) "Intimate union." Perpetual God Consciousness.
See: Sivasayujya, vishvagrasa.

**scarlet:** The color red with orange tint.

**scepter:** Rajadanda. The staff and insignia of royal or imperial
authority and power held by spiritual monarchs or kings. Traditionally,
the scepters of Indian kings are prepared and empowered by respected
heads of traditional Hindu religious orders through esoteric means. See:
danda.

**scripture (scriptural):** "A writing." A sacred text or holy book
having authority for a given sect or religion. See: shastra, smriti,
shruti.

**secluded (seclusion):** Isolated; hidden. Kept apart from others. See:
muni.

**seed karma:** Dormant or anarabdha karma. All past actions which have
not yet sprouted. See: karma.

**seer:** Visionary; rishi. A wise being or mystic who sees beyond the
limits of ordinary perception. See: akasha, clairvoyance, muni, rishi,
shamanism.

**Self Realization:** Direct knowing of the Self God, Parasiva. Self
Realization is known in Sanskrit as nirvikalpa samadhi; "enstasy without
form or seed;" the ultimate spiritual attainment (also called
asamprajnata samadhi). Esoterically, this state is attained when the
mystic kundalini force pierces through the sahasrara chakra at the crown
of the head. This transcendence of all modes of human consciousness
brings the realization or "nonexperience" of That which exists beyond
the mind, beyond time, form and space. But even to assign a name to
Parasiva, or to its realization is to name that which cannot be named.
In fact, it is "experienced" only in its aftermath as a change in
perspective, a permanent transformation, and as an intuitive familiarity
with the Truth that surpasses understanding. See: God Realization,
enstasy, liberation, kundalini, Parasiva, raja yoga, samadhi.

**Self (Self God):** God Siva's perfection of Absolute Reality,
Parasiva--That which abides at the core of every soul. See: atattva,
Paramatman, Parasiva.

**self-assertive:** Quality of one who makes himself, his ideas,
opinions, etc., dominant. Demanding recognition.

**self-conceit:** Too high an opinion of oneself; vanity, vain pride.

**self-luminous:** Producing its own light; radiating light.

**self-reflection:** Observation of, or meditation upon, oneself, one's
mind, emotions, thinking. Introspection. Playing back memories and
impressions locked within the subconscious, endeavoring to deal with
them. It is anticipating one's future and how the past will react upon
it, enhance or detract from it. See: spiritual unfoldment.

**servitude:** Condition of a slave subject to a master.

**seva:** (Sanskrit) "Service." Karma yoga. An integral part of the
spiritual path, where the aspirant strives to serve without thought of
reward or personal gain. The central practice of the charya pada. See:
yoga.

**seval:** (Tamil) The large, red, fighting rooster (kukkuta in
Sanskrit) that adorns Lord Murugan's flag, heralding the dawn of wisdom
and the conquest of the forces of ignorance. See: Karttikeya.

**sexuality:** Hinduism has a healthy, unrepressed outlook on human
sexuality, and sexual pleasure is part of kama, one of the four goals of
life. On matters such as birth control, sterilization, masturbation,
homosexuality, bisexuality, petting and polygamy, Hindu scripture is
tolerantly silent, neither calling them sins nor encouraging their
practice, neither condemning nor condoning. The two important exceptions
to this understanding view of sexual experience are adultery and
abortion, both of which are considered to carry heavy karmic
implications for this and future births. See: abortion, bisexuality,
homosexuality.

**shabda kosha:** (Sanskrit) "Sheath of sounds, or words." Vocabulary; a
dictionary or glossary of terms.

**shad darshana:** (Sanskrit) "Six views or insights; six philosophies."
Among the hundreds of Hindu darshanas known through history are six
classical philosophical systems: Nyaya, Vaisheshika, Sankhya, Yoga,
Mimamsa and Vedanta. Each was tersely formulated in sutra form by its
"founder," and elaborated in extensive commentaries by other writers.
They are understood as varied attempts at describing Truth and the path
to it. Elements of each form part of the Hindu fabric
today. --**Nyaya:** "System, rule; logic." A system of logical realism,
founded sometime around 300 bce by Gautama, known for its systems of
logic and epistemology and concerned with the means of acquiring right
knowledge. Its tools of enquiry and rules for argumentation were adopted
by all schools of Hinduism. --**Vaisheshika:** "Distinctionism." From
"vishesha," differences. Philosophy founded by Kanada (ca 300 bce)
teaching that liberation is to be attained through understanding the
nature of existence, which is classified in nine basic realities
(dravyas): earth, water, light, air, ether, time, space, soul and mind.
Nyaya and Vaisheshika are viewed as a complementary pair, with Nyaya
emphasizing logic, and Vaisheshika analyzing the nature of the
world. --**Sankhya:** "Enumeration, reckoning." A philosophy founded by
the sage Kapila (ca 500 bce), author of the Sankhya Sutras. Sankhya is
primarily concerned with "categories of existence," tattvas, which it
understands as 25 in number. The first two are the unmanifest purusha
and the manifest primal nature, prakriti--the male-female polarity,
viewed as the foundation of all existence. Prakriti, out of which all
things evolve, is the unity of the three gunas: sattva, rajas and tamas.
Sankhya and Yoga are considered an inseparable pair whose principles
permeate all of Hinduism. See: prakriti, purusha.**--Yoga:** "Yoking;
joining." Ancient tradition of philosophy and practice codified by
Patanjali (ca 200 bce) in the Yoga Sutras. It is also known as raja
yoga, "king of yogas," or ashtanga yoga, "eight-limbed yoga." Its object
is to achieve, at will, the cessation of all fluctuations of
consciousness, and the attainment of Self Realization. Yoga is wholly
dedicated to putting the high philosophy of Hinduism into practice, to
achieve personal transformation through transcendental experience,
samadhi. See: yoga. --**Mimamsa:** "Inquiry" (or Purva, "early,"
Mimamsa). Founded by Jaimini (ca 200 bce), author of the Mimamsa Sutras,
who taught the correct performance of Vedic rites as the means to
salvation. --**Vedanta** (or Uttara "later" Mimamsa): "End (or
culmination) of the Vedas." For Vedanta, the main basis is the
Upanishads and Aranyakas (the "end," anta, of the Vedas), rather than
the hymns and ritual portions of the Vedas. The teaching of Vedanta is
that there is one Absolute Reality, Brahman. Man is one with Brahman,
and the object of life is to realize that truth through right knowledge,
intuition and personal experience. The Vedanta Sutras (or Brahma Sutras)
were composed by Rishi Badarayana (ca 400 bce). See: Brahma Sutra,
padartha, tattva, Vedanta, yoga.

**shakahara:** (Sanskrit) "Vegetarian diet." From shaka, "vegetable;"
and ahara, "eating; taking food." See: meat-eater, vegetarian,
yama-niyama.

**Shakta:** (Sanskrit) "Powerful." Of or relating to Shaktism. See:
Hinduism, Shaktism, tantrism.

**Shakta Tantrism:** (Sanskrit) See: Shaktism, tantrism.

**Shakti:** (Sanskrit) "Power, energy," from the root shak, "to be
able." The active power or manifest energy of Siva that pervades all of
existence. Its most refined aspect is Parashakti, or Satchidananda, the
pure consciousness and primal substratum of all form. This pristine,
divine energy unfolds as iccha shakti (the power of desire, will, love),
kriya shakti (the power of action) and jnana shakti (the power of
wisdom, knowing), represented as the three prongs of Siva's trishula, or
trident. From these arise the five powers of revealment, concealment,
dissolution, preservation and creation.

In Saiva Siddhanta, Siva is All, and His divine energy, Shakti, is
inseparable from Him. This unity is symbolized in the image of
Ardhanarishvara, "half-female God." In popular, village Hinduism, the
unity of Siva and Shakti is replaced with the concept of Siva and Shakti
as separate entities. Shakti is represented as female, and Siva as male.
In Hindu temples, art and mythology, they are everywhere seen as the
divine couple. This depiction has its source in the folk-narrative
sections of the Puranas, where it is given elaborate expression. Shakti
is personified in many forms as the consorts of the Gods. For example,
the Goddesses Parvati, Lakshmi and Sarasvati are the respective
mythological consorts of Siva, Vishnu and Brahma. Philosophically,
however, the caution is always made that God and God's energy are One,
and the metaphor of the inseparable divine couple serves only to
illustrate this Oneness.

Within the Shakta religion, the worship of the Goddess is paramount, in
Her many fierce and benign forms. Shakti is the Divine Mother of
manifest creation, visualized as a female form, and Siva is specifically
the Unmanifest Absolute. The fierce or black (asita) forms of the
Goddess include Kali, Durga, Chandi, Chamundi, Bhadrakali and Bhairavi.
The benign or white (sita) forms include Uma, Gauri, Ambika, Parvati,
Maheshvari, Lalita and Annapurna. As Rajarajeshvari ("divine queen of
kings"). She is the presiding Deity of the Sri Chakra yantra. She is
also worshiped as the ten Mahavidyas, manifestations of the highest
knowledge--Kali, Tara, Shodashi, Bhuvaneshvari, Chinnamasta, Bhairavi,
Dhumavati, Bagata, Matangi and Kamala. While some Shaktas view these as
individual beings, most revere them as manifestations of the singular
Devi. There are also numerous minor Goddess forms, in the category of
gramadevata ("village Deity"). These include Pitari, "snake-catcher"
(usually represented by a simple stone), and Mariyamman, "smallpox
Goddess."

In the yoga mysticism of all traditions, divine energy, shakti, is
experienced within the human body in three aspects: 1) the feminine
force, ida shakti, 2) the masculine force, pingala shakti, and 3) the
pure androgynous force, kundalini shakti, that flows through the
sushumna nadi.

Shakti is most easily experienced by devotees as the sublime,
bliss-inspiring energy that emanates from a holy person or sanctified
Hindu temple. See: Amman, Ardhanarishvara, Goddess, Parashakti,
Shaktism.

**Shakti Vishishtadvaita:** (Sanskrit) The philosophy of Vira Saivism.
See: Vira Saivism.

**shaktipata:** (Sanskrit) "Descent of grace." Guru diksha, initiation
from the preceptor; particularly the first initiation, which awakens the
kundalini and launches the process of spiritual unfoldment. See:
anugraha shakti, diksha, grace, kundalini.

**Shaktism (Shakta):** (Sanskrit) "Doctrine of power." The religion
followed by those who worship the Supreme as the Divine Mother--Shakti
or Devi--in Her many forms, both gentle and fierce. Shaktism is one of
the four primary sects of Hinduism. Shaktism's first historical signs
are thousands of female statuettes dated ca 5500 bce recovered at the
Mehrgarh village in India. In philosophy and practice, Shaktism greatly
resembles Saivism, both faiths promulgating, for example, the same
ultimate goals of advaitic union with Siva and moksha. But Shaktas
worship Shakti as the Supreme Being exclusively, as the dynamic aspect
of Divinity, while Siva is considered solely transcendent and is not
worshiped. There are many forms of Shaktism, with endless varieties of
practices which seek to capture divine energy or power for spiritual
transformation. Geographically, Shaktism has two main forms, the Srikula
"family of the Goddess Sri (or Lakshmi)," which respects the brahminical
tradition (a mainstream Hindu tradition which respects caste and purity
rules) and is strongest in South India; and the Kalikula, "family of
Kali," which rejects brahminical tradition and prevails in Northern and
Eastern India. Four major expressions of Shaktism are evident today:
folk-shamanism, yoga, devotionalism and universalism. Among the eminent
mantras of Shaktism is: Aum Hrim Chandikayai Namah, "I bow to Her who
tears apart all dualities." There are many varieties of folk Shaktism
gravitating around various forms of the Goddess, such as Kali, Durga and
a number of forms of Amman. Such worship often involves animal sacrifice
and fire-walking, though the former is tending to disappear. See: Amman,
Goddess, Ishta Devata, Kali, Shakti, tantrism.

**shaktopaya:** (Sanskrit) "Way of power." See: upaya.

**Shakya:** (Sanskrit) Name of the Saivite dynasty into which Buddha,
also called Shakyamuni, was born (in what is now Nepal). See: Buddha.

**shamanism (shamanic):** From the Sanskrit shramana, "ascetic," akin to
shram, meaning "to exert." Generally refers to any religion based on the
belief that good or evil spirits can be influenced by priests, or
shamans, who serve as intermediaries between man and divine forces.
Descriptive of many of the world's tribal, indigenous faiths. See also:
folk-shamanic, pagan, incantation, mysticism, Shaktism.

**Shambhavopaya:** (Sanskrit) "Way of Shambhu (Siva)." See: upaya.

**Shandilya Upanishad:** (Sanskrit) Belongs to the Atharva Veda.
Discusses eight forms of yoga, restraints, observances, breath control,
meditation and the nature of Truth.

**Shankara:** (Sanskrit) "Conferring happiness;" "propitious." An
epithet of Siva.

**Shankara:** (Sanskrit) One of Hinduism's most extraordinary monks
(788820) and preeminent guru of the Smarta Sampradaya. Noted for his
monistic philosophy of Advaita Vedanta, his many scriptural
commentaries, and formalizing ten orders of sannyasins with pontifical
headquarters at strategic points across India. He lived only 32 years,
but traveled throughout India and transformed the Hindu world in that
time. See: Dashanami, Shankaracharya pitha, shanmata sthapanacharya,
Smarta Sampradaya, Vedanta.

**Shankaracharya pitha:** (Sanskrit) Advaita monasteries established by
Shankara (ca 788820) as centers of Smarta authority in India, each with
a distinct guru parampara and a reigning pontiff entitled
Shankaracharya, and one of the four Upanishadic mahavakyas as a mantra.
East coast: Govardhana Matha, in Puri (center of the Aranya and Vana
orders). Himalayas: Jyotih Matha, near Badrinath (Giri, Parvata and
Sagara orders). West coast: Sharada Matha, in Dvaraka (Tirtha and
Ashrama orders). South: Sringeri Matha (Bharati, Puri and Sarasvati
orders). A fifth prominent pitha, associated with Sringeri Matha, is in
Kanchipuram, also in the South. See: Dashanami, Smarta, Shankara.

**shanmata sthapanacharya:** (Sanskrit) "Founder-teacher of the six-fold
system." A title conferred upon Adi Shankara while he was living. It
refers to his attempt to consolidate the six main sects of Hinduism in
nonsectarian unity, as represented by its altar of five (or six)
Deities. See: Smartism, panchayatana puja, Shankara.

**Shanmukha Gayatri:** (Sanskrit) A Vedic Gayatri chant, the Savitri
Gayatri modified to address Lord Karttikeya as Shanmukha "He of six
faces."

**Shanmukha:** (Sanskrit) "Six-faced." A name for Lord Murugan or
Karttikeya, denoting the multiplicity of His divine functions. See:
Karttikeya.

**sharana:** (Sanskrit) "Refuge." See: Sivasharana, Vira Saivism.

**sharira:** (Sanskrit) "Body; husk." Three bodies of the soul: 1)
sthula sharira, "gross or physical body" (also called annamaya kosha),
the odic body; 2) sukshma sharira, "subtle body" (also called linga
sharira, it includes the pranamaya, manomaya and vijnanamaya koshas); 3)
karana sharira, "causal body" (also called anandamaya kosha), the
actinic causal body. Another term for sharira is deha. See: deha, kosha,
subtle body.

**shashtyabda purti:** (Sanskrit) "Sixtieth birthday celebration." Done
for the couple on the husband's birthday, usually with many family and
friends attending. It consists in a homa, retaking of marriage vows and
retying the wedding pendant.

**shastra:** (Sanskrit) "Sacred text; teaching." 1) Any religious or
philosophical treatise, or body of writings. 2) A department of
knowledge, a science; e.g., the Dharma Shastras on religious law, Artha
Shastras on politics.

**shastri:** (Sanskrit) One who is knowledgeable in shastra, or
scriptures.

**Shatapatha Brahmana:** (Sanskrit) "Priest manual of 100 paths." A
priestly manual of the Shukla Yajur Veda, dealing with theology,
philosophy and modes of worship.

**shatkona:** (Sanskrit) "Six-pointed star," formed by two interlocking
triangles, the upper one representing Siva's transcendent Being, and the
lower one Siva's manifest energy, Shakti. The shatkona is part of Lord
Karttikeya's yantra. See: Ardhanarishvara Karttikeya.

**shatsthala:** (Sanskrit) "Six stages." Vira Saivism's six stages to
union with Siva. See: Vira Saivism.

**shatter:** To break into many pieces suddenly, as if struck.

**sheath:** A covering or recepticle, such as the husk surrounding a
grain of rice. In Sanskrit, it is kosha, philosophically the bodily
envelopes of the soul. See: kosha, soul, subtle body.

**shikhara:** (Sanskrit) "Summit or crest." The towering superstructure
above the garbhagriha in North Indian style temples. In Southern
temples, shikhara refers to the top stone of the superstructure, or
vimana.

**Shiksha Vedanga:** (Sanskrit) Auxiliary Vedic texts on Sanskrit
phonetics, among four linguistic skills taught for mastery of the Vedas
and rites of yajna. Shiksha means "wish to accomplish; learning, study
method." See: Vedanga.

**Shilpa Shastra:** (Sanskrit) "Art or craft manual." 1) A particular
class of works which formed the primary teachings on any of the fine
arts or sacred sciences, such as architecture, dance, painting,
jewelry-making, pottery, weaving, and basketry, garlandry,
metal-working, acting, cooking and horsemanship. The earliest Shilpa
Shastras are thought to date to 200 bce. Many were written between the
5th and 14th centuries. See: kala64, Sthapatyaveda.

**shishya:** (Sanskrit) "A pupil or disciple," especially one who has
proven himself and has formally been accepted by a guru.

**shloka:** (Sanskrit) "Verse," from the verbal root, shlok,"to
compose." A verse, phrase, proverb or hymn of praise, usually in a
specified meter. Especially a verse of two lines, each of sixteen
syllables. Shloka is the primary verse form of the Mahabharata and
Ramayana. See: bhashya, sutra.

**shraddha:** (Sanskrit) "Faith; belief." See: pancha shraddha.

**shraddha:** (Sanskrit) "Memorial." Relating to commemorative
ceremonies for the deceased, held one week, one month after death, and
annually thereafter, according to tradition. See: death, bone-gathering,
pinda, samskaras of later life.

**shraddhadharana:** (Sanskrit) "Collection or concentration of faith or
belief." A term used in Dancing with Siva for creed, a concise synopsis
of religious doctrine. See: creed, faith.

**shrauta:** (Sanskrit) "Related to hearing; audible." That which is
prescribed by or conforms with the Vedas.

**Shrauta Shastra:** (Sanskrit) "Texts on the revelation." 1) Refers to
scriptures or teachings that are in agreement with the Vedas. 2) A
specific group of texts of the Kalpa Vedanga, and part of the essential
study for Vedic priests. The Shrauta Shastras offer explanation of the
yajna rituals. See: Vedanga.

**shruti:** (Sanskrit) "That which is heard." Hinduism's revealed
scriptures, of supreme theological authority and spiritual value. They
are timeless teachings transmitted to rishis, or seers, directly by God
thousands of years ago. Shruti is thus said to be apaurusheya,
"impersonal," or rather "suprahuman." Shruti consists essentially of the
Vedas and the Agamas, preserved initially through oral tradition and
eventually written down in Sanskrit. Among the many sacred books of the
Hindus, these two bodies of knowledge are held in the highest esteem.
For countless centuries shruti has been the basis of philosophical
discussion, study and commentary, and this attention has given rise to
countless schools of thought. It is also the subject of deep study and
meditation, to realize the wisdom of the ancients within oneself. Most
mantras are drawn from shruti, used for rites of worship, both public
and domestic, as well as personal prayer and japa. It is a remarkable
tribute to Hindu culture that so much of shruti was preserved for
thousands of years without alteration by means of oral instruction from
guru to shishya, generation after generation. In the Veda tradition this
was accomplished by requiring the student to learn each verse in eleven
different ways, including backwards. Traditionally shruti is not read,
but chanted according to extremely precise rules of grammar, pitch,
intonation and rhythm. This brings forth its greatest power. In the
sacred language of shruti, word and meaning are so closely aligned that
hearing these holy scriptures properly chanted is magical in its effect
upon the soul of the listener. See: Agamas, smriti, Vedas.

**shubha muhurta:** (Sanskrit) "Auspicious time." A range of time when
specified activities are most likely to thrive and succeed. See:
muhurta.

**Shuddha Saiva Siddhanta:** (Sanskrit) "Pure Saiva Siddhanta," a term
first used by Tirumular in the Tirumantiram to describe his monistic
Saiva Siddhanta and distinguish it from pluralistic Siddhanta and other
forms of Siddhanta that do not encompass the ultimate monism of Vedanta.

**Shuddhavidya:** (Sanskrit) "Pure Knowledge." The fifth tattva in the
Saiva Siddhanta system. See: tattva.

**shudra:** (Sanskrit) "Worker, servant." The social class of skilled
artisans, workers and laborers. See: varna dharma.

**Shukla Yajur Veda:** (Sanskrit) See: Yajur Veda.

**Shulba Shastra(s):** (Sanskrit) Practical manuals giving the
measurements and procedures for constructing the sites of Vedic yajna
rites. A division of the Kalpa Vedanga (Veda limb on rituals), these
sutras employ sophisticated geometry and are India's earliest extant
mathematical texts. Shulba means "string or cord," denoting the use of
string for measuring. See: Vedanga.

**Shum:** A Natha mystical language of meditation revealed in
Switzerland in 1968 by Sivaya Subramuniyaswami.

**Shunya Sampadane:** (Sanskrit) "Gaining of Nothingness." A primary
text of Vira Saivism (ca 1550) consisting of debates and writings of the
Siva Sharanas. Shunya: "the void, the distinctionless absolute;"
sampadana: "attainment, realization, enlightenment."

**shuttle:** An instrument that carries a spool of thread in the weaving
of cloth.

**Siddha Marga:** (Sanskrit) Another term for Siddha Siddhanta. See:
Siddha Siddhanta, siddha yoga.

**siddha:** (Sanskrit) A "perfected one'' or accomplished yogi, a person
of great spiritual attainment or powers. See: siddhi, siddha yoga,
siddha yogi.

**Siddha Siddhanta Paddhati:** (Sanskrit) "Tracks on the doctrines of
the adepts." A text of 353 highly mystical verses, ascribed to
Gorakshanatha, dealing with the esoteric nature of the inner bodies and
the soul's union with Supreme Reality. See: Gorakshanatha, Siddha
Siddhanta.

**Siddha Siddhanta:** (Sanskrit) Siddha Siddhanta, also called
Gorakhnatha Saivism, is generally considered to have come in the lineage
of the earlier ascetic orders of India. Its most well-known preceptor
was Gorakshanatha (ca 1000) a disciple of Matsyendranatha, patron saint
of Nepal, revered by certain esoteric Buddhist schools as well as by
Hindus. The school systematized and developed the practice of hatha yoga
to a remarkable degree. Indeed, nearly all of what is today taught about
hatha yoga comes from this school. Among its central texts are Hatha
Yoga Pradipika by Svatmarama, Gheranda Samhita, Siva Samhita and
Jnanamrita. Siddha Siddhanta theology embraces both transcendent Siva
(being) and immanent Siva (becoming). Siva is both the efficient and
material cause of the universe. Devotion is expressed through temple
worship and pilgrimage, with the central focus on internal worship and
kundalini yoga, with the goal of realizing Parasamvid, the supreme
transcendent state of Siva. Today there are perhaps 750,000 adherents of
Siddha Siddhanta Saivism, who are often understood as Shaktas or advaita
tantrics. The school fans out through India, but is most prominent in
North India and Nepal. Devotees are called yogis, and stress is placed
on world renunciation--even for householders. This sect is also most
commonly known as Natha, the Gorakshapantha and Siddha Yogi Sampradaya.
Other names include Adinatha Sampradaya, Nathamatha and Siddhamarga.
See: Gorakshanatha.

**siddha yoga:** (Sanskrit) "Yoga of perfected attainment, or of
supernatural powers." 1) A term used in the Tirumantiram and other Saiva
scriptures to describe the yoga which is the way of life of adepts after
attaining of Parasiva. Siddha yoga involves the development of magical
or mystical powers, or siddhis, such as the eight classical powers. It
is a highly advanced yoga which seeks profound transformation of body,
mind and emotions and the ability to live in a flawless state of God
Consciousness. 2) The highly accomplished practices of certain
alchemists. See: siddha yogi, siddhi.

**Siddha Yogi Sampradaya:** (Sanskrit) Another term for Siddha
Siddhanta. See: Siddha Siddhanta.

**siddha yogi:** (Sanskrit) "Yogi of perfection." A perfected one,
adept, a realized being who is the embodiment of the most profound yogic
states and has attained magical or mystical powers. See: siddha yoga,
siddhi.

**siddhanta:** (Sanskrit) "Final attainments or conclusions." Siddhanta
refers to ultimate understanding arrived at in any given field of
knowledge.

**siddhanta shravana (or shravana):** (Sanskrit) "Scriptural listening."
See: yama-niyama.

**siddhi:** (Sanskrit) "Power, accomplishment; perfection."
Extraordinary powers of the soul, developed through consistent
meditation and deliberate, grueling, often uncomfortable tapas, or
awakened naturally through spiritual maturity and yogic sadhana. Through
the repeated experience of Self Realization, siddhis naturally unfold
according to the needs of the individual. Before Self Realization, the
use or development of siddhis is among the greatest obstacles on the
path because it cultivates ahamkara, I-ness, and militates against the
attainment of prapatti, complete submission to the will of God, Gods and
guru. Six siddhis in particular are considered primary obstacles to
samadhi: clairvoyance (adarsha siddhi or divya siddhi), clairaudience
(shravana siddhi or divyashravana), divination (pratibha siddhi),
super-feeling (vedana siddhi) and super-taste (asvadana siddhi),
super-smell (varta siddhi). The eight classical siddhis are: 1) anima:
to be as small as an atom; 2)mahima: to become infinitely large; 3)
laghima: super-lightness, levitation; 4) prapti: pervasiveness,
extension, to be anywhere at will; 5)prakamya: fulfillment of desires;
6) vashitva: control of natural forces; 7) ishititva: supremacy over
nature; 8) kama-avasayitva: complete satisfaction. The supreme siddhi
(parasiddhi) is realization of the Self, Parasiva. See: ahamkara,
prapatti, siddha yoga.

**Sikhism:** "Discipleship." Religion of nine million members founded in
India about 500 years ago by the saint Guru Nanak. A reformist faith
which rejects idolatry and the caste system, its holy book is the Adi
Granth, and main holy center is the Golden Temple of Amritsar. See: Adi
Granth.

**simantonnayana:** (Sanskrit) "Hair-parting rite." See: samskaras of
birth.

**sin:** Intentional transgression of divine law. Akin to the Latin
sons, "guilty." Hinduism does not view sin as a crime against God, but
as an act against dharma--moral order--and one's own self. It is thought
natural, if unfortunate, that young souls act wrongly, for they are
living in nescience, avidya, the darkness of ignorance. Sin is an
adharmic course of action which automatically brings negative
consequences. The term sin carries a double meaning, as do its Sanskrit
equivalents: 1) a wrongful act, 2) the negative consequences resulting
from a wrongful act. In Sanskrit the wrongful act is known by several
terms, including pataka (from pat, "to fall") papa, enas, kilbisha,
adharma, anrita and rina (transgress, in the sense of omission). The
residue of sin is called papa, sometimes conceived of as a sticky,
astral substance which can be dissolved through penance (prayashchitta),
austerity (tapas) and good deeds (sukritya). This astral substance can
be psychically seen within the inner, subconscious aura of the
individual. Note that papa is also accrued through unknowing or
unintentional transgressions of dharma, as in the term aparadha
(offense, fault, mistake).**--inherent (or original) sin:** A doctrine
of Semitic faiths whereby each soul is born in sin as a result of Adam's
disobedience in the Garden of Eden. Sometimes mistakenly compared to the
Saiva Siddhanta concept of the three malas, especially anava. See:
pasha.**--mortal sin:** According to some theologies, sins so grave that
they can never be expiated and which cause the soul to be condemned to
suffer eternally in hell. In Hinduism, there are no such concepts as
inherent or mortal sin. See: aura, evil, karma, papa.

**Siva Advaita:** (Sanskrit) Also called Siva Vishishtadvaita, or
Saivite "qualified nondualism," Siva Advaita is the philosophy of
Srikantha (ca 1050) as expounded in his commentary on the Brahma Sutras
(ca 500-200 bce). Patterned after the Vaishnavite Vishishtadvaita of
Ramanuja, this philosophy was later amplified by Appaya Dikshita.
Brahman, or Siva, is transcendent and the efficient and material cause
of the world and souls. Souls are not identical to Him and never merge
in Him, even after liberation. As a school Siva Advaita remained
exclusively intellectual, never enjoying a following of practitioners.
Purification, devotion and meditation upon Siva as the Self--the akasha
within the heart--define the path. Meditation is directed to the Self,
Siva, the One Existence that evolved into all form. Liberation depends
on grace, not deeds. See: Appaya Dikshita, Saivism, Srikantha.

**Siva consciousness: Siv** achaitanya. A broad term naming the
experience or state of being conscious of Siva in a multitude of ways,
such as in the five expressed in the following meditation.**Vital
Breath: prana.** Experience the inbreath and outbreath as Siva's will
within your body. Become attuned to the ever-present pulse of the
universe, knowing that nothing moves but by His divine
will.**All-Pervasive Energy:** sh**akti.** Become conscious of the flow
of life within your body. Realize that it is the same universal energy
within every living thing. Practice seeing the life energy within
another's eyes.**Manifest Sacred Form: darshana.** Hold in your mind a
sacred form, such as Nataraja, Sivalinga or your satguru--who is
Sadasiva--and think of nothing else. See every form as a form of our God
Siva.**Inner Light: jyoti.** Observe the light that illumines your
thoughts. Concentrate only on that light, as you might practice being
more aware of the light on a TV screen than of its changing
pictures.**Sacred Sound: nada.** Listen to the constant high-pitched ee
sounding in your head. It is like the tone of an electrical transformer,
a hundred tamburas distantly playing or a humming swarm of bees.

These five constitute the "Sivachaitanya Panchatantra," five simple
experiences that bring the Divine into the reach of each individual.
Sivachaitanya, of course, applies to deeper states of meditation and
contemplation as well. See: jnana, mind (five states), Sivasayujya.

**Siva Drishti:** (Sanskrit) A scripture of Kashmir Saivism, now lost,
written by Somananda, a disciple of Vasugupta. See: Kashmir Saivism.

**Siva Purana:** (Sanskrit) "Ancient [lore] of Siva." 1) A collection of
six major scriptures sacred to Saivites. 2) The name of the oldest of
these six texts, though some consider it a version of the Vayu Purana.

**Siva Rakshamani Dipika** : (Sanskrit) A purely nondual commentary and
interpretation by Appaya Dikshita (15541626) on the writings of
Srikantha. See: Saivism.

**Siva Samhita:** (Sanskrit) Text from the Gorakshanatha school of
Saivism, ca 1700. In 212 sutras it discusses anatomy, asanas, energy,
breathing and philosophy. It is available in various languages and
widely studied as a valuable overview of yoga practice.

**Siva:** (Sanskrit) "The auspicious, gracious or kindly one." Supreme
Being of the Saivite religion. God Siva is All and in all,
simultaneously the creator and the creation, both immanent and
transcendent. As personal Deity, He is creator, preserver and destroyer.
He is a one being, perhaps best understood in three perfections:
Parameshvara (Primal Soul), Parashakti (pure consciousness) and Parasiva
(Absolute Reality). See: Ishta Devata, Parameshvara, Parashakti,
Parasiva, Nataraja, Sadasiva, Saivism, Satchidananda.

**Siva Sutra(s):** (Sanskrit) The seminal or seed scripture of Kashmir
Saivism, 77 aphorisms revealed to Sage Vasugupta (ca 800). See:
Vasugupta.

**Sivachaitanya:** (Sanskrit) "God consciousness." See: Siva
consciousness.

**Sivachara:** (Sanskrit) "Treating all as God." See: Vira Saivism.

**Sivacharya:** (Sanskrit) The hereditary priests of the Saiva Siddhanta
tradition. The title of Adisaiva Brahmins. An Adisaiva priest who has
received the necessary training and dikshas to perform public Siva
temple rites known as Agamic nitya parartha puja. A fully qualified
Sivacharya is also known as archaka. Sivacharya, too, names the family
clan of this priest tradition. See: Adisaiva. brahmin.

**Sivajnanabodham:** (Sanskrit) "Treatise on Siva Wisdom." A work
authored (or, some believe, a portion of the Raurava Agama translated
into Tamil) by Meykandar, ca 1300, consisting of 12 sutras describing
the relationship between God, soul and world. The Meykandar Sampradaya
revere it as their primary philosophical text, and consider it a
pluralistic exposition. For others, it is monistic in character, the
pluralistic interpretation being introduced by later commentators.
Included in this important text is an acute commentary on each of the 12
sutras. See: Meykandar Shastras.

**Sivakarnamrita:** (Sanskrit) A text by Appaya Dikshita (15541626)
written to reestablish the superiority of God Siva in the face of
widespread conversion to Vaishnavism. See: Appaya Dikshita.

**Sivalaya:** (Sanskrit) The holy Siva temple. "Siva's house or dwelling
(alaya)." See: temple.

**Sivalinga:** (Sanskrit) "Mark, or sign, of Siva." The most prevalent
icon of Siva, found in virtually all Siva temples. A rounded,
elliptical, aniconic image, usually set on a circular base, or pitha.
The Sivalinga is the simplest and most ancient symbol of Siva,
especially of Parasiva, God beyond all forms and qualities. The pitha
represents Parashakti, the manifesting power of God. Lingas are usually
of stone (either carved or naturally existing, svayambhu, such as shaped
by a swift-flowing river), but may also be of metal, precious gems,
crystal, wood, earth or transitory materials such as ice. According to
the Karana Agama (6), a transitory Sivalinga may be made of 12 different
materials: sand, rice, cooked food, river clay, cow dung, butter,
rudraksha seeds, ashes, sandalwood, dharba grass, a flower garland or
molasses. See: murti, Saivism, svayambhu Linga.

**Sivaloka:** (Sanskrit) "Realm of Siva." See: loka.

**Sivamaya:** (Sanskrit) "Formed, made, consisting of or full of Siva."
Denotes that all of existence--all worlds, all beings, all of
manifestation, that which undergoes creation, preservation and
destruction, all dualities and paradoxes--consists of and is pervaded by
Siva. An important concept of monistic Saivism. See: sarvabhadra, world,
tattva.

**Sivamayakosha:** (Sanskrit) "Sheath composed of Siva." The Primal Soul
form, Parameshvara--the body of God Siva--into which the individual soul
merges as the fulfillment of its evolution. See: Parameshvara,
vishvagrasa.

**Sivanadiyar:** (Tamil) "Slave of Siva." Conveys a mystic relationship
between the devotee and Siva in which all spiritual, mental and physical
actions are perceived as fulfilling the will and design of Siva. See:
karma yoga.

**Sivananda:** (Sanskrit) "Bliss of Siva." See: Swami Sivananda.

**Sivaness:** Quality of being Siva or like Siva, especially sharing in
His divine state of consciousness. See: samarasa, Siva consciousness,
Sivasayujya.

**Sivanubhava Mandapa:** (Sanskrit) The "hall of Siva experience," where
the Vira Saivites gathered to develop the basic doctrines of the
movement in the 12th century.

**Sivaratri:** (Sanskrit) "Night of Siva." See: Mahasivaratri.

**Siva's five faces:** See: Sadasiva.

**Sivasayujya:** (Sanskrit) "Intimate union with Siva." Becoming one
with God. The state of perpetual Siva consciousness; simultaneous
perception of the inner and the outer. A permanent state of oneness with
Siva, even in the midst of ordinary activities, the aftermath or plateau
which comes after repeated Self Realization experiences. Rishi Tirumular
says: "Sayujya is the state of jagratita--the 'Beyond Consciousness.'
Sayujya is to abide forever in upashanta, the peace that knows no
understanding. Sayujya is to become Siva Himself. Sayujya is to
experience the infinite power of inward bliss forever and ever
(Tirumantiram 1513)." In many Hindu schools of thought it is the highest
attainment. It dawns when the kundalini resides coiled in the sahasrara
chakra. See: jivanmukti, kaivalya, kundalini, moksha.

**Siva-Shakti:** (Sanskrit) Father-Mother God, both immanent and
transcendent. A name for God Siva encompassing His unmanifest Being and
manifest energy. See: Ardhanarishvara, Parameshvara, Primal Soul, Siva.

**Sivasharana:** (Sanskrit) "One surrendered in God." See: Vira Saivism.

**Sivathondan:** (Tamil) "Servant of Siva." Conveys the same mystic
meaning as Sivanadiyar, denoting a devotee who regularly performs
actions dedicated to God Siva; selfless work in service to others. See:
karma yoga.

**Sivathondu:** (Tamil) "Service to Siva." Akin to the concept of karma
yoga. See: karma yoga.

**Sivaya Namah:** (Sanskrit) "Adoration to Siva." Alternate form of
Namah Sivaya. See: Namah Sivaya.

**Sivena saha Nartanam:** (Sanskrit) "Dancing with Siva."

**Skanda:** (Sanskrit) "Quicksilver; leaping one." One of Lord
Karttikeya's oldest names, and His form as scarlet-hued warrior God.
See: Karttikeya.

**Skanda Shashthi:** (Sanskrit) A six-day festival in October-November
celebrating Lord Karttikeya's, or Skanda's, victory over the forces of
darkness.

**slaughter:** The killing of animals for food; the murder of many
people.

**Smarta Sampradaya:** (Sanskrit) The teaching tradition of Hinduism's
Smarta sect, formalized by Adi Shankara in the 9th century. See:
Smartism.

**Smarta:** (Sanskrit) "Of or related to smriti," the secondary Hindu
scriptures. See: Smartism, smriti.

**Smartism:** (Sanskrit) Sect based on the secondary scriptures
(smriti). The most liberal of the four major Hindu denominations, an
ancient Vedic brahminical tradition (ca 700 bce) which from the 9th
century onward was guided and deeply influenced by the Advaita Vedanta
teachings of the reformist Adi Shankara. Its adherents rely mainly on
the classical smriti literature, especially the Itihasas (Ramayana and
Mahabharata, the latter of which includes the Bhagavad Gita), Puranas
and Dharma Shastras. These are regarded as complementary to and a means
to understanding the Vedas. Smartas adhere to Shankara's view that all
Gods are but various depictions of Saguna Brahman. Thus, Smartas are
avowedly eclectic, worshiping all the Gods and discouraging
sectarianism. The Smarta system of worship, called panchayatana puja,
reinforces this outlook by including the major Deity of each primary
Hindu sect of ancient days: Ganesha, Surya, Vishnu, Siva and Shakti. To
encompass a sixth important lineage, Shankara recommended the addition
of a sixth Deity, Kumara. Thus he was proclaimed shanmata
sthapanacharya, founder of the six-fold system. One among the six is
generally chosen as the devotee's preferred Deity, Ishta Devata. For
spiritual authority, Smartas look to the regional monasteries
established across India by Shankara, and to their pontiffs. These are
the headquarters of ten orders of renunciate monks who spread the
Advaita Vedanta teachings far and wide. Within Smartism three primary
religious approaches are distinguished: ritualistic, devotional and
philosophical. See: dashanami, panchayatana puja, Shankara.

**smriti:** (Sanskrit) "That which is remembered; the tradition."
Hinduism's nonrevealed, secondary but deeply revered scriptures, derived
from man's insight and experience. Smriti speaks of secular
matters--science, law, history, agriculture, etc.--as well as spiritual
lore, ranging from day-to-day rules and regulations to superconscious
outpourings. 1) The term smriti refers to a specific collection of
ancient Sanskritic texts as follows: the six or more Vedangas, the four
Upavedas, the two Itihasas, and the 18 main Puranas. Among the Vedangas,
the Kalpa Vedanga defines codes of ritual in the Shrauta and Shulba
Shastras, and domestic-civil laws in the Grihya and Dharma Shastras.
Also included as classical smriti are the founding sutras of six ancient
philosophies called shad darshana (Sankhya, Yoga, Nyaya, Vaisheshika,
Mimamsa and Vedanta). 2) In a general sense, smriti may refer to any
text other than shruti (revealed scripture) that is revered as scripture
within a particular sect. From the vast body of sacred literature,
shastra, each sect and school claims its own preferred texts as
secondary scripture, e.g., the Ramayana of Vaishnavism and Smartism, or
the Tirumurai of Saiva Siddhanta. Thus, the selection of smriti varies
widely from one sect and lineage to another. See: Mahabharata, Ramayana,
Tirumurai.

**snare:** A trap for catching animals.

**social dharma:** (varna dharma). See: dharma.

**solace:** A comforting or easing of distress, pain or sorrow.

**solemn:** Observed or performed according to ritual or tradition.
Formal, serious, inspiring feelings of awe.**--solemnize:** To
consecrate with formal ceremony. See: sacrament, samskara.

**soliloquy:** An act of speaking to oneself.

**solitaire (solitary):** A hermit. One who lives alone and away from
all human company.

**Somananda:** (Sanskrit) Disciple of Vasugupta and author of
Sivadrishti (ca 850900), which was said to be a highly influential
explanation and defense of the Kashmir Saiva philosophy. See: Kashmir
Saivism.

**Somanath Temple:** (Sanskrit) Ancient center of Pashupata Saivism
located in modern Gujarat state and mentioned in the Mahabharata. The
first recorded temple was built there before 100. In 1026 the then
fabulously wealthy temple was sacked by Muslim invaders, the Sivalinga
smashed and 50,000 brahmins slaughtered. The temple was rebuilt several
times and finally demolished by the Moghul emperor Aurangzeb (ca 1700).
Sardar Patel, deputy prime minister of India, spearheaded its
reconstruction in 1947.

**soul:** The real being of man, as distinguished from body, mind and
emotions. The soul--known as atman or purusha--is the sum of its two
aspects, the form or body of the soul and the essence of the soul
(though many texts use the word soul to refer to the essence
only).**--essence or nucleus of the soul:** Man's innermost and
unchanging being--Pure Consciousness (Parashakti or Satchidananda) and
Absolute Reality (Parasiva). This essence was never created, does not
change or evolve and is eternally identical with God Siva's perfections
of Parashakti and Parasiva.**--soul body:** anandamaya kosha ("sheath of
bliss"), also referred to as the "causal body" (karana sharira),
"innermost sheath" and "body of light." Body of the soul, or soul body,
names the soul's manifest nature as an individual being--an effulgent,
human-like form composed of light (quantums). It is the emanational
creation of God Siva, destined to one day merge back into Him. During
its evolution, the soul functions through four types of outer sheaths
that envelope the soul form--mental, instinctive-intellectual, vital and
physical--and employs the mental faculties of manas, buddhi and
ahamkara, as well as the five agents of perception (jnanendriyas), and
five agents of action (karmendriyas). The "soul body" is not a body in
sense of a case, a vessel, vehicle or enclosure for something else. The
soul body is the soul itself--a radiant, self-effulgent, human-like,
super-intelligent being. Its very composition is Satchidananda in
various subtle levels of manifestation. It is the finest of subatomic
forms, on the quantum level. The soul form evolves as its consciousness
evolves, becoming more and more refined until finally it is the same
intensity or refinement as the Primal Soul, Parameshvara. The
experiences of life, in all the various planes of consciousness, are
"food for the soul," reaping lessons that actually raise the level of
intelligence and divine love. Thus, very refined souls, whether embodied
or in the disembodied, ajiva, state, are like walking intelligences with
inventive creativeness and powers of preservation, beaming with love and
luminosity in their self-effulgent bodies of quantum light particles.
See: atman, evolution of the soul, indriya, kosha, Parashakti, Parasiva,
purusha, quantum, Satchidananda, spiritual unfoldment.

**Soundless Sound:** Paranada. See: nada.

**sound: Sh** abda. As the darshana, or "seeing," of the Divine is a
central article of faith for Hindus, similarly, hearing the Divine is
spiritually indispensable. The ears are a center of many nadis connected
to inner organs of perception. Gurus may when imparting initiation
whisper in the ear of disciples to stimulate these centers and give a
greater effect to their instructions. During temple puja, bells ring
loudly, drums resound, conches and woodwinds blare to awaken worshipers
from routine states of consciousness. Meditation on inner sound, called
nada-anusandhana, is an essential yoga practice. Listening to the Vedas
or other scripture is a mystical process. Traditional music is revered
as the nectar of the Divine. See: Aum, nada, Siva consciousness.

**sovereign:** Above or superior to all others. Supreme in rank or
authority.

**sow:** To scatter or plant, as seeds for cultivation; disseminate;
propagate.

**span:** To stretch across or over, as a bridge spans a river. To cover
or take in the whole of something.

**Spanda Karika:** (Sanskrit) A commentary of 52 verses by Vasugupta on
the Siva Sutras. Also called the Spanda Sutras. See: Vasugupta, Vira
Saivism.

**spark:** A small burning piece of matter, usually thrown off by a
fire. A tiny beginning. To stir or activate.

**spectrum:** A series of colored bands which blend one into the other
so as to include the entire range of colors, as a rainbow. The entire
range of variations of anything, as in the spectrum of all possible
emotions.

**speculate (speculation):** To conjecture, reflect, think or meditate
on a subject. See: meditation, self-reflection.

**sphatika:** (Sanskrit) "Quartz crystal." From sphat, "to expand;
blossom; to burst open or into view." See: sphatika Sivalinga.

**sphatika Sivalinga:** (Sanskrit) "Crystal mark of God." A
quartz-crystal Sivalinga. See: San Marga Sanctuary, Sivalinga, Svayambhu
Linga.

**sphere:** A world. The area, place; the extent or range or action,
experience or influence. See: loka, world.

**Spinoza, Baruch:** Dutch philosopher (1632-1677) who taught a monistic
pantheism of one infinite substance, God or nature.

**spiritual evolution:** Adhyatma prasara. See: adhyatma prasara,
evolution of the soul.

**spiritual unfoldment:** Adhyatma vikasa. The unfoldment of the spirit,
the inherent, divine soul of man. The very gradual expansion of
consciousness as kundalini shakti slowly rises through the sushumna. The
term spiritual unfoldment indicates this slow, imperceptible process,
likened to a lotus flower's emerging from bud to effulgent beauty.
Contrasted with development, which implies intellectual study; or
growth, which implies character building and sadhana. Sound intellect
and good character are the foundation for spiritual unfoldment, but they
are not the unfoldment itself. When philosophical training and sadhana
is complete, the kundalini rises safely and imperceptively, without
jerks, twitches, tears or hot flashes. Brings greater willpower,
compassion and perceptive qualities. See: adhyatma vikasa, kundalini,
liberation, pada, sadhana, sadhana marga, San Marga, tapas.

**splendor (splendid):** Great brightness, magnificent in richness,
beauty or character. Grandeur.

**spouse:** A partner in a marriage; a husband or wife.

**Sri Chakra:** (Sanskrit) "Venerated wheel." See: yantra.

**Sri Lanka:** "Venerable lion." Island country off the southeast tip of
India, formerly called Ceylon, 80% Buddhist, home to several million
Tamil Saivites who live mostly in the arid north. It was a British
colony until independence in 1948 as a member of the Commonwealth;
became a republic in 1972; 25,000 square miles, 15 million population.

**sri paduka:** (Sanskrit) The guru's holy sandals. See: paduka.

**Sri Rudram:** (Sanskrit) "Hymn to the wielder of awesom powers."
Preeminent Vedic hymn to Lord Siva as the God of dissolution, chanted
daily in Siva temples throughout India. It is in this long prayer,
located in the middle of the Yajur Veda, Taittiriya Samhita, the rst of
the three Vedas, that the Saivite mantra Namah Sivaya rst appears.

**sri:** (Sanskrit) "Radiant, beautiful, majestic; prosperous." An
honorific prefix meaning "sacred, holy," often attached to the names of
Deities (as in Sri Ganesha); to the names of scriptural works or eminent
persons; similar to the English reverend or, more commonly, Mr. (the
feminine equivalent is shrimati).

**Srikantha:** (Sanskrit) A saint and philosopher (ca 1050) who promoted
a Saivite theology which embraced monism and dualism. Founder of the
Saiva school called Siva Advaita, or Siva Vishishtadvaita, teaching a
"Saivite qualified nondualism," resembling Ramanuja's Vaishnavite
Vishishtadvaita. He was also known as Nilakantha Sivacharya. See: Siva
Advaita.

**Srikumara:** (Sanskrit) Monistic Saiva Siddhanta philosopher (ca 1050)
who refuted the Shankaran Vedanta doctrine of maya as illusion and
expounded that Siva is both material cause (upadana karana) and
efficient cause (nimitta karana).

**Srinagara:** (Sanskrit) A principal city of Kashmir.

**Srinatha:** (Sanskrit) A Kashmir Saivite teacher of monistic theism.
See: Durvasas.

**srishti** (Sanskrit) "Creation." See: Nataraja.

**stave off:** To push back, impede, keep from happening.

**steadfast:** Constant. Firm, established, secure. Not wavering or
changeable.

**sthapati:** (Sanskrit) From stha, "building" or "place," and pati,
"lord or father." A master of Agamic temple architecture, sculpture,
city planning and other traditional building arts. A sthapati must be
well versed in the Shilpa Shastras, experienced in all aspects of temple
construction, pious, mystically trained and a good administrator, able
to direct and guide a team of shilpis, stonecutters, carvers, sculptors,
woodworkers, etc. See: Shilpa Shastras, Stapatyaveda.

**Sthapatyaveda:** (Sanskrit) "Science of architecture." A class of
writings on architecture, sometimes classed as one of the Upavedas. It
embodies such works as the Manasara, the Vastu Shastras and the
architectural Shilpa Shastra. See: Upaveda.

**sthiti:** (Sanskrit) "Preservation." See: Nataraja.

**sthula sharira:** (Sanskrit) "Gross or physical body." The odic body.
See: actinic, actinodic, kosha, odic, subtle body.

**stingy (stinginess):** Miserly. Unwilling or reluctant to give or
spend.

**Stoics:** Ancient Greek philosophers who held that all things are
governed by natural laws and that the wise follow virtue and remain
aloof from the external world and its passions.

**straits:** A narrow waterway; a difficult, dangerous experience or
passage in life.

**stranglehold:** Any action that suppresses freedom or cuts off life.

**stratification:** "Making layers." The process of organizing or
arranging in layers or levels.

**stri dharma:** (Sanskrit) "Womanly conduct." See: dharma.

**Subala Upanishad:** (Sanskrit) Belongs to the Shukla Yajur Veda. A
dialog between sage Subala and Brahma about the Supreme Being as
Narayana.

**subatomic:** Of the inner parts of atoms; anything smaller than an
atom.

**subconscious mind:** Samskara chitta. See: aura, conscience, mind
(five states).

**subjective:** Personal. Of or colored by the personality, state of
mind etc., of the observer (subject). Opposite of objective. Cf:
objective.

**sublime:** Noble, grand. Inspiring awe or reverence.

**subliminal:** Below the threshold of consciousness or apprehension,
such as an attitude of which one is not aware. Subconscious. See: mind
(five states).

**Subramanya:** (Sanskrit) "Very pious; dear to holy men." A Name of
Lord Karttikeya. See: karttikeya.

**Subramuniyaswami:** Current and 162nd satguru (1927) of the Nandinatha
Sampradaya's Kailasa Parampara. He was ordained Sivaya Subramuniyaswami
by Sage Yogaswami on the full-moon day of May 12, 1949, in Jaffna, Sri
Lanka, at 6:21 pm. This was just days after he had attained nirvikalpa
samadhi in the caves of Jalani. Yogaswami, then 77, ordained the 22-year
old yogi with a tremendous slap on the back, saying, "This will be heard
in America," and conferring upon him the mission to bring the fullness
of Saivism to the West. Local devotees called the initiation a
coronation. That same year, while still in Sri Lanka, Subramuniyaswami
founded the Saiva Siddhanta Yoga Order and Saiva Siddhanta Church at the
Sri Subramuniya Ashrama in Alaveddy. Returning to America, he spent the
next six years preparing for his teaching mission through intense
sadhana and tapas. He began actively teaching in 1957 when he founded
the Himalayan Academy. In 1970, he established his international
headquarters and monastery complex, Kauai Aadheenam, on Hawaii's Garden
Island of Kauai. Five years later, he designated a portion of the
51-acre holy site as the San Marga Sanctuary, future site of Iraivan
Temple, carved of white granite stone in Bangalore, India. To spearhead
a growing Hindu renaissance, he founded Hinduism Today in 1979, an
international monthly, full-color magazine acclaimed the world over as
the the greatest advent in Hindu publishing this century. In August of
1986, the World Religious Parliament in New Delhi honored
Subramuniyaswami as one of five Hindu spiritual leaders outside of India
who had most dynamically promoted Sanatana Dharma in the past 25 years.
He was given the title Jagadacharya, "World Teacher." In 1995 the
Parliament bestowed on him the title of Dharmachakra for his remarkable
publications. In April of 1988, he was selected to represent Hinduism at
the five-day Global Forum of Spiritual and Parliamentary Leaders for
Human Survival, held in England at Oxford University, and again in
Moscow from January 11 to 15, 1990; and in Brazil, June 57, 1992. At
Chicago's historic centenary Parliament of the World's Religions in
September, 1993, he was elected to the Presidents' Assembly, a core
group of 25 men and women representing the world's faiths. In late 1996
Gurudeva transformed "Hinduism Today" to a magazine, a quantum leap that
extended its global reach and impact in Hindu communities. In 1997 he
responded to President Bill Clinton's call for religious opinions on the
ethics of human cloning and spearheded the 125th anniversary and
diaspora pilgrimage of Sri Lanka's Sage Yogaswami. In Kerala, the Vishwa
Hindu Parishad honored him as "The Hindu Voice of the Century."
Throughout that same year he was a key member of Vision Kauai, a small
group of indigenous and political leaders meeting to fashion the
island's future based on ethical values.

Over the years Subramuniyaswami has written hundreds of tracts and
books, which have been distributed in the tens of thousands in many
languages. Especially in the 1980s, he lectured worldwide and
established the worship in numerous Hindu temples. Gurudeva teaches the
traditional Saivite Hindu path to enlightenment, a path that leads the
soul from simple service to worshipful devotion to God, from the
disciplines of meditation and yoga to the direct knowing of Divinity
within. His insights into the nature of consciousness provide a key for
quieting the external mind and revealing to aspirants their deeper
states of being, which are eternally perfect, full of light, love,
serenity and wisdom. He urges all seekers to live a life of ahimsa,
harmlessness towards nature, people and creatures, an ethic which
includes vegetarianism. From his ashrama in Hawaii, Gurudeva continues
to follow his satguru's instruction to bring Saivism to the Western
world by teaching others to "know thy Self by thyself" and thus "see God
Siva everywhere." Through the ordained swamis of the Saiva Siddhanta
Yoga Order, he trains young men in the ancient path of brahmacharya,
enlightenment and service to humanity. Over 30 full-time monks, along
with extended family groups in eight countries, have joined to fulfill
this parampara's mission to further monistic Saiva Siddhanta and Hindu
solidarity.

The name Subramuniya is a Tamil spelling of the Sanskrit Shubhramunya
(not to be confused with Subramanya). It is formed from shubhra meaning
"light; intuition," and muni, "silent sage." Ya means "restraint;
religious meditation." Thus, Subramuniya means a self-restrained soul
who remains silent or, when he speaks, speaks out from intuition.

**subside:** To become less active or less intense. To abate.

**substance:** Essence; real nature.

**substratum:** "Layer underneath." In geology, the layer of rock or
other matter forming the foundation of a landscape and acting as its
support. In philosophy, that which is "underneath," not visible but the
support for all of existence, the substance or underlying force which is
the foundation of any and all manifestation: Satchidananda. See:
Parashakti, Satchidananda, tattva.

**sub-subconscious mind:** Vasana chitta. See: mind (five states).

**subsuperconscious mind:** Anukarana chitta. See: kala, mind, tattvas.

**subtle body:** Sukshma sharira, the nonphysical, astral body or
vehicle in which the soul encases itself to function in the Antarloka,
or subtle world. The subtle body includes the pranamaya, manomaya and
vijnanamaya koshas if the soul is physically embodied. It consists of
only manomaya and vijnanamaya after death, when pranamaya kosha
disintegrates. And it consists of only vijnanamaya kosha when manomaya
kosha is dropped off just before rebirth or when higher evolutionary
planes are entered. Also part of the subtle body are the antahkarana
(mental faculty: intellect, instinct and ego--buddhi, manas and
ahamkara), the five jnanendriyas (agents of perception: hearing, touch,
sight, taste and smell); and the five karmendriyas (agents of action:
speech, grasping, movement, excretion and generation). See: indriya,
jiva, kosha.

**subtle plane:** See: loka, three worlds.

**successor:** A person who follows another, in office or title, as the
successor to a satguru or king.**--succession:** A number of persons or
things coming one after another in order; e.g., a spiritual succession.
See: guru parampara.

**suchi:** (Sanskrit) "Needle; sharp point." An index: that which
reveals a book.

**suicide:** "Self-killing." In Sanskrit, pranatyaga, "abandoning life
force." Intentionally ending one's own life through poisoning, drowning,
burning, jumping, shooting, etc. Suicide has traditionally been
condemned in Hindu scripture because, being an abrupt escape from life,
it creates unseemly karma to face in the future. However, in cases of
terminal disease or great disability, religious self-willed death
through fasting--prayopavesha--is permitted. The person making such a
decision declares it publicly, which allows for community regulation and
distinguishes the act from suicide performed privately in traumatic
emotional states of anguish and despair. Ancient lawgivers cite various
stipulations: 1) inability to perform normal bodily purification; 2)
death appears imminent or the condition is so bad that life's pleasures
are nil; 3) the action must be done under community regulation. The
gradual nature of prayopavesha is a key factor distinguishing it from
sudden suicide, svadehaghata ("murdering one's body"), for it allows
time for the individual to settle all differences with others, to ponder
life and draw close to God, as well as for loved ones to oversee the
person's gradual exit from the physical world. In the ideal, highly
ritualized practice, one begins by obtaining forgiveness and giving
forgiveness. Next a formal vow, mahavrata-marana, "great vow of death,"
is given to one's guru, following a full discussion of all karmas of
this life, especially fully and openly confessing one's wrongdoings.
Thereafter, attention is to be focused on scripture and the guru's noble
teachings. Meditation on the innermost, immortal Self becomes the full
focus as one gradually abstains from food. At the very end, as the soul
releases itself from the body, the sacred mantra is repeated as
instructed by the preceptor. See: death, penance, reincarnation, soul,
prayopavesha.

**sukshma sharira:** (Sanskrit) "Subtle body," or astral body. See:
actinic, actinodic, kosha, odic, soul, subtle body.

**sully (sullied):** To make dirty, or impure. See: purity-impurity.

**Sundaranathar:** (Tamil) "Beautiful lord." Original name of Natha
Siddha Tirumular before he trekked to South India from the Himalayas.
See: Tirumular.

**Sundarar:** (Tamil) "Beautiful." One of the four Tamil Samayacharyas
(ca 800), and composer of devotional hymns to God Siva, which form the
seventh book of the Tirumurai. In these, he pleads forth-rightly to Siva
for material as well as spiritual abundance. See: Nalvar, Nayanar,
Tirumurai.

**superconscious mind:** Karana chitta. See: kala, mind (five states),
mind (three phases), Satchidananda, tattva.

**supernatural:** Beyond or transcending the natural laws of the
physical cosmos. Of or relating to an order of existence beyond the
visible universe, referring to events, agencies or knowledge superseding
or mystically explaining the laws of nature. See: mysticism, shamanism.

**supplicate (supplication):** To ask for humbly. To earnestly pray for.

**Suprabheda Agama:** (Sanskrit) One of the 28 Saiva Siddhanta Agamas,
this scripture discusses temple worship, especially personal devotions,
festivals, practices and initiations for each stage of life. A total of
4,666 verses have been preserved from the original scripture.

**Supreme God:** Highest God, the source or creator of all other Gods,
beings and all manifestation.

**supreme:** Highest in rank, power, authority.

**Surdas:** (Sanskrit) Blind North-Indian Vaishnava poet (ca 1550),
famous for his devotional hymns to Lord Krishna. His massive writing
Sursagar, "Sur's Ocean," is widely read.

**surpass:** To excel; to be superior to.

**surrender:** Giving up or yielding. Surrender to the Divine is called
prapatti, a complete giving over of oneself to God's will in total trust
and abandonment. See: bhakti, prapatti, sacrifice.

**Surya:** (Sanskrit) "Sun." One of the principal Divinities of the
Vedas, also prominent in the epics and Puranas. Saivites revere Surya,
the Sun God each morning as Siva Surya. Smartas and Vaishnavas revere
the golden orb as Surya Narayana. As the source of light, the sun is the
most readily apparent image of Divinity available to man. As the giver
of life, Surya is worshiped during harvest festivals everywhere.
Esoterically, the sun represents the point where the manifest and
unmanifest worlds meet or unite. In yoga, the sun represents the
masculine force, pingala. Surya also signifies the Self within. In the
Vedic description of the course of souls after death, the "path of the
sun" leads liberated souls to the realm of Brahman; while the path of
the moon leads back to physical birth.

**sushumna nadi:** (Sanskrit) "Most gracious channel." Central psychic
nerve current within the spinal column. See: kundalini, nadi, samadhi.

**sustainable:** Maintainable; able to be kept up or continued
consistently over a period of time.

**sustenance (to sustain):** Support. That which preserves life, or
gives strength. Nourishment.

**Suta Samhita:** (Sanskrit) A chapter of the Skanda Purana dealing in
part with philosophy.

**sutala:** (Sanskrit) "Great depth." Region of obsessive jealousy and
retaliation. The third chakra below the muladhara, centered in the
knees. Corresponds to the third astral netherworld beneath the earth's
surface, called Samhata ("abandoned") or Sutala. See: chakra, loka,
Naraka.

**sutra:** (Sanskrit) "Thread." An aphoristic verse; the literary style
consisting of such maxims. From 500 bce, this style was widely adopted
by Indian philosophical systems and eventually employed in works on law,
grammar, medicine, poetry, crafts, etc. Each sutra is often accompanied
by a commentary called bhashya and sometimes subcommentary called tika,
vyakhyana or tippani. Through the media of short, concise, easily
memorized sutras, vast amounts of knowledge were preserved. Reciting
relevant sutra texts from memory is a daily sadhana in various Hindu
arts and sciences. Sutra also names the wife's wedding pendant (mangala
sutra). See: bhashya, wedding pendant.

**svadharma:** (Sanskrit) "One's own way." See: dharma.

**svadhishthana:** (Sanskrit) "One's own base." See: chakra.

**svadhyaya:** (Sanskrit) "Self-reflection; scriptural study." See:
yama-niyama.

**svarga:** (Sanskrit) "Abode of light." An intermediate realm of the
Antarloka; a term essentially synonymous with Svarloka. See: loka.

**Svarloka:** (Sanskrit) "Celestial or bright plane." The third of the
seven upper worlds, the mid-astral region (equated in some texts with
Svarga), realm of manipura chakra. See: loka.

**Svatmarama:** (Sanskrit) See: Hatha Yoga Pradipika.

**svayambhu Linga:** (Sanskrit) "Self-existent mark or sign of God."
Names a Sivalinga discovered in nature and not carved or crafted by
human hands; often a smooth cylindrical stone, called banalinga, such as
found in India's Narmada River. See: Sivalinga.

**Svayambhuva Agama:** (Sanskrit) One of the 28 Saiva Siddhanta Agamas.
See: Saiva Agama.

**Svayambhuva Sutra(s):** (Sanskrit) A subsidiary text of the Saiva
Agamas.

**Svetashvatara Upanishad:** (Sanskrit) An Upanishad of the Yajur Veda
that emphasizes theism--personal God and devotion--and at the same time
monism--the unity of God, soul and world. It is valued as a major
Upanishad, among the greatest panentheist writings, especially precious
to Saivite schools.

**swami:** (Sanskrit) "Lord; owner." He who knows or is master of
himself. A respectful title for a Hindu monk, usually a sannyasin, an
initiated, orange-robed renunciate, dedicated wholly to religious life.
As a sign of respect, the term swami is sometimes applied more broadly
to include nonmonastics dedicated to spiritual work. See: monk, sannyasa
dharma, sannyasin.

**Swami Sivananda:** (Sanskrit) One of Hinduism's most influential
modern-day saints (18871963). He was born in South India, practiced
medicine in Malaysia, published a medical journal, became administrator
of a hospital and later renounced the world. He was initiated by Swami
Vishvananda Sarasvati at Rishikesh in 1924, and founded the Divine Life
Society in 1939, which has branches in many countries today. He has been
a powerful force in spreading Hindu teachings in India and abroad
through his many books and the travels of his numerous swamis.
Emphasized hatha and raja yoga and a broad, universal form of Hinduism.

**swamini:** (Sanskrit) The feminine equivalent of the term swami. See:
monastic, nunk, sannyasa, swami.

**swastika (svastika):** (Sanskrit) "Sign of auspiciousness," From su
("wellness," "auspiciousness") and astu, "be it so." The ancient Hindu
symbol of good fortune, representing the sun. The right-angled arms of
the swastika denote the indirect way Divinity is reached--through
intuition, not by intellect. It has been a prominent icon in many
cultures. See: murti.

**swirl:** To move in a whirling, circular motion, like a whirlpool.

**symbolism:** The representation of one thing by something else. E.g.,
the damaru, Siva's drum, is a symbol of creation.

**syncretism:** A combination of various beliefs and practices, often of
opposing views formed into a one creed or system of belief, typically
marked by inconsistencies. See: universalist.

**synonymous:** Having the same or similar meaning. Quality of two words
or phrases whose meanings are identical.

**synthesis:** A combining of various parts to make a whole.


