B
=

**backbiting:** Speaking maliciously or slanderously about a person who
is absent.

**Badarayana:** (Sanskrit) Author of the Brahma Sutras. See: Brahma
Sutra.

**balipitha:** (Sanskrit) "Offering place." An inverted lotus-shaped
stone atop a pedestal situated near the temple flagpole, dhvajastambha.
Here devotees are to leave all negative thoughts as they enter the
temple.

**bard:** A singer or reciter of epic poems.

**Basavanna:** (Sanskrit) A 12th-century philosopher, poet and prime
minister who reformed and revived Vira Saivism in Karnataka. See: Vira
Saivism.

**Batara:** A name of Siva used in Indonesia. See: Siva.

**Baudhayana Dharma Shastra:** (Sanskrit) A book of laws associated with
the Krishna Yajur Veda and governing studentship, marriage, household
rituals, civil law, etc. It is followed by brahmins of Southwest India.
See: Dharma Shastra, Kalpa Vedanga.

**bce:** Abbreviation for "before common era," referring to dating prior
to the year zero in the Western, or Gregorian calendar, system. Thus,
300 bce was 300 years before the turn of the millennium. Cf: ce.

**Being:** When capitalized being refers to God's essential divine
nature--Pure Consciousness, Absolute Reality and Primal Soul (God's
nature as a divine Person). Lower case being refers to the essential
nature of a person, that within which never changes; existence. See:
Siva.

**benediction:** A blessing, especially a spoken one. See: blessing.

**benevolence:** Inclination to do good; charitable, kindly. See:
yama-niyama.

**benign:** Good, kindly, doing no harm. See: ahimsa.

**beseech:** To ask of someone earnestly. To solicit with fervor.

**bestow:** To offer as a gift. See: dana.

**betoken:** To indicate, show; offer as a sign of the future.
Symbolize.

**betrothal:** Mutual pledge to marry; engagement. In Sanskrit, vagdana
or nishchitartha. See: samskaras of adulthood.

**bewilder:** To baffle or confuse through something complicated or
involved.

**bhaga: n** (Sanskrit) "Good fortune; happiness." A God of the Rig
Veda; Lord of wealth, prowess and happiness. See: purushartha, Rig Veda,
wealth.

**Bhagavad Gita: n** (Sanskrit) "Song of the Lord." One of the most
popular of Hindu writings, a conversation between Lord Krishna and
Arjuna on the brink of the great battle at Kurukshetra. In this central
episode of the epic Mahabharata (part of the sixth book), Krishna
illumines the warrior-prince Arjuna on yoga, asceticism, dharma and the
manifold spiritual path. See: Itihasa, Mahabharata.

**Bhagavata: n** (Sanskrit) "Relating to God or a God holy; sacred,
divine." Pertaining to Vishnu or Krishna. From bhaga, "Gracious lord;
patron; good fortune." The name of a sect of Vaishnavism which arose in
the Western part of India after 600 bce. A highly devotional
monotheistic faith worshiping God as Krishna, Vasudeva or
Vasudeva-Krishna. It is believed by scholars to have been one of five
religions (along with the Ekantika, Narayaniya, Vaikhanasa and Satvata)
that blended to form what was called the Pancharatra religion in the
vicinity of Mathura around 300 bce. Today, the term Bhagavata is often
used to refer to the Vaishnavite religion as a whole. See:
Pancharatra,Vaishnavism.

**Bhagavata Purana: n** (Sanskrit) Also known as Srimad Bhagavatam, a
work of 18,000 stanzas. A major Purana and primary Vaishnava scripture,
from oral tradition, written down ca 800. It provides the stories of all
incarnations of Vishnu, filled with the bhakti, inner current of
devotion. See: Purana.

**Bhairava: n** (Sanskrit) "Terrifying." Lord Siva as the fiery
protector. He carries and is represented by a trishula (trident), a
symbol often enshrined as guardian at the entrance to Siva temples. See:
Siva, trishula.

**bhajana: n** (Sanskrit) Spiritual song. Individual or group singing of
devotional songs, hymns and chants. See: congregational worship,
kirtana.

**bhakta: n** (Sanskrit) "Devotee." A worshiper. One who is surrendered
to the Divine.

**bhakti: n** (Sanskrit) "Devotion." Surrender to God, Gods or guru.
Bhakti extends from the simplest expression of devotion to the
ego-decimating principle of prapatti, which is total surrender. Bhakti
is the foundation of all sects of Hinduism, as well as yoga schools
throughout the world. See: bhakti yoga, darshana, prapatti, prasada,
sacrifice, surrender, yajna.

**bhakti yoga: n** (Sanskrit) "Union through devotion." Bhakti yoga is
the practice of devotional disciplines, worship, prayer, chanting and
singing with the aim of awakening love in the heart and opening oneself
to God's grace. Bhakti may be directed toward God, Gods or one's
spiritual preceptor. Bhakti yoga seeks communion and ever closer rapport
with the Divine, developing qualities that make communion possible, such
as love, selflessness and purity. Saint Sambandar described bhakti as
religion's essence and the surest means to divine union and liberation.
He advised heartfelt worship, unstinting devotion and complete surrender
to God in humble, committed service. From the beginning practice of
bhakti to advanced devotion, called prapatti, self-effacement is an
intricate part of Hindu, even all Indian, culture. Bhakti yoga is
embodied in Patanjali's Yoga Darshana in the second limb, niyamas
(observances), as devotion (Ishvarapranidhana). Bhakti yoga is practiced
in many Hindu schools, and highly developed in Vaishnavism as a
spiritual path in itself, leading to perfection and liberation. In Saiva
Siddhanta, its cultivation is the primary focus during the kriya pada
(stage of worship). See: bhakti yoga, prapatti, sacrifice, surrender,
yajna.

**Bharat: n** (Sanskrit) "He who supports, maintains or bears a burden."
The ancient and original name of Indian lands and the constitutional
name of independent India. (Bharat In Hindi.) Also, Bharatavarsha "land
of Bharata," a legendary monarch and sage.

**bhashya: n** (Sanskrit) "Speech, discussion." Commentary on a text.
Hindu philosophies are largely founded upon the interpretations, or
bhashyas, of primary scripture. Other types of commentaries include:
vritti, a brief commentary on aphorisms; tippani, like a vritti but less
formal, explains difficult words or phrases; varttika, a critical study
and elaboration of a bhashya; and tika or vyakhyana, an explanation of a
bhashya or shastra in simpler language.

**Bhaskara: n** (Sanskrit) Philosopher (ca 950). His Bhaskarabhashya, a
commentary on the Brahma Sutras, was the first elaborate criticism of
Shankara's Advaitic doctrine of avidya-maya. See: Shankara,Vedanta,
Vishishtadvaita.

**Bhavalinga: n** (Sanskrit) "Mark of existence." Siva beyond space and
time. See: atattva, Parasiva, Sivalinga,Vira Saivism.

**bhedabheda: n** (Sanskrit) "Difference-nondifference." A term in
Vedanta which means that soul and world are identical with and yet
different from God, in the same way that the waves of an ocean can be
seen as being nondifferent from the ocean, yet they are not the ocean,
only a part of it. See: Vedanta.

**Bhogarishi: nu** (Sanskrit) One of the 18 siddhas of Saiva tradition,
an alchemist and tantrika yogi, associated with the Palani Hills Murugan
temple in South India, who created the Dandayuthapaniswami murti from
nine poisonous metals. He is thought by some to still reside there in a
cave. Chinese historical records suggest that he came from China. See:
siddha, siddhi, tantric.

**Bhojadeva Paramara: nu** (Sanskrit) ite king, poet, artist and
theologian of Gujarat (1018-1060). Author of Tattvaprakasha. Renowned
for establishing a systematic, monistic Saiva Siddhanta, and creating
India's then largest artificial lake, 250 miles in length, called
Bhojpur. See: Tatparyadipika.

**bhrityachara: n** (Sanskrit) "Servant's way." One of the five Vira
Saiva codes of conduct. See: Panchachara, Vira Saivism.

**Bhuloka: n** (Sanskrit) "Earth world." The physical plane. See: loka.

**bhumika: n** (Sanskrit) "Earth; ground; soil." Preface; introduction
to a book. From bhu, "to become, exist; arise, come into being."

**Bhuvarloka: n** (Sanskrit) "Plane of atmosphere." The second of the
seven upper worlds, realm of svadhishtana chakra, consisting of the two
astral regions closest to the physical plane: Pitriloka, "world of
ancestors," and Pretaloka, "world of the departed." See: loka.

**Bijjala** : (Sanskrit) A king in Karnataka associated with the life of
Basavanna.

**bilva:** (Sanskrit) Wood-apple (or bael) tree, Aegle marmelos, sacred
to Lord Siva. Its leaves, picked in threes, are offered in the worship
of the Sivalinga. The delicious fruit when unripe is used medicinally.

**bindu:** (Sanskrit) "A drop, small particle, dot." 1) The seed or
source of creation. In the 36 tattvas, the nucleus or first particle of
transcendent light, technically called Parabindu, corresponding to the
Shakti tattva. Scientists say the whole universe just before the big
bang could fit on the head of a pin--a tremendous point of energy--that
is Parabindu. 2) Small dot worn on the forehead between the eyebrows, or
in the middle of the forehead, made of red powder (kunkuma),
sandalpaste, clay, cosmetics or other substance. It is a sign that one
is a Hindu. Mystically, it represents the "third eye," or the "mind's
eye," which sees things that the physical eyes cannot see. The forehead
dot is a reminder to use and cultivate one's spiritual vision, to
perceive and understand life's inner workings, as well as to look into
the past to see the future. The bindu is also a beauty mark worn by
Hindu women, the color red generally a sign of marriage, black often
worn before marriage to ward off the evil eye, kudrishti or papadrishti.
The bindu is known as pottu in Tamil. Bindu is also a term for semen.
See: tattva, tilaka.

**birth chart:** Janmapatrika. An astrological map of the sky drawn for
a person's moment and place of birth. Also known as rashi chakra or
zodiac wheel, it is the basis for interpreting the traits of individuals
and the experiences, prarabdha karmas, they will go through in life.
See: jyotisha, karma.

**birthstar:** See: nakshatra.

**bi-sexual:** Of or characterized by sexual attraction for members of
both genders. See: heterosexual, homosexual, sexuality.

**blessing:** Good wishes; benediction. Seeking and giving blessings is
extremely central in Hindu life, nurtured in the precepts of karunya
(grace), shakti (energy), darshana (encountering/seeing the divine),
prasada (blessed offerings), puja (invocation), tirthayatra
(pilgrimage), diksha (initiation), shaktipata (descent of grace),
samskaras (rites of passage), sannidhya (holy presence) and sadhana
(inner-attunement disciplines).

**bodhaka:** (Sanskrit) "Teacher." One who awakens or catalyzes knowing;
a religious instructor or catalyst.

**bodhi tantra:** (Sanskrit) "Wise methods; ways of wisdom." See:
sadhana, tantra.

**bodies:** See: kosha, sharira, soul.

**bodily humor:** Commonly, the fluids of the body, an English
equivalent of the ayurvedic term dosha, which names three fundamental
interbalancing principles or constituents of the human constitution.
See: ayurveda, dosha.

**bond (bondage):** See: evolution of the soul, mala, pasha.

**bone-gathering:** Asthisanchaya. Part of Hindu funeral rites. About
twelve hours after cremation, family men return to the cremation site to
collect the remains. Water is first sprinkled on the ashes to separate
the black ash of the wood from the fine, white ash of the body. The
white ash and bones (up to four inches long, called flowers) are
collected in a tray or brass pot. Some Hindus send the ashes and bones
for deposition in the Ganges. Or they may be put into any ocean or
river. Arrangements can be made with crematoriums in the East or West
for the family to personally gather the ash and flowers. See: cremation,
samskaras of adulthood.

**boon:** Varadana. A welcome blessing, a gracious benefit received. An
unexpected benefit or bonus. See: blessing, grace.

**bountiful:** Giving abundantly and without restraint; plentiful.

**Brahma:** (Sanskrit) The name of God in His aspect of Creator.
Saivites consider Brahma, Vishnu and Rudra to be three of five aspects
of Siva. Smartas group Brahma, Vishnu and Siva as a holy trinity in
which Siva is the destroyer. Brahma the Creator is not to be confused
with 1) Brahman, the Transcendent Supreme of the Upanishads; 2)
Brahmana, Vedic texts; 3) brahmana, the Hindu priest caste (also spelled
brahmin). See: Brahman, Parameshvara.

**brahmachari:** (Sanskrit) "He who is moving in God." An unmarried male
spiritual aspirant who practices continence, observes religious
disciplines, including sadhana, devotion and service and who may be
under simple vows. Also names one in the student stage, age 12-24, or
until marriage. See: ashrama dharma, monk.

**brahmacharini:** (Sanskrit) Feminine counterpart of brahmachari. See:
nunk.

**brahmacharya:** (Sanskrit) "Path to God," or "moving in God." Sexual
purity. See: yama-niyama.

**brahmacharya ashrama:** (Sanskrit) See: ashrama dharma.

**brahma muhurta:** (Sanskrit) "Time of God." A very favorable time for
sadhana. It is traditional to arise before this period, bathe and begin
one's morning worship. Brahma muhurta is defined as roughly 1.5 hours,
the last muhurta of the night in the 8-muhurta system. It is understood
as comprising the final three muhurtas of the night in 15 or 16-muhurta
systems, equalling 144 minutes or 135 minutes respectively. See:
muhurta.

**Brahman:** (Sanskrit) "Supreme Being; expansive spirit." From the root
brih, "to grow, increase, expand." Name of God or Supreme Deity in the
Vedas, where He is described as 1) the Transcendent Absolute, 2) the
all-pervading energy and 3) the Supreme Lord or Primal Soul. These three
correspond to Siva in His three perfections. Thus, Saivites know Brahman
and Siva to be one and the same God.**--Nirguna Brahman:** God "without
qualities (guna)," i.e., formless, Absolute Reality, Parabrahman, or
Parasiva--totally transcending guna (quality), manifest existence and
even Parashakti, all of which exhibit perceivable qualities.**--Saguna
Brahman:** God "with qualities;" Siva in His perfections of Parashakti
and Parameshvara--God as superconscious, omnipresent, all-knowing,
all-loving and all-powerful. The term Brahman is not to be confused with
1) Brahma, the Creator God; 2) Brahmana, Vedic texts, nor with 3)
brahmana, Hindu priest caste (English spelling: brahmin). See:
Parameshvara, Parashakti, Parasiva.

**Brahmana:** (Sanskrit) "Knower of God." 1) One of four primary
sections of each Veda; concerned mainly with details of yajna, or
sacrificial fire worship, and specific duties and rules of conduct for
priests, but also rich in philosophical lore. 2) The first of the four
varnas, or social classes, comprising pious souls of exceptional
learning, including priests, educators and humanity's visionary guides.
Also spelled brahmin. See: brahmin, varna dharma, Vedas.

**Brahmanda:** (Sanskrit) "Egg of God," or "Cosmic egg." The cosmos;
inner and outer universe. See: loka, three worlds, world.

**brahmarandhra:** (Sanskrit) "Door of Brahman." See: door of Brahman.

**Brahma Sutra(s):** (Sanskrit) "Threads (aphorisms) of the Absolute."
Also known as the Vedanta Sutras, composed by Badarayana (ca 400 bce) as
the first known systematic exposition of Upanishadic thought. Its 550
aphorisms are so brief as to be virtually unintelligible without
commentary. It was through interpretations of this text, as well as the
Upanishads themselves and the Bhagavad Gita, that later schools of
Vedanta expressed and formulated their own views of the Upanishadic
tenets. A third name for this important work is Shariraka Sutras,
"aphorisms on the embodied soul." See: Upanishad,Vedanta.

**Brahma Sutra Bhashya:** (Sanskrit) A lengthy 13th-century commentary
on the Brahma Sutras by Srikantha to establish a Vedic base for the
Saivite qualified nondualism called Siva Advaita. See: Siva Advaita,
Vedanta.

**Brahma Sutra, Shankara Bhashya:** (Sanskrit) ankara's explanation of
one of the three major treatises on Vedanta philosophy. See: Smarta.

**brahmin (brahmana):** (Sanskrit) "Mature or evolved soul." The class
of pious souls of exceptional learning. From Brahman, "growth,
expansion, evolution, development, swelling of the spirit or soul." The
mature soul is the exemplar of wisdom, tolerance, forbearance and
humility. See: varna dharma.

**brahminical tradition:** The hereditary religious practices of the
Vedic brahmins, such as reciting mantras, and personal rules for daily
living.

**Brahmotsava:** (Sanskrit) "God's festival, or foremost festival." Each
temple has one festival of the year which is its major celebration. This
is called Brahmotsava, often a ten-day event. See: festival, temple.

**Brihadaranyaka Upanishad:** (Sanskrit) One of the most important
Upanishads, part of the Shatapatha Brahmana of the Yajur Veda. Ascribed
to Sage Yajnavalkya, it teaches modes of worship, meditation and the
identity of the individual self with the Supreme Self. See: Upanishad.

**Brihaspati:** (Sanskrit) "Lord of Prayer." Vedic preceptor of the Gods
and Lord of the Word, sometimes identified with Lord Ganesha. Also names
a great exponent of Saiva Siddhanta (ca 900). See: Ganesha.

**brihatkutumba:** (Sanskrit) "Extended family." Also called
mahakutumba. See: extended family, joint family.

**Buddha:** (Sanskrit) "The enlightened." Usually the title of
Siddhartha Gautama (ca 624-544 bce), a prince born of the Shakya clan--a
Saivite Hindu tribe in eastern India on the Nepalese border. He
renounced the world and became a monk. After his enlightenment he
preached the doctrines upon which his followers later founded Buddhism.
See: Buddhism.

**buddhi:** (Sanskrit) "Intellect, reason, logic." The intellectual or
disciplined mind. Buddhi is characterized by discrimination (viveka),
voluntary restraint (vairagya), cultivation of calmness (shanti),
contentment (santosha) and forgiveness (kshama). It is a faculty of
manomaya kosha, the instinctive-intellectual sheath. See: intellectual
mind, kosha, mind (individual).

**buddhi chitta:** (Sanskrit) "Intellectual mind." See: buddhi,
intellectual mind.

**Buddhism:** The religion based on the teachings of Siddhartha Gautama,
known as the Buddha (ca 624-544 bce). He refuted the idea of man's
having an immortal soul and did not preach of any Supreme Deity. Instead
he taught that man should seek to overcome greed, hatred and delusion
and attain enlightenment through realizing the Four Noble Truths and
following the Eightfold Path. Prominent among its holy books is the
Dhammapada. Buddhism arose out of Hinduism as an inspired reform
movement which rejected the caste system and the sanctity of the Vedas.
It is thus classed as nastika, "unbeliever," and is not part of
Hinduism. Buddhism eventually migrated out of India, the country of its
origin, and now enjoys a following of over 350 million, mostly in Asia.
See: Buddha.


