T
=

**Tagore, Rabindranath:** One of India's most highly acclaimed
modern-day writers and poets (18611941), son of Devendranath Tagore. He
wrote in Bengali and in English. His most famous poetic religious work
is Gitanjali, which centers around dialogs between the soul and God
Vishnu. He received the Nobel Prize for literature in 1913.

**tainted:** Sullied, spoiled or stained. Morally corrupt or depraved.

**Tai Pongal:** (Tamil) A four-day home festival held in the Tamil month
of Tai (January-February), celebrating the season's first harvest.
Surya, the Sun God, is honored at this time as the giver of all good
fortune and as the visible Divine One. Newly harvested rice is
ceremoniously cooked outdoors over an open fire in a giant pot (hence
pongal, from pongu, "to cook"). The direction of the overflow of boiling
milk is an augury for the coming year.

**Tai Pusam:** (Tamil) A festival held on the Pushya nakshatra near the
full-moon day of January-February to worship Lords Siva or Karttikeya,
depending on the locality. It is an important holiday, especially dear
to the Tamil people, celebrated with great pomp, fervor and intensity in
India, Sri Lanka, Malaysia, Fiji, South Africa and Reunion, often marked
by the carrying of kavadi. In Mauritius and Singapore it is a national
holiday. See: kavadi, Karttikeya.

**Taittiriya Aranyaka:** (Sanskrit) A forest treatise of Krishna Yajur
Veda. See: Veda.

**Taittiriya Samhita:** (Sanskrit) See: Yajur Veda.

**Taittiriya Upanishad:** (Sanskrit) Belongs to the Taittiriya Brahmana
of the Yajur Veda and is divided into three sections called valli(s).
The first deals with phonetics and pronunciation, the second and third
with Brahman and the attainment of bliss.

**tala:** (Sanskrit) "Plane or world; level; base, bottom." Root of the
name of the seven realms of lower consciousness centered in the seven
chakras below the muladhara. See: chakra, hell, purgatory, loka, Naraka.

**talatala chakra:** (Sanskrit) "Lower region." The fourth chakra below
the muladhara, centered in the calves. Region of chronic mental
confusion and unreasonable stubbornness. Corresponds to the fourth
astral netherworld beneath the earth's surface, called Tamisra
("darkness") or Talatala. This state of consciousness is born of the
sole motivation of self-preservation. See: chakra, loka, Naraka.

**tamas(ic):** (Sanskrit) "Force of inertia." See: guna.

**Tamil:** (Tamil) The ancient Dravidian language of the Tamils, a
Caucasoid people of South India and Northern Sri Lanka, who have now
migrated throughout the world. The official language of the state of
Tamil Nadu, India. See: race.

**Tamil Nadu:** (Tamil) State in South India, 50,000 square miles,
population 55 million. Land of countless holy scriptures, saints, sages
and over 40,000 magnificent temples, including Chidambaram, Madurai,
Palani Hills and Rameshvaram.

**tandava:** (Sanskrit) "Violent dance." Any vigorous dance sequence
performed by a male dancer. There are many forms of tandava. Its
prototype is Siva's dance of bliss, ananda tandava. The more sublime,
female dance is called lasya, from lasa, "lively." Dance in general is
nartana. See: Nataraja.

**tantra:** (Sanskrit) "Loom, methodology." 1) Most generally, a synonym
for shastra, "scripture." 2) A synonym for the Agamic texts, especially
those of the Shakta faith, a class of Hindu scripture providing detailed
instruction on all aspects of religion, mystic knowledge and science.
The tantras are also associated with the Saiva tradition. 3) A specific
method, technique or spiritual practice within the Saiva and Shakta
traditions. For example, pranayama is a tantra. Tantra generally
involves a reversal of the normal flow of energies. Its perspective is
that the inner self is most important, and outer life is secondary.
Tantra causes the life force to flow up through the sushumna. Many are
the methods for overcoming the unovercomeable. Fallen into the hands of
the unscrupulous, these techniques become black magic (abhichara).

**Tantraloka:** (Sanskrit) One of the most comprehensive and
authoritative expositions of Kashmir Saivism, written by Abhinavagupta.
See: Abhinavagupta, Kashmir Saivism.

**tantrika:** (Sanskrit) (Anglicized: tantric.) Adjectival form for
practices prescribed in the Tantra traditions. The name of a follower of
any of the tantric traditions. See: tantra, tantrism.

**tantrism:** The enlightenment path outlined in the Tantra scriptures.
1) Tantrism is sometimes considered a parallel stream of history and
tradition in Hinduism, running alongside and gradually interweaving with
the Vedic brahminical tradition. 2) Tantrism refers to traditions,
mainly within Saivism and Shaktism, that focus on the arousal of the
kundalini force, and which view the human body as a vehicle of the
Divine and an instrument for liberation. Tantrism's ultimate aim is a
channeling of the kundalini life force through the sushumna, the
gracious channel, upwards into the sahasrara chakra and beyond, through
the door of brahman (brahmarandhra) into Parasiva, either before or at
the time of death. The stress is on the transformation of all spheres of
consciousness, spiritual, psychic, emotional and material. It is a path
of sadhana. 3)**--Shakta Tantrism:** Brings a strong emphasis on the
worship of the feminine force. Depending on the school, this may be
symbolic or literal in rites involving sexual intercourse, etc. Shakta
Tantrism's main principle is the use of the material to gain the
spiritual. In certain schools, historically, this implies embracing that
which is normally forbidden and manipulating the forces to attain
transcendent consciousness rather than lower consciousness. There are
three main streams: 1) the right-hand path (dakshina marga or
dakshinachara) of conservative Hindu practice, 2) the left-hand path
(vama marga or vamachara) involving the use of things normally forbidden
such as taking intoxicants, meat, ritual sex, etc., and 3) the yogic
path of the Kaula sect. Gorakshanatha followers are sometimes grouped
with the latter. See: Shaktism, kundalini, raja yoga, tantra.

**Tao:** "The way." The central concept of the Chinese religion called
Taoism. Though traditionally considered impossible to translate, Tao is
often rendered as "cosmic order," akin to the Sanskrit rita. See:
dharma.

**tapas:** (Sanskrit) "Warmth, heat," hence psychic energy, spiritual
fervor or ardor. 1) Purificatory spiritual disciplines, severe
austerity, penance and sacrifice. The endurance of pain, suffering,
through the performance of extreme penance, religious austerity and
mortification. By comparison, sadhana is austerity of a simple,
sustained kind, while tapas is austerity of a severe,
psyche-transforming nature. Tapas is extreme bodily mortification, long
term sadhanas, such as meditating under a tree in one place for 12
years, taking a lifetime vow of silence and never speaking or writing,
or standing on one leg for a prescribed number of years. Scriptures warn
against extreme asceticism that harm the body. 2) On a deeper level,
tapas is the intense inner state of kundalini "fire" which stimulates
mental anguish and separates the individual from society. Life does not
go on as usual when this condition occurs. The association with a
satguru, Sadasiva, brings the devotee into tapas; and it brings him out
of it. The fire of tapas burns on the dross of sanchita karmas. This is
the source of heat, dismay, depression and striving until final and
total surrender, prapatti. The individual can mollify this heated
condition by continuing his regular sadhana as outlined by the guru. The
fires of self-transformation may be stimulated by the practice of tapas,
or come unbidden. One can "do" tapas, but the true tapas is a condition
of being and consciousness which is a state of grace, bringing positive
change, transformation and purification of one's nature. Guru bhakti is
the only force that can cool the fires of tapas. See: kundalini,
penance, sadhana.

**tapasvin:** (Sanskrit) One who performs tapas or is in the state of
tapas. See: tapas.

**Tapoloka:** (Sanskrit) "Plane of austerity." The second highest of the
seven upper worlds, realm of ajna chakra. See: loka.

**tarnished:** Dulled, sullied, spoiled, lacking luster.

**Tat:** (Sanskrit) "That; the indescribable Absolute; supreme."

**Tatparyadipika:** (Sanskrit) A commentary by Srikumara (ca 1100) on
the Tattvaprakasha of Sri Bhojadeva Paramara (10181060), a
philosopher-king in Central India who expounded Saiva Siddhanta.
Srikumara upheld the monistic basis of Bhojadeva's work, while later
commentator Aghorasiva reinterpreted it in dualistic terms. See:
Aghorasiva, Saiva Siddhanta.

**Tat Sat:** (Sanskrit) "That is Truth." A terse phrase pointing to the
inexpressible truth of which nothing more can be said.

**tattva:** (Sanskrit) "That-ness" or "essential nature." Tattvas are
the primary principles, elements, states or categories of existence, the
building blocks of the universe. Lord Siva constantly creates, sustains
the form of and absorbs back into Himself His creations. Rishis describe
this emanational process as the unfoldment of tattvas, stages or
evolutes of manifestation, descending from subtle to gross. At
mahapralaya, cosmic dissolution, they enfold into their respective
sources, with only the first two tattvas surviving the great
dissolution. The first and subtlest form--the pure consciousness and
source of all other evolutes of manifestation--is called Siva tattva, or
Parashakti-nada. But beyond Siva tattva lies Parasiva--the utterly
transcendent, Absolute Reality, called attava. That is Siva's first
perfection. The Sankhya system discusses 25 tattvas. Saivism recognizes
these same 25 plus 11 beyond them, making 36 tattvas in all. These are
divided into three groups: 1) First are the five shuddha (pure) tattvas.
These constitute the realm of shuddha maya.
2) Next are the seven shuddha-ashuddha (pure-impure) tattvas. These
constitute the realm of shuddhashuddha maya. 3) The third group
comprises the 24 ashuddha (impure) tattvas. These constitute the realm
of ashuddha maya.

**--The shuddha tattvas: Actinic or spiritual energy.** This is the
superconscious realm, also known as shuddha (pure) maya or mahamaya.
Bindu, transcendent light, is the "material" cause of this pure sphere.
This is the Sivaloka, the region of the 330 million Gods, the myriad
rishis and other beings who have attained freedom from the triple
bondage.

1)**Siva tattva:** "auspiciousness," of two parts: the higher is
Parashakti, "Supreme Energy," from which emerges primal sound, nada
(more precisely Paranada, soundless sound). Though most often referred
to as sound, nada is more mystically known as movement, the first
impulse arising from perfect quiescence, the first "thing" out of the
motionless Self. This is Siva's second perfection, Parashakti,
superconsciousness, the mind of God. The Siva tattva pervades all other
35 categories and possesses the powers of will, knowledge and action
(iccha, jnana, kriya).

2)**Shakti tattva:** energy, corresponds to bindu, light, the cause of
form (more precisely Parabindu, primal nucleus). This is the tattva of
Parameshvara, the Primal Soul, father-mother God, Siva's third
perfection, who after mahapralaya remains transfixed in deep samadhi,
until He again emanates the universe through His Cosmic Dance.

3)**Sadasiva tattva:** the power of revealing grace. In this realm the
energies of knowledge and action are in perfect equilibrium. This is the
realm of the anandamaya kosha.

4)**Ishvara tattva:** the energy of concealment, concealing grace. The
energy of action prevails over that of knowledge in order to arouse
cosmic activity in its subtle form.

5)**shuddhavidya tattva:** pure knowledge, dharma. This is a level of
manifestation in which the energy of action is in abeyance and the
energy of knowledge prevails. Shuddhavidya tattva includes Siva's other
three powers or aspects: Rudra (destruction), Vishnu (preservation) and
Brahma (creation).

**--The shuddhashuddha tattvas: Actinodic, or spiritual-magnetic,
energy.** The seven tattvas from maya to purusha make up the
shuddhashuddha (pure-impure) realm.

6)**maya tattva:** mirific energy, the "material" cause of the "impure
sphere." The category of maya brings into being as its immediate aids
the following five tattvas, known as the "five sheaths," pancha
kanchuka, of the individual soul, purusha. Collectively they make up the
vijnanamaya kosha, or mental body.

7)**kala tattva:** the phenomenon of time, which divides all experience
into past, present and future.

8)**niyati tattva:** karmic destiny; necessity; order; law of cause and
effect; restraint.

9)**kala tattva:** creativity, aptitude, the power which draws the soul
toward spiritual knowledge. Its energy partially removes the veil of
anava which clouds the inherent powers of the soul.

10)**vidya tattva:** limited knowledge, the power which gives the soul
practical knowledge in accord with its present life experiences.

11)**raga tattva:** attachment, the arousal of desire, without which no
experience of the objective world is possible.

12)**purusha tattva:** soul identity; soul connected with subjectivity.
Through identification with the five above "sheaths," the soul, atman,
becomes a purusha, or bound soul, capable of experiencing the higher
Antarloka as a limited individual. This five-fold sheath is called the
pancha kanchuka, or vijnanamaya kosha (mental body).

**--ashuddha tattvas: Odic, or magnetic, energy.** These 24 categories
make up the "world" of ashuddha (impure) maya. This is the realm of the
astral and physical planes, in which souls function through the
manomaya, pranamaya and annamaya koshas, depending on their level of
embodiment.

13)**prakriti tattva:** primal nature, the gross energy of which all
lower tattvas are formed. Prakriti, also called pradhana, is expressed
as three gunas (qualities)--sattva, rajas and tamas. These manifest as
light, activity and inertia, respectively; and on the subtle level as
pleasure, sorrow and delusion. These gunas dominate the soul's powers of
knowledge, action and desire (jnana, kriya and iccha), and form the guna
body, manomaya kosha.

--antahkarana: the mental faculty. 14)**buddhi tattva:** judgment,
intellect, the faculty of discrimination. 15)**ahamkara tattva:**
egoism, sense of I-ness in the external form. It is the fundamental
principle of individuality. 16)**manas tattva:** the instinctive mind,
the receiving and directing link between the outer senses and the inner
faculties.

--jnanendriya: the five cognitive senses, of the nature of sattva guna.
Each has a subtle and physical aspect. 17) sh**rotra tattva:** hearing
(ears). 18)**tvak tattva:** touching (skin). 19)**chakshu tattva:**
seeing (eyes). 20)**rasana tattva:** tasting (tongue). 21)**ghrana
tattva:** smelling (nose).

--karmendriya: the five organs of action, of the nature of rajaguna.
Each has a subtle and physical aspect. 22)**vak tattva:** speech
(voice). 23)**pani tattva:** grasping (hands). 24)**pada tattva:**
walking (feet). 25)**payu tattva:** excretion (anus). 26)**upastha
tattva:** procreation (genitals).

--tanmatra: the five subtle elements, of the nature of tamaguna. 27)
sh**abda tattva:** sound. 28)**sparsha tattva:** feel. 29)**rupa
tattva:** form. 30)**rasa tattva:** taste. 31)**gandha tattva:** odor.
These are the subtle characteristics of the five gross elements, akasha,
vayu, tejas, apas and prithivi, respectively.

--panchabhuta: the five gross elements. 32) a**kasha tattva:** ether or
space. 33)**vayu tattva:** air. 34)**tejas tattva:** fire. 35) a**pas
tattva** (or jala): water. 36)**prithivi tattva:** earth. See: atattva,
antahkarana, guna, kosha, Siva (also, charts at end of lexicon).

**Tattva Prakasha:** (Sanskrit) "Illumination of the categories." Text
of 76 verses by the philosopher-king Bhoja Paramara which systematized
and consolidated monistic Saiva Siddhanta in the 11th century.

**tattvatrayi:** (Sanskrit) "Essential triad." Names the primary
categories of Saiva and Shakta schools, Pati (God), pashu (soul) and
pasha (world, or bonds). See: padartha, Pati-pashu-pasha.

**Tayumanavar:** (Tamil) A Tamil Saivayogi, devotional mystic and poet
saint (ca 17th century) whose writings are a harmonious blend of
philosophy and devotion. In his poem "Chinmayananda Guru," Tayumanavar
places himself in the genealogy of Rishi Tirumular. See: Tirumular.

**temper:** To reduce in intensity or moderate by the addition of other
qualities. Also, the quality of anger, or the propensity to become
angry. See: chakra.

**temple:** An edice in a consecrated place dedicated to the worship of
God or the Gods. From the Latin templum, "temple, sanctuary; marked
space." Hindu temples, over one million worldwide, are revered as
sacred, magical places in which the three worlds most consciously
commune--structures especially built and consecrated to channel the
subtle spiritual energies of inner-world beings. The temple's psychic
atmosphere is maintained through regular worship ceremonies (puja)
invoking the Deity, who uses His installed image (murti) as a temporary
body to bless those living on the earth plane. In Hinduism, the temple
is the hub of virtually all aspects of social and religious life. It may
be referred to by the Sanskrit terms mandira, devalaya (or Sivalaya, a
Siva temple), as well as by vernacular terms such as koyil (Tamil). See:
garbhagriha, darshana, mandapa, pradakshina, sound, teradi, tirthayatra.

**temporal:** Referring to time; subject to time. Passing, existing only
for a time.

**tend:** Having a tendency or inclination to do something.

**teradi:** (Tamil) "Chariot shed." Tamil term for the building that
houses the temple cart or chariot (ter) in which the parade Deity,
utsava murti, is taken in procession on festival days.

**terminable:** Which can be ended. Not lasting forever.

**terminal:** Concluding, ending, final.

**terminal illness:** Incurable disease, ending in death. See: death,
suicide.

**That** : When capitalized, this simple demonstrative refers uniquely
to the Ultimate, Indescribable or Nameless Absolute. The Self God,
Parasiva. It is the English equivalent of Tat, as in, Tat tvam asi, "You
are That!"

**theism:** Belief that God exists as a real, conscious, personal
Supreme Being, creator and ruler of the universe. May also include
belief in the Gods.

**theology:** The study of religious doctrines, specifically of the
nature of God, soul and world. --**theologians:** Those who study, are
expert in or formulate theology. Cf: metaphysics.

**thither:** Toward that place; there. Farther.

**thou/thy:** Poetic, Old English alternates for you/your. Thy is the
possessive form of thou. Often used in religious writing or translation
of devotional scripture as an expression of respect and veneration not
conveyed in the ordinary pronouns you and your.

**three worlds:** The three worlds of existence, triloka, are the
primary hierarchical divisions of the cosmos. 1) Bhuloka: "Earth world,"
the physical plane. 2) Antarloka: "Inner or in-between world," the
subtle or astral plane. 3) Sivaloka: "World of Siva," and of the Gods
and highly evolved souls; the causal plane, also called Karanaloka.

The three-world cosmology is readily found in Hindu scriptures. In the
major Upanishads of the Vedas we find numerous citations, with
interesting variations. Verse 1.5.17 of the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad
states, "Now, there are, verily, three worlds, the world of men
(Manushyaloka), the world of the fathers (Pitriloka) and the world of
the Gods (Devaloka)..." Later, verse 6.2.15 refers to the two higher
worlds as the Devaloka and the Brahmaloka. The Katha Upanishad, verse
2.3.8, omitting the world of men, lists the Pitriloka, the Gandharvaloka
(world of genies or elementals) and the Brahmaloka (world of God).
Another perspective of three worlds is offered in the Prashna Upanishad
3.8, which lists the world of good (Punyaloka), the world of evil
(Papaloka) and the world of men (Manushyaloka).

Scriptures offer several other cosmological perspectives, most
importantly seven upper worlds (sapta urdhvaloka) and seven lower worlds
(sapta adholoka), which correspond to the 14 chakras and make up the
"world-egg of God," the universe, called Brahmanda. The seven upper
worlds are Bhuloka, Bhuvarloka, Svarloka, Maharloka, Janaloka, Tapoloka
and Satyaloka. The second, third and fourth comprise the subtle plane.
The highest three comprise the causal plane. The seven lower worlds,
collectively known as Naraka or Patala, are (from highest to lowest)
Put, Avichi, Samhata, Tamisra, Rijisha, Kudmala and Kakola.

From the Saiva Agamic perspective of the 36 tattvas, the pure sphere,
shuddha maya--the first five tattvas--is subdivided into 33 planes of
existence. The "pure-impure" realm, shuddhashuddha maya--the seven
tattvas from maya tattva to purusha--contains 27 planes of existence.
The ashuddha ("impure") realm--of 24 tattvas--has 56 planes of
existence. See: chakra, loka, Naraka, tattva (also: individual loka
entries).

**thwart:** To hinder, obstruct or frustrate.

**thy:** See: thou/thy.

**tilaka:** (Sanskrit) "Sesamum-like mark," from tila, "sesame seed."
Distinctive marks made on the forehead or the brow with clay, ashes or
sandalwood paste as an indication of sectarian affiliation. Vaishnavas
wear a vertical v-shaped tilaka made of clay. The Saivite tilaka, called
tripundra, is three horizontal strips of holy ash with a dot below the
middle of the forehead. Wearing the tilaka is an expression of religious
affiliation and pride in one's beliefs, not unlike the Christian's cross
or the Jew's yarmulke. Elaborate tilakas are worn by Hindus today mainly
at religious events and when on pilgrimage, though many Hindus wear the
simple dot (bindu) on the forehead, indicating that they are Hindu, even
when moving in the general public. See: bindu, Hinduism, tripundra.

**timeless:** Outside the condition of time, or not measurable in terms
of time.

**tirobhava:** (Sanskrit) "Concealment," same as tirodhana. See:
Nataraja, tirodhana shakti.

**tirodhana shakti:** (Sanskrit) "Concealing power." Veiling grace, or
God's power to obscure the soul's divine nature. Tirodhana shakti is the
particular energy of Siva that binds the three bonds of anava, karma,
maya to the soul. It is a purposeful limiting of consciousness to give
the opportunity to the soul to grow and mature through experience of the
world. See: evolution of the soul, grace.

**tirthayatra:** (Sanskrit) "Journeying to a holy place." Pilgrimage.
One of the five sacred duties (pancha nitya karmas) of the Hindu is to
journey periodically to one of the innumerable holy spots in India or
other countries. Preceded by fasting and continence, it is a time of
austerity and purification, when all worldly concerns are set aside and
God becomes one's singular focus. Streams of devout pilgrims are
received daily at the many ancient holy sites (tirthas) in India, and
tens of thousands at festival times. See: pancha nitya karma, pancha
shraddha.

**tiru:** (Tamil) "Sacred; holy." The exact Tamil equivalent of sri.
Feminine equivalent is tirumati. See: sri.

**Tirukural:** (Tamil) "Holy couplets." A treasury of Hindu ethical
insight and a literary masterpiece of the Tamil language, written by
Saiva Saint Tiruvalluvar (ca 200 bce) near present-day Chennai. Its
nonsectarian wisdom has been adopted by Christians, Muslims, Jains and
even atheists. The text focuses primarily on the first three goals of
life--artha (wealth), dharma (conduct) and kama (desire)--but also
includes 13 chapters on renunciate dharma, relating to life's fourth
goal, moksha (liberation). In an extraordinarily compact verse form of
14 syllables, the poet presents 133 subjects of ten verses each on
relationships, human strengths and foibles, statecraft and more. One of
the world's earliest ethical texts, the Tirukural could well be
considered a bible on virtue for the human race. In fact, it is sworn on
in South Indian courts of law. See: Tiruvalluvar.

**Tirumantiram:** (Tamil) "Holy incantation." The Nandinatha
Sampradaya's oldest Tamil scripture; written ca 200 bce by Rishi
Tirumular. It is the earliest of the Tirumurai, and a vast storehouse of
esoteric yogic and tantric knowledge. It contains the mystical essence
of raja yoga and siddha yoga, and the fundamental doctrines of the 28
Saiva Siddhanta Agamas, which in turn are the heritage of the ancient
pre-historic traditions of Saivism. As the Agamas themselves are now
partially lost, the Tirumantiram is a rare source of the complete
Agamanta (collection of Agamic lore). Its 3047 verses were, as legend
has it, composed in a rather extraordinary way. Before writing each
verse, Tirumular would meditate for an entire year, then summarize his
meditation in a four-line Tamil verse. He did this for 3,000 years! The
allegory is said to mean that 3,000 years of knowledge is compacted in
this one book. The text is organized in nine parts, called tantras,
summarized as follows: 1) basic rules of religious morality; 2)
allegorical explanations of Saiva mythological stories; five powers of
Siva, three classifications of souls; 3) a complete treatise on raja
yoga; 4) mantras and tantras; 5) the essential features of the Saiva
religion; the four forms of Saivism, four stages, unorthodox paths,
conduct to be avoided; 6) the Sivaguru, grace, renunciation, sin,
penance, jnana, worthy and unworthy persons; 7) siddha yoga, more on
grace, mudras, control of ida and pingala, worlds reached by different
classes of yogis after death, refinements of yoga, the satguru; 8)
essential theology: five sheaths, eleven states, three padarthas
(Pati-pashu-pasha), 36 tattvas, four states of consciousness, three
malas, three gunas, ten karanas, etc.; 9) the fruits of realization,
liberation, jnana, Siva's dances, meeting of the guru. See: Tirumurai,
Tirumular.

**Tirumular:** (Tamil) An illustrious siddha yogi and rishi of the
Nandinatha Sampradaya's Kailasa Parampara who came from the Himalayas
(ca 200 bce) to Tamil Nadu to compose the Tirumantiram. In this
scripture he recorded the tenets of Saivism in concise and precise verse
form, based upon his own realizations and the supreme authority of the
Saiva Agamas and the Vedas. Tirumular was a disciple of Maharishi
Nandinatha. See: Tirumantiram, Kailasa Parampara, Vedanta.

**Tirumurai:** (Tamil) "Holy book." A twelve-book collection of hymns
and writings of South Indian Saivite saints, compiled by Saint
Nambiyandar Nambi (ca 1000). Of these, books 1-3 are the hymns of Saint
Tirujnana Sambandar (ca 600). Books 4-6 are the hymns of Saint
Tirunavakarasu (Appar), a contemporary of Sambandar. Book 7 contains the
hymns of Saint Sundaramurti (ca 800). Book 8 contains the two works of
Saint Manikkavasagar (9th century)--Tiruvasagam and Tirukovaiyar. Book 9
is the Tiruvisaippa and Tiruppallandu, which together comprise the works
of nine saints. Book 10 is the Tirumantiram of Saint Tirumular (ca 200
bce). Book 11 contains the hymns of ten saints, including Saint Nakkirar
and Nambiyandar Nambi, the compiler. Book 12 is the Periyapuranam by
Saint Sekkilar (11th century), narrating the life story of the 63 Saiva
Nayanar saints. The first seven books are known as Devarams.

**Tiruvalluvar:** (Tamil) "Holy weaver." Tamil weaver and householder
saint (ca 200 bce) who wrote the classic Saivite ethical scripture
Tirukural. He lived with his wife Vasuki, famed for her remarkable
loyalty and virtues, near modern-day Chennai. There a memorial park, the
Valluvar Kottam, enshrines his extraordinary verses in marble. See:
Tirukural.

**Tiruvasagam:** (Tamil) "Holy Utterances." The lyrical Tamil scripture
by Saint Manikkavasagar (ca 850). Considered one of the most profound
and beautiful devotional works in the Tamil language, it discusses every
phase of the spiritual path from doubt and anguish to perfect faith in
God Siva, from earthly experience to the guru-disciple relationship and
freedom from rebirth. The work is partly autobiographical, describing
how Manikkavasagar, the prime minister to the Pandyan King, renounced
the world after experiencing an extraordinary vision of Siva seated
beneath a tree. The 658 hymns of Tiruvasagam together with the 400 hymns
of Tirukovaiyar by the same author make up the eighth Tirumurai of Saiva
Siddhanta scripture. See: Manikkavasagar, Tirumurai.

**tithe (tithing):** The spiritual discipline, often a vrata, of giving
one tenth of one's gainful and gifted income to a religious organization
of one's choice, thus sustaining spiritual education and upliftment on
earth. The Sanskrit equivalent is dashamamsha, called makimai in the
Tamil tradition. Tithing is given not as an offering, but as "God's
money." In olden days it was a portion of one's crops, such as one
coconut out of ten. Immediately setting aside the tithe as soon as
income is received sanctifies the remaining portion and reaps the
greatest punya. It is an acknowledgement by faithful Hindus of God's
providential care, bringing a greater awareness of God's power in the
world. Because tithers are thus uplifted to a purer, spiritual
consciousness, abundance naturally floods into their lives. Additional
offerings should be given after this minimal obligation is paid. See:
dashamamsha.

**tithi:** (Sanskrit) A lunar day, approximately one-thirtieth of the
time it takes the moon to orbit the earth. Because of their means of
calculation (based on the difference of the longitudinal angle between
the position of sun and the moon), tithis may vary in length. There are
15 tithis in each fortnight (half month). The names of the tithis are
Prathama (new moon), Dvitiya, Tritiya, Chaturthi, Panchami, Shashthi,
Saptami, Ashtami, Navami, Dashami, Ekadashi, Dvadashi, Trayodashi,
Chaturdashi, and lastly either Purnima (full moon) or Amavasya (new
moon). These are sometimes prefixed to indicate either the dark
(krishna) fortnight--when the moon is waning--or the light (shukla)
fortnight--when the moon is waxing--e.g., Shukla-Navami. Most Hindu
festivals are calculated according to the tithis.

**touchstone:** A test or criterion for determining value or
authenticity.

**trait:** A quality or distinguishing peculiarity of character.

**trance:** In general, a condition of altered consciousness,
accompanied by a lack of awareness to physical surroundings, neither a
state of wakefulness nor sleep. In a religious sense it is a state of
intense concentration, introspection or meditation. In such a state,
called samadhi, body consciousness is completely lost as the energies
are drawn up the spine into the sahasrara chakra at the crown of the
head. Great prophets have gone into trance and spoken out predictions of
the future and in their waking state later had no memory of what they
had said. In spiritualism, trance describes the phenomenon in which an
individual leaves the physical body, and a disincarnate being enters or
takes control of the body, often giving forth verbal messages to others
in attendance, as in a seance. Trance can be either voluntary or
involuntary. See: mediumship, samadhi.

**tranquil:** Quiet, peaceful.

**transcend:** To go beyond one's limitations, e.g., "to transcend one's
ego." Philosophically, to go beyond the limits of this world, or more
profoundly, beyond time, form and space into the Absolute, the Self God.

**transcendent:** Surpassing the limits of experience or manifest form.
In Saiva Siddhanta, a quality of God Siva as Absolute Reality, Parasiva,
the Self. Distinguished from immanent. See: atattva, Parasiva.

**transfix:** To render motionless.

**transgress:** To overstep or break a law or ethical principle.

**transient:** That which is temporary, fleeting. Passing, not
permanent.

**transition:** Passing from one condition or place to another. A
synonym of death which implies, more correctly, continuity of the
individual rather than his annihilation. See: death.

**traverse:** To move across or extend over.

**treacherous:** Dangerous, unreliable. Giving a false sense of safety.

**tread:** To walk on or across.

**treatise:** An article or book which systematically discusses a
subject.

**trepidation:** Anxiety; fearful uncertainty. Trembling.

**tribal:** Relating to, or having the character of a tribe, a group,
clan or village often related by ancestry, race or allegiance to a
common leader or lineage. A term often used derogatorily to refer to
so-called primitive peoples, but more accurately seen as the natural
human social structure into which all villages and communities, ancient
or modern, naturally organize. A term often used in reference to
indigenous peoples, mostly shamanic in conviction, found worldwide from
ancient times. See: pagan.

**trickery:** Deception, fraud. Creating illusion, such as by magic.

**trident:** Three-pronged spear. See: trishula.

**Trikashasana:** (Sanskrit) "Three teachings." Also, Trikashastra. A
name for Kashmir Saivism based on its various philosophical triads
including: Siva, Shakti and Nara (bound soul); Pati, pashu and pasha;
three energies: highest (para), lowest (apara), and in-between
(parapara); and three sets of scriptures. See: Kashmir Saivism.

**trikona:** (Sanskrit) A triangle; symbol of God Siva as Absolute
Reality. Also represents the element fire.

**triloka:** (Sanskrit) "Three worlds." The physical, astral and causal
planes (Bhuloka, Antarloka and Sivaloka). See: world, loka.

**Trimurti:** (Sanskrit) A classic representation of God as the
three-fold Deity image--Brahma, Vishnu and Rudra. See: Brahma.

**triple bondage:** See: mala, pasha.

**tripundra:** (Sanskrit) "Three marks." The Saivite sectarian mark,
consisting of three horizontal lines of vibhuti (holy ash) on the brow,
often with a dot (bindu) at the third eye. The three lines represent the
soul's three bonds: anava, karma and maya. Holy ash, made of burnt cow
dung, is a reminder of the temporary nature of the physical body and the
urgency to strive for spiritual attainment and closeness to God. See:
bindu, tilaka, vibhuti.

**Trishula:** (Sanskrit) A three-pronged spear or trident wielded by
Lord Siva and certain Saivite ascetics. Symbolizes God's three
fundamental shaktis or powers--iccha (desire, will, love), kriya
(action) and jnana (wisdom).

**Truth:** When capitalized, ultimate knowing which is unchanging. Lower
case (truth): honesty, integrity; virtue.

**Tryambaka:** (Sanskrit) "Three-eyed one." A name of Rudra-Siva, one of
the Ekadasha ("eleven") Rudras. His emblems include a water pot, chakra,
drum, bow, goad, snake and trident. The grace of Tryambaka is beseeched
in the famous Mritunjaya Mantra, or Siva Gayatri. Also the name of a
disciple of Durvasas who disseminated advaita. See: Durvasas, Gayatri
Mantra.

**Tukaram:** (Sanskrit) Among the most beloved and widely-read of
Maharashtrian Sant poets (15981649) who wrote passionate songs urging
devotees to seek the grace of Lord Vishnu.

**Tulasidasa:** (Sanskrit) Vaishnava sannyasin poet (ca 15321623) whose
Sri Ramacharitamanasa, a Hindi rendering of Valmiki's Sanskrit epic,
Ramayana, is acclaimed one of the world's greatest literary works. See:
Ramayana.

**tumult:** Noise, uproar, disturbance; agitation, confusion.

**turbulent:** Violently agitated. Marked by turmoil or wildly irregular
motions.

**turmeric:** A plant of India, Curcuma longa, of the ginger family
whose powdered rhyzome is a prized seasoning and yellow dye. It has rich
ayurvedic properties, is used in holy ritual and serves also to make
kunkuma.

**tyaf:** A special bamboo-like script used for writing prayers to be
conveyed to the inner worlds through the sacred fire. See: lekhaprartha
havana.

**tyaga:** (Sanskrit) "Letting go, detachment, renunciation." Described
in the Bhagavad Gita as the basic principle of karma yoga, detachment
from the fruits of one's actions. See: sacrifice, sannyasa, vairagya.


