V
=

**Vachana:** (Sanskrit) "Utterance." Short, insightful devotional poems
written by the early Vira Saiva sharana saints. Full of wit and
brilliant philosophy, they are the basis for Lingayat philosophy and
practice.

**vagdana:** (Sanskrit) "Word-giving." Marriage engagement ceremony.
See: samskaras of adulthood.

**vahana:** (Sanskrit) "Bearing, carrying or conveying." Each Hindu God
is depicted as riding an animal or bird vahana, which is symbolic of a
function of the God. For example, Siva rides the bull, a symbol of
strength and potency. Karttikeya rides the peacock, mayura, emblem of
beauty and regality.

**vaidya:** (Sanskrit) "Versed in science; learned; a doctor." See:
ayurveda vaidya.

**Vaikasi Vishakham:** (Tamil) A festival held on Vishakha nakshatra,
near the full moon day of the Tamil month of Vaikasi, May-June, to
celebrate the creation, or "birth," of Lord Karttikeya. It is a time of
gift-giving to panditas and great souls, weddings, feedings for the
poor, caring for trees, spiritual initiation and conclaves of holy men.

**Vaikuntha:** (Sanskrit) "Vishnu's heaven." See: Vaishnavism.

**vairagi:** (Sanskrit) "Dispassionate one." An ascetic who lives by the
principle of vairagya. Also names a particular class of mendicants,
generally Vaishnavas, of North India who have freed themselves from
worldly desires. See: monk, sannyasa, tyaga.

**vairagya:** (Sanskrit) "Dispassion; aversion." Freedom from passion.
Distaste or disgust for worldliness because of spiritual awakening.
Also, the constant renunciation of obstacles on the path to liberation.
Ascetic or monastic life.

**Vaisheshika:** (Sanskrit) "Distinctionism." A philosophical school (ca
600 bce) that focuses on understanding the categories of existence. See:
shad darshana.

**Vaishnava:** (Sanskrit) Of or relating to Vishnu; same as Vaishnavite.
A follower of Lord Vishnu or His incarnations. See: Vishnu, Vaishnavism.

**Vaishnavism (Vaishnava):** (Sanskrit) "Way of Vishnu." One of the four
major religions, or denominations of Hinduism, representing roughly half
of the world's one billion Hindus. It gravitates around the worship of
Lord Vishnu as Personal God, His incarnations and their consorts. The
doctrine of avatara (He who descends), especially important to
Vaishnavism, teaches that whenever adharma gains ascendency in the
world, God takes a human birth to reestablish "the way." There are
either 10, 22 or 34 avataras of Vishnu, according to various scriptures.
The most renowned avataras were Rama and Krishna. The last to come will
be Kalki, the harbinger of a golden age on Earth. Vaishnavism stresses
the personal aspect of God over the impersonal, and bhakti (devotion) as
the true path to salvation. The goal of Vaishnavism is the attainment of
mukti, defined as blissful union with God's body, the loving recognition
that the soul is a part of Him, and eternal nearness to Him in
Vaikuntha, heaven. Foremost among Vaishnava scriptures are the Vaishnava
Agamas, Bhagavad Gita and Bhagavata Purana. Among the earliest schools
were the Pancharatras and the Bhagavatas. The five major contemporary
schools (founded between 1000 and 1500) are those of Ramanuja (Sri
Vaishnavism), Madhva, Nimbarka, Vallabha and Chaitanya. Philosophically
they range from Madhva's pure dualism to Vallabha's lofty monistic
vision.

**Vaishnavite:** Of or relating to Vishnu; same as Vaishnava. A follower
of Vishnu or His incarnations. See: Vaishnavism, Vishnu.

**vaishya:** (Sanskrit) "Landowner; merchant." The social class of
bankers, businessmen, industrialists; employers. Merchant class,
originally those whose business was trade as well as agriculture. See:
varna dharma.

**valipadu:** (Tamil) "Ritual worship; revering, following." The acts of
adoration of the divine, expressed in many practices and ways.

**Vallabhacharya:** (Sanskrit) "Beloved." Vaishnava saint (ca 1475-1530)
whose panentheistic Shuddha Advaita (pure nondualism) philosophy became
the essential teaching of the nonascetic Vaishnava sect that bears his
name. He composed 17 works, most importantly commentaries on the Vedanta
and Mimamsa Sutras and the Bhagavata Purana. The stories of his 84
disciples are often repeated on festive occasions by followers. The sect
is strongest in Gujarat. See: Vedanta.

**vama:** (Sanskrit) 1) "Pleasant; beautiful; benignant; striving
after"--as in Vamadeva, a name of Siva. 2) "Left; crooked; acting in the
opposite way"--as in vama marga, the left-handed tantric path." See:
left-handed, tantrism.

**vanaprastha ashrama:** (Sanskrit) "Forest-dweller stage." See: ashrama
dharma, shashtyabda purti.

**vanquish:** To defeat or conquer in conflict or competition. See:
victors and vanquished.

**Varanasi:** (Sanskrit) Also known as Kashi or Banaras. (Derived from
the name of two rivers, the Varana, "warding off," and Asi, "sword.")
One of the most holy of Saivite cities, and among the oldest cities in
the world. Located in North India on the Ganges River. Hindus consider
it highly sanctifying to die in Kashi, revering it as a gateway to
moksha.

**varna:** (Sanskrit) "External appearance, covering; type, species,
kind, color; caste. See: varna dharma.

**varna dharma:** (Sanskrit) "The way of one's kind." The hereditary
social class system, generally referred to as caste, established in
India in ancient times. Within varna dharma are the many religious and
moral codes which define human virtue. Varna dharma is social duty, in
keeping with the principles of good conduct, according to one's
community, which is generally based on the craft or occupation of the
family. Strictly speaking it encompasses two interrelated social
hierarchies: 1) varna, which refers to the four classes: brahmin,
kshatriya, vaishya and shudra; and 2) jati, the myriad occupational
subgroups, or guilds, which in India number over 3,000. Hence this
dharma is sometimes called jati dharma. The class-caste system is still
very much a part of Indian life today. Many modern Hindus propose that
social status is now (and was originally) more properly determined by a
person's skills and accomplishments than by birth. Mobility between
jatis, or castes, within Hindu communities worldwide is limited but not
impossible, and is accomplished through marrying into a new jati, or
changing professions through persistence, skill and education. Shastris
say that once a person breaks out of his varna or jati of birth and
changes "caste," it takes three generations for his family to become
fully established in that new strata of society, provided the continuity
is unbroken.

**--varna:** The four varnas are as follows.**--brahmin (brahmana):**
"Mature, evolved soul." Scholarly, pious souls of exceptional learning.
Hindu scriptures traditionally invest the brahmin class with the
responsibility of religious leadership, including teaching and priestly
duties.**--kshatriya** : "Governing; endowed with sovereignty."
Lawmakers and law enforcers and military, also known as
rajanya.**--vaishya** : "Landowner, merchant." Businessmen, financiers,
industrialists; employers. Those engaged in business, commerce and
agriculture.**--shudra** : (Sanskrit) "Worker, servant." Skilled
artisans and laborers. It is in keeping with varna dharma that sons are
expected to follow the occupation of their father, as that is the
occupation that was chosen prior to birth.

**--jati:** "Birth; position assigned by birth; rank, caste, family,
race, lineage." Jati, more than varna, is the specific determinant of
one's social community. Traditionally, because of rules of purity each
jati is excluded from social interaction with the others, especially
from interdining and intermarriage. In modern times there is also a
large group (one-seventh of India's population in 1981) outside the four
varnas. These are called scheduled classes, untouchables, jatihita
("outcaste"), chandalas (specifically those who handle corpses) and
harijan, a name given by Mahatma Gandhi, meaning "children of God."
"Untouchable" jatis included the nishada (hunter), kaivarta (fisherman)
and karavara (leather worker).

The varna dharma system--despite its widespread discrimination against
harijans, and the abuse of social status by higher castes--ensures a
high standard of craftsmanship, a sense of community belonging, family
integrity and religio-cultural continuity. Caste is not unique to
Hinduism and India. By other names it is found in every society. The
four varnas, or classes, and myriad jatis, occupational castes, or
guilds, form the basic elements of human interaction. See: dharma,
Dharma Shastras, jati.

**varnashrama dharma:** (Sanskrit) "The way of one's caste and stage of
life." Names the social structure of four classes (varna), hundreds of
castes (jati) and four stages of life (ashramas). It is the combined
principles of varna dharma and ashrama dharma. See: ashrama dharma,
dharma, varna dharma.

**vasana:** (Sanskrit) "Subconscious inclination." From vas, "living,
remaining." The subliminal inclinations and habit patterns which, as
driving forces, color and motivate one's attitudes and future actions.
Vasanas are the conglomerate results of subconscious impressions
(samskaras) created through experience. Samskaras, experiential
impressions, combine in the subconscious to form vasanas, which
thereafter contribute to mental fluctuations, called vritti. The most
complex and emotionally charged vasanas are found in the dimension of
mind called the sub-subconscious, or vasana chitta. See: samskara, mind
(five states), vasana daha tantra, vritti.

**vasana daha tantra:** (Sanskrit) "Subconscious purification by fire."
Daha means to burn, a tantra is a method, and vasanas are deep-seated
subconscious traits or tendencies that shape one's attitudes and
motivations. Vasanas can be ether positive or negative. One of the best
methods for resolving difficulties in life, of dissolving troublesome
vasanas, the vasana daha tantra is the practice of burning confessions,
or even long letters to loved ones or acquaintances, describing pains,
expressing confusions and registering complaints and long-held hurts.
Writing down problems and burning them in any ordinary fire brings them
from the subconscious into the external mind, releasing the supressed
emotion as the fire consumes the paper. This is a magical healing
process. See: lekhaprartha havana, vasana.

**Vasishtha:** (Sanskrit) Disciple of Maharishi Nandikeshvara
(Nandinatha) (ca 250 bce) along with Patanjali and Vyaghrapada (as
recorded in Panini's book of grammar). Also the name of several other
famous sages, including the rishi attributed with composing the hymns of
the Rig Veda's seventh mandala, another who plays a central role in the
epics and certain Puranas and Upanishads, and a third who expounds the
ancient yogic wisdom to Lord Rama in the 29,000-verse Yoga Vasishtha.

**Vasugupta:** (Sanskrit) Celebrated preceptor (ca 800) whose finding of
the Siva Sutras catalyzed the reemergence of the ancient Kashmir Saiva
tradition. It is said that he discovered the 77 sutras carved in a rock
on Mahadeva mountain after a visionary dream in which Lord Siva told him
of their location. The sacred rock, named Shankarpal, is revered to this
day. See: Kashmir Saivism, Siva Sutras.

**vata:** (Sanskrit) The banyan tree, Ficus indicus sacred to Siva.
Thought to derive from vat, "to surround, encompass"--also called
nyagrodha, "growing downwards." Ancient symbol of the Sanatana Dharma.
Its relative, the ashvattha, or pipal tree, is given in the Upanishads
as a metaphor for creation, with the "roots above and the branches
below."

**vata:** (Sanskrit) "Movement." Vayu, "air-ether." One of the three
bodily humors, called dosha, vata is known as the air humor. Principle
of movement in the body. Vata dosha governs such functions as breathing
and movement of the muscles and tissues. See: ayurveda, dosha.

**vault:** An arched roof, ceiling or chamber.

**Veda:** (Sanskrit) "Wisdom." Sagely revelations which comprise
Hinduism's most authoritative scripture. They, along with the Agamas,
are shruti, "that which is heard." The Vedas are a body of dozens of
holy texts known collectively as the Veda, or as the four Vedas: Rig,
Yajur, Sama and Atharva. In all they include over 100,000 verses, as
well as additional prose. The knowledge imparted by the Vedas is highly
mystical or superconscious rather than intellectual. Each Veda has four
sections: Samhitas (hymn collections), Brahmanas (priestly manuals),
Aranyakas (forest treatises) and Upanishads (enlightened discourses).
The Samhitas and Brahmanas (together known as the karmakanda, "ritual
section") detail a transcendent-immanent Supreme-Being cosmology and a
system of worship through fire ceremony and chanting to establish
communication with the Gods. The Aranyakas and Upanishads (the
jnanakanda, "knowledge section") outline the soul's evolutionary
journey, providing yogic-philosophic training and propounding a lofty,
nondual realization as the destiny of all souls. The oldest portions of
the Vedas are thought to date back as far as 6,000 bce, written down in
Sanskrit in the last few millennia, making them the world's most ancient
scriptures. See: Aranyaka, Brahmana, shruti, Upanishad, Vedanga.

**Vedanga:** (Sanskrit) "Veda-limb." Six branches of post-Vedic studies
revered as auxiliary to the Vedas. Four Vedangas govern correct chanting
of the Vedas: 1) Shiksha (phonetics), 2) Chandas (meter), 3) Nirukta
(etymology), 4) Vyakarana (grammar). The two other Vedangas are 5)
Jyotisha Vedanga (astronomy-astrology) and 6) Kalpa Vedanga (procedural
canon) which includes the Shrauta and Shulba Shastras (ritual codes),
Dharma Shastras (social law) and Grihya Shastras (domestic codes). See:
Kalpa Vedanga, Vedas, and individual entries for named texts.

**Vedanta:** (Sanskrit) "Ultimate wisdom" or "final conclusions of the
Vedas." Vedanta is the system of thought embodied in the Upanishads (ca
1500-600 bce), which give forth the ultimate conclusions of the Vedas.
Through history there developed numerous Vedanta schools, ranging from
pure dualism to absolute monism. The first and original school is
Advaita Ishvaravada, "monistic theism" or panentheism, exemplified in
the Vedanta-Siddhanta of Rishi Tirumular (ca 250 bce) of the Nandinatha
Sampradaya in his Tirumantiram, which is a perfect summation of both the
Vedas and the Agamas. This is a dipolar reconciliation of monism and
dualism which, as philosopher-statesman Dr. S. Radhakrishnan (18881975)
declared, best depicts the philosophy of the Upanishads. After about 700
ce, many other schools developed, each establishing itself through
written commentaries on the major Upanishads, the Bhagavad Gita and the
Brahma Sutras. The latter text, by Badarayana (ca 400 bce), is the
earliest known systematization of Vedanta, but its extremely terse
aphorisms are philosophically illusive without commentary. During the
"scholastic era" (7001700), three main variations of the original
Vedanta were developed: 1) Advaita Vedanta, or pure nondualism,
exemplified by Shankara (788820); 2) Vishishtadvaita Vedanta, or
qualified nondualism, most fully expressed by Ramanuja (10171137); and
3) Dvaita Vedanta, expounded by Madhva (11971278).

Panentheism is embodied in those qualified nondual Vedanta schools that
accept the ultimate identity of the soul and God. Examples are the
Vishishtadvaita of Bhaskara (ca 950), the Shuddha Advaita, "pure
nondualism," of Vallabha (ca 14751530) and, to a lesser degree, the
Vishishtadvaita of Ramanuja.

In summary: Madhva, the dualist, conceives Brahman to be the Personal
God. In his philosophy, the universe, souls and God are all separate
from one another and real. Ramanuja, the qualified nondualist, also
conceives Brahman to be the Personal God. In his philosophy, God must
not be considered apart from the world and souls, for the three together
form a one whole. The world and souls are real as the body of God, and
the individual soul feels himself to be part of God. Shankara, the
strict advaitist, conceives Brahman to be the Impersonal God, the
Absolute. Shankara does not deny the existence of the Personal God,
known as Ishvara, but declares Ishvara to be equally as unreal as the
universe and the individuality of the soul. In truth, the only Reality
is the Absolute, and man is that Absolute. To Rishi Tirumular, the
panentheist, there is an eternal oneness of God and man at the level of
their inner Being, but a difference is acknowledged during the evolution
of the soul. Ultimately even this difference merges in identity. Thus,
there is perfectly beginningless oneness and a temporary difference
which resolves itself in perfect identity.

Vedanta is one of the six classical philosophies (shad darshanas) along
with Nyaya, Vaisheshika, Sankhya, Yoga and Mimamsa. Vedanta is also
called Uttara Mimamsa, "upper or later examination," as distinguished
from Purva Mimamsa, which concerned itself solely with the earlier
portions of the Veda. Other important schools of Vedanta include the
Dvaitadvaita, "dual-nondualism,"of Nimbarka (ca 1150), and the Achintya
Bhedabheda, "unthinkable difference-nondifference," of Chaitanya
(14851534). See: acosmic pantheism, Advaita Isvaravada, dvaita-advaita,
monistic theism, Madhva, panentheism, Ramanuja, Tirumantiram, Vallabha.

**Vedic-Agamic:** Simultaneously drawing from and complying with both of
Hinduism's revealed scriptures (shruti), Vedas and Agamas, which
represent two complimentary, intertwining streams of history and
tradition. The difference between Siddhanta and Vedanta is traditionally
described in the following way. While the Vedas depict man looking for
God, the Agamas hold the perspective of God looking to help man. This is
reflected in the fact that while the Vedas are voiced by rishis, God or
the Goddess is the giver of truth in the Agama texts. See: grace,
shruti.

**vegetarian: Sh** akahara. Of a diet which excludes meat, fish, fowl
and eggs. Vegetarianism is a principle of health and environmental
ethics that has been a keystone of Indian life for thousands of years.
Vegetarian foods include grains, fruits, vegetables, legumes and dairy
products. Natural, fresh foods, locally grown, without insecticides or
chemical fertilizers, are preferred. The following foods are minimized:
frozen and canned foods, highly processed foods, such as white rice,
white sugar and white flour; and "junk" foods and beverages (those with
abundant chemical additives, such as artificial sweeteners, colorings,
flavorings and preservatives). A person following a vegetarian diet is
called a shakahari. See: guna, mansahari, yama-niyama.

**veil:** A piece of cloth used to conceal. To cover or hide.

**veiling grace:** Tirobhava shakti. The divine power that limits the
soul's perception by binding or attaching the soul to the bonds of
anava, karma, and maya-- enabling it to grow and evolve as an individual
being. See: grace.

**vel:** (Tamil) "Spear, lance." The symbol of Lord Karttikeya's divine
authority as Lord of yoga and commander of the devas. (Known as shula in
Sanskrit.) See: Karttikeya.

**Vellore:** (Tamil) See: Chinna Bomman.

**venerate:** To love or consider with respect and admiration; to
revere. From the Latin veneratus, to worship, reverence.

**vengeful:** Desiring or seeking to return injury for injury. Wanting
revenge.

**venture:** To risk. To express in words at the risk of criticism.

**veracity:** Honesty, truthfulness; accuracy.

**vermillion:** Bright red.

**veshti:** (Tamil) A long, unstitched cloth like a sarong, wound about
the waist and reaching below the ankles. Traditional Hindu apparel for
men. It can be wrapped in many different styles. A Tamil word derived
from the Sanskrit veshtana, "encircling." Also called vetti (Tamil) or
dhoti (Hindi).

**vestments:** The clothing, especially official robes or other garb,
worn by religious persons, often as a sign of their spiritual position
or ordination.

**vibhuti:** (Sanskrit) "Resplendent, powerful." Holy ash, prepared by
burning cow dung along with other precious substances, milk, ghee,
honey, etc. It symbolizes purity and is one of the main sacraments given
at puja in all Saivite temples and shrines. Saivites wear three stripes
on the brow as a distinct sectarian mark, as do many Smartas. Vibhuti is
also a synonym for siddhi, supernormal powers developed through yoga
practice. It is the title of the third chapter of Patanjali's Yoga
Sutras, which discusses siddhis. See: tilaka. tripundra.

**vice:** Fault or failing. Corrupt habits; depravity. From the Sanskrit
vishu, meaning, "adverse; in opposite directions."

**victors and vanquished:** Those who triumph and those who are defeated
in battle, debate or any competition. A concept or attitude about
winning and losing derived from dualistic beliefs, which can lead to
adharma, himsa, etc.

**vid:** (Sanskrit) "To know." Verbal root of Veda and vidya,
"knowledge."

**videhamukti:** (Sanskrit) "Disembodied liberation." Release from
reincarnation through nirvikalpa samadhi--the realization of the Self,
Parasiva--at the point of death. Blessed are those who are aware that
departure, mahasamadhi, is drawing near. They settle all affairs, make
amends and intensify personal sadhana. They seek the silver channel of
sushumna which guides kundalini through the door of Brahman into the
beyond of the beyond. They seek total renunciation as the day of
transition looms strongly in their consciousness. Those who know that
Lord Yama is ready to receive them, seek to merge with Siva. They seek
nirvikalpa samadhi as the body and earthly life fall away. Those who
succeed are the videhamuktas, honored as among those who will never be
reborn. Hindu tradition allows for vows of renunciation, called atura
sannyasa diksha, to be taken and the orange robe donned by the worthy
sadhaka or householder in the days prior to death. See: jivanmukti,
kaivalya, moksha, Parasiva, Self Realization.

**vidya:** (Sanskrit) "Knowledge, learning, science." The power of
understanding gained through study and meditation. Contrasted with
avidya, ignorance.

**vidyarambha:** (Sanskrit) "Commencement of learning." See: samskaras
of childhood.

**Vighneshvara:** (Sanskrit) "Lord of Obstacles." A name for Lord
Ganesha describing His power to both remove and create obstacles to
guide souls along the right path. See: Ganesha.

**Vijayanagara:** (Sanskrit) "City of Victory." Opulent city and last
Indian empire, centered in present-day Karnataka state, which extended
as far as Malaysia, Indonesia and the Philippines. It flourished from
1336 to 1565, at which time it began to disintegrate following defeat at
the hand of Muslim armies. However, its existence and strength did serve
to prevent Muslim expansion into South India. Awed visitors recounted
its fabulously rich culture and great wealth. Site of extensive recent
archeological renovation.

**vijnanamaya kosha:** (Sanskrit) "Sheath of cognition." The soul's
mental or cognitive-intuitive sheath, also called the actinodic sheath.
See: kosha, mental body, soul.

**Vinayaka:** (Sanskrit) "Remover." A name of Lord Ganesha, meaning the
remover of obstacles (sometimes preceded by vighna, "obstacle"). See:
Ganesha.

**Vinayaka Ahaval:** (Tamil) "Ode to Vinayaka." Famous Tamil poem in
praise of Ganesha by the 8th-century woman saint, Auvaiyar.

**Vinayaka Vratam:** (Tamil) A 21-day festival to Lord Ganesha beginning
on the full-moon day of November-December. An important festival in
Tamil Nadu and in Tamil communities worldwide, when special pujas are
conducted in Ganesha temples, and devotees make a vow (vrata), such as
to attend the daily puja, or to fast by taking only one meal a day.
(Sanskrit)

**Vira Saivism (Saiva):** (Sanskrit) "Heroic Saivism." Made prominent by
Basavanna in the 12th century. Also called Lingayat Saivism. Followers,
called Lingayats, Lingavantas or Sivasharanas, always wear a Sivalinga
on their person. Vira Saivites are proudly egalitarian and emphasize the
personal relationship with Siva, rather than temple worship. Vira Saiva
priests, jangamas, conduct marriages and other domestic rites and also
act as gurus or teachers. Among the most central texts are Basavanna's
Vachanas, Allama Prabhu's Mantragopya, Chennabasavanna's Karana Hasuge,
and the collected work called Shunya Sampadane. The monistic-theistic
doctrine of Vira Saivism is called Shakti Vishishtadvaita--a version of
qualified nondualism which accepts both difference and nondifference
between soul and God, like rays are to the sun. In brief, Siva and the
cosmic force or existence are one ("Siva are you; you shall return to
Siva."). Yet, Siva is beyond His creation, which is real, not illusory.
God is both efficient and material cause. In Vira Saivism, Siva divides
from His Absolute state into Linga (Supreme Lord) and anga, individual
soul, the two eventually reuniting in undifferentiated oneness. There
are three aspects of Sivalinga. 1) Ishtalinga, personal form of Siva, in
which He fulfills desires and removes afflictions--God as bliss or joy;
2) Bhavalinga, Siva beyond space and time, the highest divine principle,
knowable through intuition; 3) Pranalinga, the reality of God which can
be apprehended by the mind. The soul merges with Siva by a progressive,
six-stage path called shatsthala, consisting of bhakti (devotion),
mahesha (charity and selfless service), prasada (seeking Siva's grace),
Pranalinga (experience of all as Siva), sharana (egoless refuge in Siva)
and aikya (oneness with Siva). Today Vira Saivism is a vibrant faith,
particularly strong in its religious homeland of Karnataka, South
Central India. Roughly 40 million people live here, of which perhaps 25%
are members of the Vira Saiva religion. Early on, they rejected
brahminical authority, and along with it the entire caste system and the
Vedas. By rejecting the Vedas, they continue to stand outside mainstream
Hinduism, but in their profound love of Siva and acceptance of certain
Saiva Agamas, as well as the main truths of the Vedic wisdom, they have
identified themselves as a unique Saiva sect. Though they have
established their faith as a distinct and independent religion in Indian
courts of law, they are still widely embraced as devout brothers and
sisters of the Hindu dharma. See: Lingavanta, Saivism.

**virginal:** Characteristic of a virgin. Pure. --**virginal God:**
Reference to Lord Karttikeya, the perpetual bachelor, descriptive of His
inherent purity.

**visarjana:** (Sanskrit) "Departure." See: Ganesha Chaturthi.

**Vishnu:** (Sanskrit) "The All-Pervasive." Supreme Deity of the
Vaishnavite religion. God as personal Lord and Creator, the All-Loving
Divine Personality, who periodically incarnates and lives a fully human
life to reestablish dharma whenever necessary. In Saivism, Vishnu is
Siva's aspect as Preserver. See: Vaishnavism.

**visionary:** Characteristic of one who has visions; a prophet, evolved
seer.

**Vishishtadvaita:** (Sanskrit) "Qualified nondualism." Best known as
the term used by Ramanuja (ca 1017-1137) to name his Vaishnava Vedanta
philosophy, which is nondualistic in that the ultimate truth or reality
is one, not two, and souls are in fact part of God. And it is
"qualified" in that souls are fully one with God, but not identical.
Thus there is a full union which is somewhat shy of total merger. Siva
Vishishtadvaita was the term chosen by Bhaskara (ca 950) to name his
philosophy. See: Siva Advaita, Vedanta.

**visualize (visualization):** To imagine, create mental images.
Exercising the power of thought to create the future.

**vishuddha chakra:** (Sanskrit) "Wheel of purity." The fifth chakra.
Center of divine love. See: chakra.

**vishvagrasa:** (Sanskrit) "Total absorption." The final merger of the
soul in Siva at the fulfillment of its evolution. It is ultimate union
of the individual soul body with the body of Siva--Parameshvara--within
the Sivaloka, from whence the soul was first emanated. This occurs at
the end of the soul's evolution, after the four outer sheaths--annamaya
kosha, pranamaya kosha, manomaya kosha and vijnamaya kosha--have been
dropped off. Finally, anandamaya kosha, the soul form itself, merges in
the Primal Soul. Individuality is lost as the soul becomes Siva, the
creator, preserver, destroyer, veiler and revealer. Individual identity
expands into universality. Having previously merged in Parasiva and
Parashakti in states of samadhi, the soul now fully merges into
Parameshvara and is one with all three of Siva's perfections. Jiva has
totally become Siva--not a new and independent Siva, as might be
construed, for there is and can only be one Supreme God Siva. This
fulfilled merger can happen at the moment the physical body is dropped
off, or after eons of time following further unfoldment of the higher
chakras in the inner worlds--all depending on the maturity, ripeness and
intentions of the soul, by which is meant the advanced soul's choice to
be either an upadeshi or a nirvani. See: atman, evolution of the soul,
nirvani and upadeshi, samadhi, soul.

**vitala:** (Sanskrit) "Region of negation." Region of raging anger and
viciousness. The second chakra below the muladhara, centered in the
thighs. Corresponds to the second astral netherworld beneath the earth's
surface, called Avichi ("joyless") or Vitala. See: chakra, loka, Naraka.

**vivaha:** (Sanskrit) "Marriage." See: samskaras.

**Viveka Chudamani:** (Sanskrit) "Crest jewel of discrimination." A
famous text by Shankara (788-820) on discipline and discrimination
between the real and the unreal as the way to God.

**Viveka Martanda:** (Sanskrit) A philosophic treatise of the Siddha
Siddhanta school of Saivism ascribed to Gorakshanatha (ca 900).

**Vivekananda, Swami:** (Sanskrit) "Of blissful discrimination."
Disciple of Sri Ramakrishna who was overtaken by an ardent love of
Hinduism and a missionary zeal that drove him onward. He attained
mahasamadhi at age 39 (18631902). Most notable among his achievements
was a trip around the world on which he gave brilliant lectures,
especially in Europe and America, that created much respect for
Hinduism. In India he founded the Ramakrishna Mission which thrives
today internationally with over 100 centers and nearly 1,000 sannyasins.
He is credited, along with Tagore, Aurobindo, Radhakrishnan and others,
with sparking the modern Hindu revival. See: jnana yoga, Ramakrishna.

**vivify:** To give life to, or make more active, influential, etc.

**void:** An empty space. Philosophically, emptiness itself. The absence
of time, form and space. God Siva in His perfection as Parasiva, as a
sacred void, but not "like the emptiness inside of an empty box....[It]
is the fullness of everything." See: Parasiva.

**votary:** A person committed by a vow. A devotee; a monk or nunk.

**vrata:** (Sanskrit) "Vow, religious oath." Often a vow to perform
certain disciplines over a period of time, such as penance, fasting,
specific mantra repetitions, worship or meditation. Vratas extend from
the simplest personal promise to irrevocable vows made before God, Gods,
guru and community. See: marriage covenant, sannyasa diksha, Vinayaka
Vratam.

**vritti:** (Sanskrit) "Whirlpool." In yoga psychology, names the
fluctuations of consciousness, the waves of mental activities (chitta
vritti) of thought and perception. A statement from Patanjali's Yoga
Sutras (1.2) reads, "Yoga is the restraint (nirodha) of mental activity
(chitta vritti)." In general use, vritti means: 1) course of action,
mode of life; conduct, behavior; way in which something is done; 2) mode
of being, nature, kind, character. See: mind (individual), raja yoga.

**Vyaghrapada:** (Sanskrit) "Tiger feet." Famous Nandinatha Sampradaya
siddha (ca 200 bce), trained under Maharishi Nandinatha, was a brother
disciple of rishis Tirumular and Patanjali. He pilgrimaged south from
Kashmir, settling at Tamil Nadu's Chidambaram Siva Temple to practice
yoga. See: Kailasa Parampara.

**Vyakarana Vedanga:** (Sanskrit) Auxiliary Vedic texts on Sanskrit
grammar. Vyakarana is among four linguistic skills taught for mastery of
the Vedas and the rites of yajna. The term literally means "separation,
or explanation." The most celebrated Vyakarana work is Panini's
4,000-sutra Ashtadhyayi, which set the linguistic standards for
classical Sanskrit (ca 400 bce). See: Vedanga.


