W
=

**wane:** To decrease. "On the wane:" in the process of decreasing or
disappearing.

**warp and woof:** In the art of weaving, warp names the lengthwise
threads that give structure to the cloth; woof denotes the crossing
threads that give design and color. Taken together, the expression "warp
and woof" means the very fiber or essence of a thing.

**waver:** To vacillate, showing doubt or indecision. Characteristic of
not being firm-minded. To be unsure of oneself. See: conversion to
Hinduism.

**wealth:** Artha. Abundance; financial stability. See: purushartha.

**wedding pendant:** A gold ornament worn by the Hindu wife around the
neck representing her vows of matrimony. Known as mangala sutra in
Sanskrit, and tali in Tamil. She reveres it as an image of her husband
and ritually worships it during her morning devotions.

**whence:** From where. Whence does it come? Where does it come from?

**whirling:** To move rapidly in a circular motion.

**wield:** To hold and use with skill.

**wisdom:** The timely application of knowledge. The power of judging
the best course of action, based on understanding, knowledge and
experience.

**withholding:** To refrain from giving. Not granting.

**woeful:** Sad, pitiful, full of sorrow. --**woeful birth:** An
unfavorable birth; a life of difficulties resulting from negative karmas
accrued in previous lives.

**wondrous:** Inspiring awe, extraordinary, mirific.

**woodwind:** A wind instrument such as the flute or the Indian
nagasvara.

**woof:** See: warp and woof.

**Words of Our Master:** A collection of sayings and inspiring
statements of Sage Yogaswami of Sri Lanka--compiled from the notes and
recollections of devotees.

**world:** In Hindu theology, world refers to 1)**loka:** a particular
region of consciousness or plane of existence. 2)**maya:** The whole of
manifest existence; the phenomenal universe, or cosmos. In this sense it
transcends the limitations of physical reality, and can include
emotional, mental and spiritual, physical realms of existence, depending
on its use. Also denoted by the terms prakriti and Brahmanda.
3)**pasha:** In Saivism, the term world is often used to translate the
term pasha in the Agamic triad of fundamentals--Pati, pashu, pasha,
"God, soul, world." It is thus defined as the "fetter" (pasha) that
binds the soul, veiling its true nature and enabling it to grow and
evolve through experience as an individual being. In this sense, the
world, or pasha, is three-fold, comprising anava (the force of
individuation), karma (the principle of cause and effect) and maya
(manifestation, the principle of matter, Siva's mirific energy, the
sixth tattva). See: Brahmanda, microcosm-macrocosm, sarvabhadra,
Sivamaya, tattva.

**worldly:** Materialistic, unspiritual. Devoted to or concerned with
the affairs or pleasures of the world, especially excessive concern to
the exclusion of religious thought and life. Connoting ways born of the
lower chakras: jealousy, greed, selfishness, anger, guile,
etc. --**worldliness:** The state or quality of being
worldly.**--worldly wise:** Knowledgeable in the ways of the world.
Street wise. Sophisticated. See: materialism, samsari.

**wrath:** Intense anger. Rage.

**written prayers:** See: lekhaprartha havana.

**wrought:** Formed, fashioned, crafted, built.


