Y
=

**yajna:** (Sanskrit) "Worship; sacrifice." One of the most central
Hindu concepts--sacrifice and surrender through acts of worship, inner
and outer. 1**)** A form of ritual worship especially prevalent in Vedic
times, in which oblations--ghee, grains, spices and exotic woods--are
offered into a fire according to scriptural injunctions while special
mantras are chanted. The element fire, Agni, is revered as the divine
messenger who carries offerings and prayers to the Gods. The ancient
Veda Brahmanas and the Shrauta Shastras describe various types of yajna
rites, some so elaborate as to require hundreds of priests, whose
powerful chanting resounds for miles. These major yajnas are performed
in large, open-air structures called yagashala. Domestic yajnas,
prescribed in the Grihya Shastras, are performed in the family compound
or courtyard. Yajna requires four components, none of which may be
omitted: dravya, sacrificial substances; tyaga, the spirit of
sacrificing all to God; devata, the celestial beings who receive the
sacrifice; and mantra, the empowering word or chant.

While puja (worship in temples with water, lights and flowers) has
largely replaced the yajna, this ancient rite still continues, and its
specialized priestly training is carried on in schools in India. Yajnas
of a grand scale are performed for special occasions, beseeching the
Gods for rain during drought, or for peace during bloody civil war. Even
in temples, yajna has its Agamic equivalent in the agnikaraka, the homa
or havana ceremony, held in a fire pit (homakunda) in an outer mandapa
of a temple as part of elaborate puja rites.

2**)** Personal acts of worship or sacrifice. Life itself is
a**jivayajna.** The Upanishads suggest that one can make "inner yajnas"
by offering up bits of the little self into the fires of sadhana and
tapas until the greater Self shines forth. The five daily
yajnas,**pancha mahayajna,** of the householder (outlined in the Dharma
Shastras) ensure offerings to rishis, ancestors, Gods, creatures and
men. They are as follows.**--brahma yajna:** (also called Veda yajna or
rishi yajna) "Homage to the seers." Accomplished through studying and
teaching the Vedas.**--deva yajna:** "Homage to Gods and elementals."
Recognizing the debt due to those who guide nature, and the feeding of
them by offering ghee and uncooked grains into the fire. This is the
homa sacrifice.**--pitri yajna:** "Homage to ancestors." Offering of
cakes (pinda) and water to the family line and the progenitors of
mankind.**--bhuta yajna:** "Homage to beings." Placing food-offerings,
bali, on the ground, intended for animals, birds, insects, wandering
outcastes and beings of the invisible worlds. ("Let him gently place on
the ground [food] for dogs, outcastes, svapachas, those diseased from
sins, crows and insects" Manu Dharma Shastras 3.92).**--manushya
yajna:** "Homage to men." Feeding guests and the poor, the homeless and
the student. Manushya yajna includes all acts of philanthropy, such as
tithing and charity. The Vedic study is performed in the morning. The
other four yajnas are performed just before taking one's noon meal. Manu
Dharma Shastras (3.80) states, "Let him worship, according to the rule,
the rishis with Veda study, the devas with homa, the pitris with
shraddha, men with food, and the bhutas with bali." Mystics warn that
all offerings must be tempered in the fires of kundalini through the
power of inner yajna to be true and valuable, just as the fire of
awareness is needed to indelibly imprint ideas and concepts on one's own
akashic window. See: dharma, havana, homa, puja, sacrifice.

**Yajnavalkya Smriti:** (Sanskrit) A Hindu code of law, one of the
Dharma Shastras, regarded second in authority only to the earlier Manu
Dharma Shastras. See: Dharma Shastra, smriti.

**Yajnavalkya Upanishad:** (Sanskrit) A metrical rendering of the Jabala
Upanishad, which expounds on sannyasa, renunciation of worldly life in
the quest for liberation.

**Yajnopavita:** (Sanskrit) "Sacred thread." See: upanayana.

**Yajur Veda:** (Sanskrit) "Wisdom of sacrificial formulas." One of the
four compendia of revelatory texts called Vedas (Rig, Sama, Yajur and
Atharva). When used alone, the term Yajur Veda generally refers to this
Veda's central and oldest portion--the Samhita, "hymn collection." Of
this there are two recensions: 1) the Krishna ("black") Yajur Veda
(so-called because the commentary, Brahmana, material is mixed with the
hymns); and 2) the Shukla ("white or clear") Yajur Veda (with no
commentary among the hymns). The contents of these two recensions are
also presented in different order. The Yajur Veda Samhita is divided
into 40 chapters and contains 1,975 stanzas. About 30 percent of the
stanzas are drawn from the Rig Veda Samhita (particularly from chapters
eight and nine). This Veda is a special collection of hymns to be
chanted during yajna. The Krishna Yajur Veda Samhita exists today in
various recensions, most importantly the Taittiriya Samhita and the
Maitrayani Samhita. The Shukla Yajur Veda Samhita is preserved most
prominently as the Vajasaneyi Samhita. See: Vedas.

**Yama:** (Sanskrit) "The restrainer." Hindu God of death; oversees the
processes of death transition, guiding the soul out of its present
physical body. See: death.

**yama-niyama:** (Sanskrit) "Restraints-observances." The first two of
the eight limbs of raja yoga, constituting Hinduism's fundamental
ethical codes, the yamas and niyamas are the essential foundation for
all spiritual progress. They are codified in numerous scriptures
including the Shandilya and Varuha Upanishads, Hatha Yoga Pradipika by
Gorakshanatha, the Tirumantiram of Tirumular and the Yoga Sutras of
Patanjali. All the above texts list ten yamas and ten niyamas, with the
exception of Patanjali's classic work, which lists only five of each.
The yamas are the ethical restraints; the niyamas are the religious
practices. Because it is brief, the entire code can be easily memorized
and reviewed daily by the spiritual aspirant. Here are the ten
traditional yamas and ten niyamas. --**yamas:** 1)**ahimsa:**
"Noninjury." Not harming others by thought, word, or deed. 2)**satya:**
"Truthfulness." Refraining from lying and betraying promises.
3)**asteya:** "Nonstealing." Neither stealing, nor coveting nor entering
into debt. 4)**brahmacharya:** (Sanskrit) "Divine conduct." Controlling
lust by remaining celibate when single, leading to faithfulness in
marriage. 5)**kshama:** (Sanskrit) "Patience." Restraining intolerance
with people and impatience with circumstances. 6)**dhriti:**
"Steadfastness." Overcoming nonperseverance, fear, indecision and
changeableness. 7)**daya:** "Compassion." Conquering callous, cruel and
insensitive feelings toward all beings. 8) a**rjava:** "Honesty,
straightforwardness." Renouncing deception and wrongdoing.
9)**mitahara:** "Moderate appetite." Neither eating too much nor
consuming meat, fish, fowl or eggs. 10) sh**aucha:** "Purity." Avoiding
impurity in body, mind and speech. --**niyamas:** 1)**hri:** "Remorse."
Being modest and showing shame for misdeeds. 2)**santosha:**
"Contentment." Seeking joy and serenity in life. 3)**dana:** "Giving."
Tithing and giving generously without thought of reward. 4) a**stikya:**
(Sanskrit) "Faith." Believing firmly in God, Gods, guru and the path to
enlightenment. 5) I**shvarapujana:** "Worship of the Lord." The
cultivation of devotion through daily worship and meditation.
6)**siddhanta shravana:** "Scriptural listening." Studying the teachings
and listening to the wise of one's lineage. 7)**mati:** "Cognition."
Developing a spiritual will and intellect with the guru's guidance.
8)**vrata:** "Sacred vows." Fulfilling religious vows, rules and
observances faithfully. 9)**japa:** "Recitation." Chanting mantras
daily. 10)**tapas:** (Sanskrit) "Austerity." Performing sadhana,
penance, tapas and sacrifice. Patanjali lists the yamas as: ahimsa,
satya, asteya, brahmacharya and aparigraha (noncovetousness); and the
niyamas as: shaucha, santosha, tapas, svadhyaya (self-reflection,
scriptural study) and Ishvarapranidhana (worship). See: raja yoga.

**yantra:** (Sanskrit) "Restrainer," "limiter." A mystic diagram
composed of geometric and alphabetic figures--usually etched on small
plates of gold, silver or copper. Sometimes rendered in three dimensions
in stone or metal. The purpose of a yantra is to focus spiritual and
mental energies according to computer-like yantric pattern, be it for
health, wealth, childbearing or the invoking of one God or another. It
is usually installed near or under the temple Deity. Psychically seen,
the temple yantra is a magnificent three-dimensional edifice of light
and sound in which the devas work. On the astral plane, it is much
larger than the temple itself. --**Sri Chakra:** The most well known
yantra and a central image in Shakta worship. Consisting of nine
interlocking triangles, it is the design of Siva-Shakti's
multidimensional manifestations. Yantras are also used for meditation
and sadhana, especially in the Shakta tradition. Installing them beneath
Deities is a fairly modern practice, while the Agamas prescribe the
placement of precious gems. For Saivites the Tiru-ambala chakra,
representing Lord Nataraja, is most sacred. See: murti.

**yea:** Yes, indeed, truly.

**yield:** To produce as a result of cultivation, such as fruit. To
profit or give.

**yoga:** (Sanskrit) "Union." From yuj, "to yoke, harness, unite." The
philosophy, process, disciplines and practices whose purpose is the
yoking of individual consciousness with transcendent or divine
consciousness. One of the six darshanas, or systems of orthodox Hindu
philosophy. Yoga was codified by Patanjali in his Yoga Sutras (ca 200
bce) as the eight limbs (ashtanga) of raja yoga. It is essentially a one
system, but historically, parts of raja yoga have been developed and
emphasized as yogas in themselves. Prominent among the many forms of
yoga are hatha yoga (emphasizing bodily perfection in preparation for
meditation), kriya yoga (emphasizing breath control), as well as karma
yoga (selfless service) and bhakti yoga (devotional practices) which
could be regarded as an expression of raja yoga's first two limbs (yama
and niyama). See: austerity, bhakti yoga, danda, hatha yoga, jivanmukta,
raja yoga, shad darshana, siddha yoga, siddhi.

**yoga pada:** (Sanskrit) The third of the successive stages in
spiritual unfoldment in Saiva Siddhanta, wherein the goal is Self
Realization. See: pada, yoga.

**Yoga Sampradaya:** (Sanskrit) A term for Siddha Siddhanta. See:
Saivism.

**Yogaswami:** (Tamil) "Master of yoga." Sri Lanka's most renowned
contemporary spiritual master (1872-1964), a Sivajnani and Natha siddhar
revered by both Hindus and Buddhists. He was trained in and practiced
kundalini yoga under the guidance of Satguru Chellappaswami, from whom
he received guru diksha. Sage Yogaswami was in turn the satguru of
Sivaya Subramuniyaswami, current preceptor of the Natha Sampradaya's
Kailasa Parampara. Yogaswami conveyed his teachings in hundreds of
songs, called Natchintanai, "good thoughts," urging seekers to follow
dharma and realize God within. Four great sayings capsulize his message:
Thanai ari, "Know thy Self by thyself;" Sarvam Sivam Ceyal, "Siva is
doing it all;" Sarvam Sivamaya, "All is Siva;" and Summa Iru, "Be
still." See: Kailasa Parampara.

**yoga tapas:** (Sanskrit) "Fiery union." Relentless, sustained yoga
practice that awakens the fiery kundalini, bringing the transforming
heat of tapas and ultimately the repeated experience of the Self God,
leading to jnana, the wisdom state. See: Advaita Siddhanta, austerity,
danda, jivanmukta, Kadaitswami, karma, jnana, penance, punya, siddhi,
tapas, yama, yoga.

**Yogatattva Upanishad:** (Sanskrit) Scripture of 142 verses based on
Advaita Vedanta and yoga practices, ca 1400.

**Yoga Vasishtha:** (Sanskrit) Poetic work of over 29,000 verses
attributed to Valmiki. It is a dialog between Prince Rama and his
teacher, Sage Vasishtha, in the form of 50 intriguing stories which
present advaita and the concepts and ideals of yoga in elegant Sanskrit.
(Variously dated between 500 and 1000 ce.)

**yogi:** (Sanskrit) One who practices yoga, especially kundalini or
raja yoga.

**yogini:** (Sanskrit) Feminine counterpart of yogi.

**yon:** That or those (at a distance).

**yoni:** (Sanskrit) "Source, origin; female genitals, womb." In some
tantric sects the Sivalinga is depicted as a phallic symbol, and the
base as a vulva, or yoni. While the linga represents the unmanifest or
static Absolute, the yoni represents the dynamic, creative energy of
God, the womb of the universe.

**yore:** Of yore: a long time ago, in a distant past. See: Sivalinga,
tantrism.

**young soul:** A soul who has gone through only a few births, and is
thus inexperienced or immature. See: evolution of the soul, soul.

**yuga:** (Sanskrit) "Period, age." One of four ages which chart the
duration of the world according to Hindu thought. They are: Satya (or
Krita), Treta, Dvapara and Kali. In the first period, dharma reigns
supreme, but as the ages revolve, virtue diminishes and ignorance and
injustice increases. At the end of the Kali Yuga, which we are in now,
the cycle begins again with a new Satya Yuga. It is said in the
Mahabharata that during the Satya Yuga all are brahmins, and the color
of this yuga is white. In the Treta Yuga, righteousness decreases by
one-fourth and men seek reward for their rites and gifts; the color is
red and the consciousness of the kshatriya, sovereignty, prevails. In
the Dvapara Yuga, the four varnas come fully into existence. The color
is yellow. In the Kali Yuga, the color is black. Righteousness is
one-tenth that of the Satya Yuga. True worship and sacrifice cease, and
base, or shudra, consciousness is prominent. Calamities, disease,
fatigue and faults such as anger and fear prevail. People decline and
their motives grow weak. See: cosmic cycle, mahapralaya, pralaya.


