C
=

**ca:** Abbreviation for circa--Latin for "approximately"--used with
dates that are not precise, e.g., ca 650 means "around the year 650."

**cadenced:** In measured, modulated, rhythmic voice.

**callous:** Unfeeling, not sensitive, lacking compassion or pity. See:
yama-niyama.

**camphor:** Karpura. An aromatic white crystalline solid derived from
the wood of camphor trees (or prepared synthetically from pinene),
prized as fuel in temple arati lamps. See: arati, puja.

**canon:** The religious laws governing a sect or a religion. Body of
accepted or authorized scriptures.

**caste:** A hierarchical system, called varna dharma (or jati dharma),
established in India in ancient times, which determined the privileges,
status, rights and duties of the many occupational groups, wherein
status is determined by heredity. There are four main estates
(varnas)--brahmin, kshatriya, vaishya and shudra--and innumerable
castes, called jati. See: varna dharma.

**catalyst:** A person or thing acting as a stimulus upon another, whose
presence brings about change. Difficulties can be a catalyst for
spiritual unfoldment. Catalyst is sometimes used to name a teacher or
facilitator.

**causal body:** Karana sharira, the inmost body; the soul form, also
called anandamaya kosha, "bliss sheath," and actinic causal body. See:
kosha, soul.

**causal plane:** Highest plane of existence, Sivaloka. See: loka.

**cause:** Karana. Anything which produces an effect, a
result. --**efficient cause:** (nimitta karana) That which directly
produces the effect; that which conceives, makes, shapes, etc., such as
the potter who fashions a clay pot, or God who creates the
world. --**material cause:** (upadana karana) The matter from which the
effect is formed, as the clay which is shaped into a pot, or God as
primal substance becoming the world. --**instrumental cause:** (sahakari
karana) That which serves as a means, mechanism or tool in producing the
effect, such as the potter's wheel, necessary for making a pot, or God's
generative Shakti. See: maya, tattva.

**ce:** Abbreviation for "common era." Equivalent to the abbreviation
ad. Following a date, it indicates that the year in question comes after
the year zero in the Western, or Gregorian calender, system. E.g., 300
ce is 300 years after the turn of the millennium. Cf: bce.

**celestial:** "Of the sky or heavens." Of or relating to the heavenly
regions or beings. Highly refined, divine.

**celibacy:** Complete sexual abstinence. Also the state of a person who
has vowed to remain unmarried. See: brahmachari, brahmacharya.

**centillion:** The number 1 followed by 600 zeros. An unimaginably
large figure.

**ceremony:** A formal rite established by custom or authority as proper
to special occasions. From the Latin caerimonia, "awe; reverent rite."

**cf:** An abbreviation for "compare." A scholastic notation.

**chaitanya:** (Sanskrit) "Spirit, consciousness, especially higher
consciousness; Supreme Being."A widely used term, often preceded by
modifiers, e.g., sakshi chaitanya, "witness consciousness," or bhakti
chaitanya, "devotional consciousness," or Sivachaitanya, "God
consciousness." See: chitta, consciousness, mind (five states), Siva
consciousness.

**Chaitanya:** (Sanskrit) A renowned Vaishnava saint (1485-1534),
revered today especially in Bengal and Orissa, remembered for his
ecstatic states of devotion. He taught a dualistic philosophy in which
bhakti (devotion) to the divine couple Radha and Krishna is the only
means to liberation. Practice revolves mainly around kirtana, devotional
singing and dancing. He gave prominence to the Gaudiya Vaishnava sect,
of which several branches thrive today, including ISKCON. See: Krishna,
Vaishnavism, Vedanta.

**chakra:** (Sanskrit) "Wheel." Any of the nerve plexes or centers of
force and consciousness located within the inner bodies of man. In the
physical body there are corresponding nerve plexuses, ganglia and
glands. The seven principal chakras can be seen psychically as colorful,
multi-petaled wheels or lotuses. They are situated along the spinal cord
from the base to the cranial chamber. Additionally, seven chakras,
barely visible, exist below the spine. They are seats of instinctive
consciousness, the origin of jealousy, hatred, envy, guilt, sorrow, etc.
They constitute the lower or hellish world, called Naraka or patala.
Thus, there are 14 major chakras in all.

The seven upper chakras, from lowest to highest, are: 1)**muladhara**
(base of spine): memory, time and space; 2)**svadhishthana** (below
navel): reason; 3)**manipura** (solar plexus): willpower; 4)**anahata**
(heart center): direct cognition; 5)**vishuddha** (throat): divine love;
6) a**jna** (third eye): divine sight; 7)**sahasrara** (crown of head):
illumination, Godliness.

The seven lower chakras, from highest to lowest, are 1)**atala** (hips):
fear and lust; 2) **vitala** (thighs): raging anger; 3) **sutala**
(knees): retaliatory jealousy; 4) **talatala** (calves): prolonged
mental confusion; 5) **rasatala** (ankles): selfishness; 6) **mahatala**
(feet): absence of conscience; 7) **patala** (located in the soles of
the feet): murder and malice. See: pradakshina, Naraka (also: individual
chakra entries).

**Chalukya:** (Sanskrit) Indian dynasty (450-1189) in the Punjab area.
Buddhism and Saivism were prominent. This dynasty completed the Buddhist
Ajanta Cave frescoes and advanced the art of Hindu temple building.

**chandana:** (Sanskrit) "Sandalwood paste." One of the sacred
substances offered during puja and afterwards distributed to devotees as
a sacrament (prasada).

**Chandas Vedanga:** (Sanskrit) Auxiliary Vedic texts on the metrical
rules of poetic writing. Chanda, meter, is among four linguistic skills
taught for mastery of the Vedas and the rites of yajna. Chandas means
"desire; will; metrical science." The most important text on Chandas is
the Chanda Shastra, ascribed to Pingala (ca 200 bce). See: Vedanga.

**Chandogya Upanishad:** (Sanskrit) One of the major Upanishads, it
consists of eight chapters of the Chandogya Brahmana of the Sama Veda.
It teaches the origin and significance of Aum, the importance of the
Sama Veda, the Self, meditation and life after death. See: Upanishad.

**chandra:** (Sanskrit) "The moon." Of central importance in Hindu
astrology and in the calculation of the festival calendar. Considered
the ruler of emotion.

**Charvaka:** (Sanskrit) "Good or sweet voice or word." Indian
philosopher (ca 600 bce) who fashioned the school of pure materialism
bearing his name. One of the great skeptics of all time. See: nastika.

**charya pada:** (Sanskrit) "Conduct stage." Stage of service and
character building. See: pada, Saiva Siddhanta, Saivism.

**chaturdharma:** (Sanskrit) "Four dharmas:" rita, ashrama dharma, varna
dharma and svadharma. See: dharma.

**chela:** (Sanskrit) "Disciple." (Hindi.) A disciple of a guru; synonym
for shishya. The feminine equivalent is chelina or cheli.

**Chellappaswami:** (Tamil) "Wealthy father." Reclusive siddha and 160th
satguru (1840-1915) of the Nandinatha Sampradaya's Kailasa Parampara, he
lived on Sri Lanka's Jaffna peninsula near Nallur Kandaswami Temple in a
small hut where today there is a small samadhi shrine. Among his
disciples was Sage Yogaswami, whom he trained intensely for five years
and initiated as his successor. See: Kailasa Parampara, Natha
Sampradaya.

**Chennabasavanna:** (Sanskrit) "Little Basavanna." The 12th-century
theologian who systematized the religious doctrine of Vira Saivism.

**Chidambaram:** (Tamil) "Hall of Consciousness." A very famous South
Indian Siva Nataraja temple. See: Nataraja.

**Chinna Bomman:** (Tamil) King of Vellore, an area near Chennai
(1559-1579), patron and disciple of Appaya Dikshita.

**chit:** (Sanskrit) "Consciousness" or "awareness." Philosophically,
"pure awareness; transcendent consciousness," as in Sat-chit-ananda. In
mundane usage, chit means "perception; consciousness." See: awareness,
chitta, consciousness, mind (universal), sakshin.

**chitsabha:** (Sanskrit) "Hall of consciousness." See: Nataraja.

**chitta:** (Sanskrit) "Mind; consciousness." Mind-stuff. On the
personal level, it is that in which mental impressions and experiences
are recorded. Seat of the conscious, subconscious and superconscious
states, and of the three-fold mental faculty, called antahkarana,
consisting of buddhi, manas and ahamkara. See: awareness, consciousness,
mind (individual), mind (universal), sakshin.

**chudakarana:** (Sanskrit) "Head-shaving sacrament." See: samskara.

**circumambulation:** Pradakshina. Walking around, usually clockwise.
See: pradakshina, puja.

**citadel:** Fortress, usually situated on a height.

**clairaudience:** "Clear-hearing." Psychic or divine hearing,
divyashravana. The ability to hear the inner currents of the nervous
system, the Aum and other mystic tones. Hearing in one's mind the words
of inner-plane beings or earthly beings not physically present. Also,
hearing the nadanadi shakti through the day or while in meditation. See:
clairvoyance, nada.

**clairvoyance:** "Clear-seeing." Psychic or divine sight, divyadrishti.
The ability to look into the inner worlds and see auras, chakras, nadis,
thought forms, non-physical people and subtle forces. The ability to see
from afar or into the past or future--avadhijnana, "knowing beyond
limits."Also the ability to separate the light that illumines one's
thoughts from the forms the light illumines. Also, duradarshana,
"far-seeing," the modern Sanskrit term for television in India.
Duradarshin names a seer or prophet. See: akasha.

**coarse:** Of poor quality; gross, rough cut. Not fine or refined.

**coexistent:** "Existing together."

**cognition:** Knowing; perception. Knowledge reached through intuitive,
superconscious faculties rather than through intellect alone.

**cognitive body:** Vijnanamaya kosha. The most refined sheath of the
astral, or subtle, body (sukshma sharira). It is the sheath of higher
thought and cognition. See: astral body, kosha.

**cohesive:** Remaining together; not disintegrating.

**coined:** Made up; invented.

**commemorative:** Anything that honors the memory of a departed person
or past event. See: shraddha.

**commencement:** Beginning.

**commission:** To give an order or power for something to be made or
done.

**commitment:** Dedication or engagement to a long-term course of
action.

**commune:** To communicate closely, sharing thoughts, feelings or
prayers in an intimate way. To be in close rapport.

**compatible:** Capable of combining well; getting along, harmonious.

**compensate:** To make up for; counteract; recompense.

**component:** An element; one of the parts constituting a whole.

**comprehend:** Understand.

**comprehensive:** Including much or all.

**comprise:** To consist of; be composed of.

**concealing grace:** See: grace, tirodhana shakti.

**conceive:** To form or develop an idea, thought, belief or attitude.

**concentration:** Uninterrupted and sustained attention. See: raja
yoga.

**concept:** An idea or thought, especially a generalized or abstract
idea.

**conception:** Power to imagine, conceive or create. Moment when a
pregnancy is begun, a new earthly body generated.**--the point of
conception; the apex of creation:** The simple instant that precedes any
creative impulse and is therefore the source and summit of the powers of
creation or manifestation. To become conscious of the point of
conception is a great siddhi.

**concomitant:** Accompanying a condition or circumstance.

**concord:** Harmony and agreement; peaceful relations.

**condone:** To forgive, pardon or overlook.

**confer:** To give or grant, especially an honor or privilege.

**confession:** An admission of guilt or acknowledgement of wrongdoing.

**confidentiality:** The ability to keep confidences or information told
in trust; not divulging private or secret matters.

**confine(s):** Boundary, limits, border. To restrict or keep within
limits.

**conflagration:** A large, destructive fire.

**conform:** To be in accord or agreement with.

**conformity:** Action in accordance with customs, rules, prevailing
opinion.

**congregational worship:** Worship done as a group, such as
synchronized singing, community prayers or other participatory worship
by individuals sharing a strict membership to a particular organization,
with no other religious affiliations. Hindu worship is strongly
congregational within ashramas and tightly organized societies, but
usually noncongregational in the general sphere. See: bhajana, kirtana,
puja, yajna.

**conquest:** Act or process of overcoming.

**conscience:** The inner sense of right and wrong, sometimes called
"the knowing voice of the soul." However, the conscience is affected by
the individual's training and belief patterns, and is therefore not
necessarily a perfect reflection of dharma. In Sanskrit the conscience
is known as antaryamin, "inner guide," or dharmabuddhi, "moral wisdom."
Other terms are sadasadvichara shakti "good-bad reflective power" and
samjnana, "right conception." It is the subconscious of the person--the
sum total of past impressions and training--that defines the creedal
structure and colors the conscience and either clearly reflects or
distorts superconscious wisdom. If the subconscious has been impressed
with Western beliefs, for example, of Christianity, Judaism,
existentialism or materialism, the conscience will be different than
when schooled in the Vedic dharma of Shaktism, Smartism, Saivism or
Vaishnavism. This psychological law has to do with the superconscious
mind working through the subconscious (an interface known as the
subsuperconscious) and explains why the dharma of one's sampradaya must
be fully learned as a young child for the conscience to be free of
conflict. The Sanatana Dharma, fully and correctly understood provides
the purest possible educational creedal structure, building a
subconscious that is a clear, unobstructing channel for superconscious
wisdom, the soul's innate intelligence, to be expressed through the
conscience. Conscience is thus the sum of two things: the superconscious
knowing (which is the same in all people) and the creedal belief
structure through which the superconscious flows. This explains why
people in different cultures have different consciences. See: creed,
dharma, mind (individual).

**conscious mind:** The external, everyday state of consciousness. See:
mind.

**consciousness:** Chitta or chaitanya. 1) A synonym for mind-stuff,
chitta; or 2) the condition or power of perception, awareness,
apprehension. There are myriad gradations of consciousness, from the
simple sentience of inanimate matter to the consciousness of basic life
forms, to the higher consciousness of human embodiment, to omniscient
states of superconsciousness, leading to immersion in the One universal
consciousness, Parashakti. Chaitanya and chitta can name both individual
consciousness and universal consciousness. Modifiers indicate the level
of awareness, e.g., vyashti chaitanya, "individual consciousness;"
buddhi chitta, "intellectual consciousness;" Sivachaitanya, "God
consciousness." Five classical "states" of awareness are discussed in
scripture: 1) wakefulness (jagrat), 2) "dream" (svapna) or astral
consciousness, 3) "deep sleep" (sushupti) or subsuperconsciousness, 4)
the superconscious state beyond (turiya "fourth") and
5) the utterly transcendent state called turiyatita ("beyond the
fourth"). See: awareness, chitta, chaitanya, mind (all entries).

**consecrate:** To declare holy, or designate for sacred or religious
use.

**consecrated temple:** A temple duly and fully established in all three
worlds through formal religious ceremony known as kumbhabisheka.

**consent:** Accord; agreement; approval, especially for a proposed act.

**console:** To make someone feel less sad or disappointed. To comfort.

**consolidate:** To make stronger by bringing several things into a
single whole.

**consort:** Spouse, especially of a king or queen, God or Goddess.
Among the Gods there are actually no sexes or sexual distinctions,
though in mythological folk-narratives, Hinduism traditionally
represents these great beings in elaborate anthropomorphic depictions.
Matrimony and human-like family units among the Gods are derived from
educational tales intended to illustrate the way people should and
should not live. See: Shakti.

**contemplation:** Religious or mystical absorption beyond meditation.
See: enstasy, raja yoga, samadhi.

**contend:** To hold as a belief or assert as fact.

**continence (continent):** Restraint, moderation or, most strictly,
total abstinence from sexual activity. See: brahmacharya.

**conversely:** A word used to introduce a concept with terms similar to
a previous one, but in reversed order.

**conversion to Hinduism:** Entering Hinduism has traditionally required
little more than accepting and living the beliefs and codes of Hindus.
This remains the basic factor of adoption, although there are, and
always have been, formal ceremonies recognizing an individual's entrance
into the religion, particularly the namakarana, or naming rite. The most
obvious sign of true sincerity of adoption or conversion is the total
abandoning of the former name and the choosing of the Hindu name,
usually the name of a God or Goddess, and then making it legal on one's
passport, identity card, social security card and driver's license. This
name is used at all times, under all circumstances, particularly with
family and friends. This is severance. This is adoption. This is
embracing Hinduism. This is conversion. This is true sincerity and
considered by born members as the most honorable and trusted testimony
of those who choose to join the global congregation of the world's
oldest religion. Many temples in India and other countries will ask to
see the passport or other appropriate identification before admitting
devotees of non-Indian origin for more than casual worship. It requires
nothing more than one's own commitment to the process. Belief is the
keynote of religious conviction, and the beliefs vary greatly among the
different religions of the world. What we believe forms our attitudes,
shapes our lives and molds our destiny. To choose one's beliefs is to
choose one's religion. Those who find themselves at home with the
beliefs of Hinduism are, on a simple level, Hindu. Formally entering a
new religion, however, is a serious commitment. Particularly for those
with prior religious ties it is sometimes painful and always
challenging.

The acceptance of outsiders into the Hindu fold has occurred for
thousands of years. As Swami Vivekananda once said, "Born aliens have
been converted in the past by crowds, and the process is still going
on." Dr. S. Radhakrishnan confirms the swami's views in a brief passage
from his well known book The Hindu View of Life: "In a sense, Hinduism
may be regarded as the first example in the world of a missionary
religion. Only its missionary spirit is different from that associated
with the proselytizing creeds. It did not regard it as its mission to
convert humanity to any one opinion. For what counts is conduct and not
belief. Worshipers of different Gods and followers of different rites
were taken into the Hindu fold. The ancient practice of vratyastoma,
described fully in the Tandya Brahmana, shows that not only individuals
but whole tribes were absorbed into Hinduism. Many modern sects accept
outsiders. Dvala's Smriti lays down rules for the simple purification of
people forcibly converted to other faiths, or of womenfolk defiled and
confined for years, and even of people who, for worldly advantage,
embrace other faiths (p. 28-29)." See: Hindu, Hinduism.

**cope:** To contend with on equal terms. To face or deal with
difficulties.

**cosmic:** Universal; vast. Of or relating to the cosmos or entire
universe.

**cosmic cycle:** One of the infinitely recurring periods of the
universe, comprising its creation, preservation and dissolution. These
cycles are measured in periods of progressive ages, called yugas. Satya
(or Krita), Treta, Dvapara and Kali are the names of these four
divisions, and they repeat themselves in that order, with the Satya Yuga
being the longest and the Kali Yuga the shortest. The comparison is
often made of these ages with the cycles of the day: Satya Yuga being
morning until noon, the period of greatest light or enlightenment, Treta
Yuga afternoon, Dvapara evening, and Kali Yuga the darkest part of the
night. Four yugas equal one mahayuga. Theories vary, but by traditional
astronomical calculation, a mahayuga equals 4,320,000 solar years (or
12,000 "divine years;" one divine year is 360 solar years)--with the
Satya Yuga lasting 1,728,000 years, Treta Yuga 1,296,000 years, Dvapara
Yuga 864,000 years, and Kali Yuga 432,000 years. Mankind is now
experiencing the Kali Yuga, which began at midnight, February 18, 3102
bce (year one on the Hindu calendar [see Hindu Timeline]) and will end
in approximately 427,000 years. (By another reckoning, one mahayuga
equals approximately two million solar years.) A dissolution called laya
occurs at the end of each mahayuga, when the physical world is destroyed
by flood and fire. Each destructive period is followed by the succession
of creation (srishti), evolution or preservation (sthiti) and
dissolution (laya). A summary of the periods in the cosmic cycles:

1 mahayuga = 4,320,000 years (four yugas)

71 mahayugas = 1 manvantara or manu (we are in the 28th mahayuga)

14 manvantaras = 1 kalpa or day of Brahma (we are in the 7th manvantara)

2 kalpas = 1 ahoratra or day and night of Brahma

360 ahoratras = 1 year of Brahma

100 Brahma years = 309,173,760,000,000 years (one "lifetime" of Brahma,
or the universe). We are in Brahma Year 51 of the current cycle.

At the end of every kalpa or day of Brahma a greater dissolution, called
pralaya (or kalpanta, "end of an eon"), occurs when both the physical
and subtle worlds are absorbed into the causal world, where souls rest
until the next kalpa begins. This state of withdrawal or "night of
Brahma," continues for the length of an entire kalpa until creation
again issues forth. After 36,000 of these dissolutions and creations
there is a total, universal annihilation, mahapralaya, when all three
worlds, all time, form and space, are withdrawn into God Siva. After a
period of total withdrawal a new universe or lifespan of Brahma begins.
This entire cycle repeats infinitely. This view of cosmic time is
recorded in the Puranas and the Dharma Shastras. See: mahapralaya.

**Cosmic Dance:** See: Nataraja.

**Cosmic Soul:** Purusha or Parameshvara. Primal Soul. The Universal
Being; Personal God. See: Parameshvara, Primal Soul, purusha, Siva.

**cosmology:** "Cosmos-knowledge." The area of metaphysics pertaining to
the origin and structure of the universe. Hindu cosmology includes both
inner and outer worlds of existence. See: tattva.

**cosmos:** The universe, or whole of creation, especially with
reference to its order, harmony and completeness. See: Brahmanda, loka,
three worlds, tattva.

**covenant:** A binding agreement to do or keep from doing certain
things.

**covet:** To want ardently, especially something belonging to another.
To envy.

**cranial chakras:** The ajna, or third-eye center, and the sahasrara,
at the top of the head near the pineal and pituitary glands. See:
chakra.

**creation:** The act of creating, especially bringing the world into
ordered existence. Also, all of created existence, the cosmos. Creation,
according to the monistic-theistic view, is an emanation or extension of
God, the Creator. It is Himself in another form, and not inherently
something other than Him. See: cause, tattva.

**creator:** He who brings about creation. Siva as one of His five
powers. See: creation, Nataraja, Parameshvara.

**creed: Sh** raddhadharana. An authoritative formulation of the beliefs
of a religion. Historically, creeds have arisen to protect doctrinal
purity when religions are transplanted into foreign cultures. See:
conscience.

**cremation:** Dahana. Burning of the dead. Cremation is the traditional
system of disposing of bodily remains, having the positive effect of
releasing the soul most quickly from any lingering attachment to the
earth plane. In modern times, cremation facilities are widely available
in nearly every country, though gas-fueled chambers generally take the
place of the customary wood pyre. Embalming, commonly practiced even if
the body is to be cremated, is ill-advised, as it injures the astral
body and can actually be felt by the departed soul, as would an autopsy.
Should it be necessary to preserve the body a few days to allow time for
relatives to arrive, it is recommended that hot ice surround the body
and that the coffin be kept closed. Arrangements for this service should
be made well in advance with the mortuary. Note that the remains of
enlightened masters are sometimes buried or sealed in a special tomb
called a samadhi. This is done in acknowledgement of the extraordinary
attainment of such a soul, whose very body, having become holy, is
revered as a sacred presence, sannidhya, and which not infrequently
becomes the spiritual seed of a temple or place of pilgrimage. See:
bone-gathering, death, reincarnation, sannidhya.

**cringe:** To retreat, bend or crouch in an attitude of fear,
especially from something dangerous or painful.

**crown chakra:** Sahasrara chakra. The thousand-petaled cranial center
of divine consciousness. See: chakra.

**crucial:** Of supreme importance; decisive; critical.

**crude:** Raw. Not prepared or refined. Lacking grace, tact or taste.
Uncultured.

**crux:** The essential or deciding point.

**culminate:** To reach the highest point or climax. Result.

**culture:** Development or refinement of intellect, emotions,
interests, manners, and tastes. The ideals, customs, skills and arts of
a people or group that are transmitted from one generation to another.
Culture is refined living that arises in a peaceful, stable society.
Hindu culture arises directly out of worship in the temples. The music,
the dance, the art, the subtleties of mannerism and interraction between
people all have their source in the humble devotion to the Lord, living
in the higher, spiritual nature, grounded in the security of the
immortal Self within.


