D
=

**Dakshinamurti:** (Sanskrit) "South-facing form." Lord Siva depicted
sitting under a banyan tree, silently teaching four rishis at His feet.

**dampati:** (Sanskrit) "House lord(s)." A term for husband and wife as
the dual masters and sovereign guides of the Hindu home (dama). See:
grihastha dharma.

**dana:** (Sanskrit) "Generosity, giving; a gift." See: yama-niyama.

**dance:** See: tandava, Nataraja.

**danda** : (Sanskrit) "Staff of support." The staff carried by a sadhu
or sannyasin, representing the tapas which he has taken as his only
support, and the vivifying of sushumna and consequent Realization he
seeks. Danda also connotes "penalty or sanction." See: sadhu, sannyasin.

**darshana:** (Sanskrit) "Vision, sight." Seeing the Divine. Beholding,
with inner or outer vision, a temple image, Deity, holy person or place,
with the desire to inwardly contact and receive the grace and blessings
of the venerated being or beings. Even beholding a photograph in the
proper spirit is a form of darshana. Not only does the devotee seek to
see the Divine, but to be seen as well, to stand humbly in the awakened
gaze of the holy one, even if for an instant, such as in a crowded
temple when thousands of worshipers file quickly past the enshrined
Lord. Gods and gurus are thus said to "give" darshana, and devotees
"take" darshana, with the eyes being the mystic locus through which
energy is exchanged. This direct and personal two-sided apprehension is
a central and highly sought-after experience of Hindu faith. Also:
"point of view," doctrine or philosophy. See: shad darshana, sound.

**Darwin's theory:** Theory of evolution developed by Charles Darwin
(1809-1882) stating that plant and animal species develop or evolve from
earlier forms due to hereditary transmission of variations that enhance
the organism's adaptability and chances of survival. See: evolution of
the soul, nonhuman birth.

**dashama bhaga vrata:** (Sanskrit) "One-tenth-part vow." A promise that
tithers make before God, Gods and their family or peers to tithe
regularly each month--for a specified time, or for life, as they wish.
See: dashamamsha.

**dashamamsha:** (Sanskrit) "One-tenth sharing." The traditional Hindu
practice of tithing, giving one-tenth of one's income to a religious
institution. It was formerly widespread in India. In ancient times the
term makimai was used in Tamil Nadu. See: dashama bhaga vrata,
purushartha.

**dasa marga:** (Sanskrit) "Servant's path." See: pada.

**Dashanami:** (Sanskrit) "Ten names." Ten monastic orders organized by
Adi Shankara (ca 800): Aranya, Vana, Giri, Parvata, Sagara, Tirtha,
Ashrama, Bharati, Puri and Sarasvati. Also refers to sannyasins of these
orders, each of whom bears his order's name, with ananda often attached
to the religious name. For example, Ramananda Tirtha. Traditionally,
each order is associated with one of the main Shankaracharya pithas.
See: Shankaracharya pitha, Smarta Sampradaya, Shankara.

**daurmanasya:** (Sanskrit) "Mental pain, dejection, sorrow, melancholy
and despair." See: chakra.

**daya:** (Sanskrit) "Compassion." See: yama-niyama.

**death:** Death is a rich concept for which there are many words in
Sanskrit, such as: mahaprasthana, "great departure;" samadhimarana,
dying consciously while in the state of meditation; mahasamadhi, "great
merger, or absorption," naming the departure of an enlightened soul.
Hindus know death to be the soul's detaching itself from the physical
body and continuing on in the subtle body (sukshma sharira) with the
same desires, aspirations and occupations as when it lived in a physical
body. Now the person exists in the in-between world, the subtle plane,
or Antarloka, with loved ones who have previously died, and is visited
by earthly associates during their sleep. Hindus do not fear death, for
they know it to be one of the most glorious and exalted experiences,
rich in spiritual potential. Other terms for death include panchatvam
(death as dissolution of the five elements), mrityu (natural death),
prayopavesha (self-willed death by fasting), marana (unnatural death,
e.g., by murder). See: reincarnation, suicide, videhamukti.

**deceit (deception):** The act of representing as true what is known to
be false. A dishonest action.

**decentralized:** Whose administrative agencies, power, authority,
etc., are distributed widely, rather than concentrated in a single place
or person. In Hinduism, authority is decentralized.

**decked:** Covered with fine clothing or ornaments.

**defiled:** Polluted, made dirty, impure.

**deformity:** Condition of being disfigured or made ugly in body, mind
or emotions.

**deha:** (Sanskrit) "Body." From the verb dih, "to plaster, mold;
anoint, fashion." A term used in the Upanishads, yoga texts, Saiva
Agamas, Tirumantiram and elsewhere to name the three bodies of the soul:
gross or physical (sthula), astral or subtle (sukshma) and causal
(karana). A synonym for sharira. See: sharira.

**Deism:** A doctrine which believes in the existence of God based on
purely rational grounds; a particular faith prominent in the 17th and
18th centuries adhered to by several founding fathers of the United
States, including Benjamin Franklin and Thomas Jefferson. It holds that
God created the world and its natural laws but is not involved in its
functioning.

**Deity:** "God." Can refer to the image or murti installed in a temple
or to the Mahadeva the murti represents. See: murti, puja.

**delineate:** To mark or trace out the boundaries of a thing, concept,
etc.

**delude:** To fool as by false promises or improper concepts or
thinking.

**delusion** : Moha. False belief, misconception.

**denial:** Saying "no." Opposing or not believing in the existence of
something.

**denomination:** A name for a class of things, especially for various
religious groupings, sects and subsects. See: parampara, sampradaya.

**denote:** To indicate, signify or refer to.

**deplore:** To be regretful or sorry about; to lament, disapprove.

**deploy:** To spread out; rearrange into an effective pattern.

**deportment:** The manner of bearing or conducting oneself; behavior.

**depraved:** Immoral; corrupt; bad; perverted.

**desirous:** Having a longing or desire; motivated by desire.

**despair:** The state of having lost or given up hope.

**despise:** To strongly dislike; look down upon with contempt or scorn.

**destiny:** Final outcome. The seemingly inevitable or predetermined
course of events. See: adrishta, fate, karma.

**Destroyer:** Term for God Siva in His aspect of Rudra. See: Nataraja.

**deva:** (Sanskrit) "Shining one." A being living in the higher astral
plane, in a subtle, nonphysical body. Deva is also used in scripture to
mean "God or Deity." See: Mahadeva.

**Devaloka:** (Sanskrit) "Plane of radiant beings." A synonym of
Maharloka, the higher astral plane, realm of anahata chakra. See: loka.

**devamandira:** (Sanskrit) "Abode of celestial beings." From mand, "to
stand or tarry." A Hindu temple; also simply mandira. See: temple.

**Devanagari:** (Sanskrit) "Divine city [script]." The alphabetic script
in which Sanskrit, Prakrit, Hindi and Marathi are written. A descendant
of the Northern type of the Brahmi script. It is characterized by the
connecting, horizontal line at the top of the letters. See: Sanskrit.

**Devi:** (Sanskrit) "Goddess." A name of Shakti, used especially in
Shaktism. See: Shakti, Shaktism.

**Devi Bhagavata Purana:** (Sanskrit) A subsidiary text of the Siva
Puranas.

**Devi Gita:** (Sanskrit) Twelve chapters (29 to 40) from the 7th book
of Srimad Devi Bhagavatam, a Shakta scripture. It teaches external
worship of the Deity with form and meditation on the Deity beyond form.

**Devikalottara Agama:** (Sanskrit) One recension (version) of the
Sardha Trishati Kalottara Agama, (Sanskrit) a subsidiary text of Vatula
Agama. (Sanskrit) Also known as Skanda Kalottara. (Sanskrit) Its 350
verses are in the form of a dialog between Karttikeya and Siva and deal
with esoterics of mantras, initiations, right knowledge, faith and
worship of Siva. See: Saiva Agamas.

**Devi Upanishad:** (Sanskrit) A Shakta Upanishad dealing with the
nature and worship of the Goddess. See: Shaktism.

**devoid:** Completely without; empty.

**devonic:** Of or relating to the devas or their world. See: deva.

**devotee:** A person strongly dedicated to something or someone, such
as to a God or a guru. The term disciple implies an even deeper
commitment. See: guru bhakti.

**Dhammapada:** (Sanskrit) The holy book of Buddhism. See: Buddhism.

**Dhanurveda:** (Sanskrit) "Science of archery." A class of ancient
texts on the military arts, comprising the Upaveda of the Yajur Veda.
Dhanurveda teaches concentration, meditation, hatha yoga, etc., as
integral to the science of warfare. See: Upaveda.

**dharana:** (Sanskrit) "Concentration." From dri, "to hold." See:
meditation, raja yoga, shraddadharana, yoga.

**dharma:** (Sanskrit) "Righteousness." From dhri, "to sustain; carry,
hold." Hence dharma is "that which contains or upholds the cosmos."
Dharma, religion, is a complex and all-inclusive term with many
meanings, including: divine law, law of being, way of righteousness,
religion, ethics, duty, responsibility, virtue, justice, goodness and
truth. Essentially, dharma is the orderly fulfillment of an inherent
nature or destiny. Relating to the soul, it is the mode of conduct most
conducive to spiritual advancement, the right and righteous path. There
are four principal kinds of dharma, as follows. They are known
collectively as**--chaturdharma:** "four religious laws." 1)**--rita:**
"Universal law." The inherent order of the cosmos. The laws of being and
nature that contain and govern all forms, functions and processes, from
galaxy clusters to the power of mental thought and perception.
2**) --varna dharma** : (Sanskrit) "Law of one's kind." Social duty.
Varna can mean "race, tribe, appearance, character, color, social
standing, etc." Varna dharma defines the individual's obligations and
responsibilities within the nation, society, community, class,
occupational subgroup and family. An important part of this dharma is
religious and moral law. See: jati, varna dharma. 3**)** a**shrama
dharma:** "Duties of life's stages." Human or developmental dharma. The
natural process of maturing from childhood to old age through
fulfillment of the duties of each of the four stages of
life--brahmachari (student), grihastha (householder), vanaprastha (elder
advisor) and sannyasa (religious solitaire)--in pursuit of the four
human goals: dharma (righteousness), artha (wealth), kama (pleasure) and
moksha (liberation). See: ashrama dharma. 4**) svadharma** : "Personal
path, pattern or obligation." One's perfect individual pattern through
life, according to one's own particular physical, mental and emotional
nature. Svadharma is determined by the sum of past karmas and the
cumulative effect of the other three dharmas. It is the individualized
application of dharma, dependent on personal karma, reflected on one's
race, community, physical characteristics, health, intelligence, skills
and aptitudes, desires and tendencies, religion, sampradaya, family and
guru.

Within ashrama dharma, the unique duties of man and woman are
respectively called stri dharma and purusha dharma. --**purusha
dharma:** "Man's duty." Man's proper pattern of conduct; traditional
observances, vocation, behavior and attitudes dictated by spiritual
wisdom. Characterized by leadership, integrity, accomplishment,
sustenance of the family. Notably, the married man works in the world
and sustains his family as abundantly as he can.**--stri dharma:**
(Sanskrit) "Woman's duty." Traditional conduct, observances, vocational
and spiritual patterns which bring spiritual fulfillment and societal
stability. Characterized by modesty, quiet strength, religiousness,
dignity and nurturing of family. Notably, she is most needed and
irreplaceable as the maker of the home and the educator of their
children as noble citizens of tomorrow. See: grihastha dharma.

A part of the varna dharma of each person is sadharana dharma--the
principles of good conduct applicable to all people regardless of age,
gender or class.**--sadharana dharma:** "Duties applicable to all."
Listed in the Manu Shastras as: dhairya (steadfastness), kshama
(forgiveness), dama (self-restraint), chauryabhava (nonstealing),
shaucha (cleanliness), indriyanigraha (sense control), dhi
(high-mindedness), vidya (learning), satya (veracity), akrodha (absence
of anger). Another term for such virtues is --**samanya dharma:**
"general duty," under which scriptures offer similar lists of ethical
guidelines. These are echoed and expanded in the yamas and niyamas,
"restraints and observances." See: yama-niyama.

One other important division of dharma indicates the two paths within
Hinduism, that of the family person, the grihastha dharma, and that of
the monastic, the sannyasa dharma.**--grihastha dharma:** "Householder
duty." The duties, ideals and responsibilities of all nonmonastics,
whether married or unmarried. This dharma, which includes the vast
majority of Hindus, begins when the period of studentship is complete
and extends until the end of life. See: grihastha dharma. **--sannyasa
dharma:** "Monastic duty." Above and beyond all the other dharmas
("ati-varnashrama dharma") is sannyasa dharma--the ideals, principles
and rules of renunciate monks. It is the highest dharma. See: sannyasa
dharma.

**--apad dharma:** "Emergency conduct." This dharma embodies the
principle that the only rigid rule is wisdom, and thus exceptional
situations may require deviating from normal rules of conduct, with the
condition that such exceptions are to be made only for the sake of
others, not for personal advantage. These are notable exceptions, made
in cases of extreme distress or calamity.

**--adharma:** "Unrighteousness." Thoughts, words or deeds that
transgress divine law in any of the human expressions of dharma. It
brings the accumulation of demerit, called papa, while dharma brings
merit, called punya. Varna adharma is violating the ideals of social
duty, from disobeying the laws of one's nation to squandering family
wealth. Ashrama adharma is failure to fulfill the duties of the stages
of life. Sva-adharma is understood as not fulfilling the patterns of
dharma according to one's own nature. The Bhagavad Gita states (18.47),
"Better one's svadharma even imperfectly performed than the dharma of
another well performed. By performing the duty prescribed by one's own
nature (svabhava) one incurs no sin (kilbisha)." See: punya, papa,
purity-impurity, varna dharma.

**dharmasabha:** (Sanskrit) "Religious assembly, congregation." A
church.

**Dharma Shastra:** (Sanskrit) "Religious law book." A term referring to
all or any of numerous codes of Hindu civil and social law composed by
various authors. The best known and most respected are those by Manu and
Yajnavalkya, thought to have been composed as early as 600 bce. The
Dharma Shastras, along with the Artha Shastras, are the codes of Hindu
law, parallel to the Muslim Sharia, the Jewish Talmud, each of which
provides guidelines for kings, ministers, judicial systems and law
enforcement agencies. These spiritual-parliamentary codes differ from
British and American law, which separate religion from politics.
(Contemporary British law is influenced by Anglican Christian thought,
just as American democracy was, and is, profoundly affected by the
philosophy of its non-Christian, Deistic founders.) The Dharma Shastras
also speak of much more, including creation, initiation, the stages of
life, daily rites, duties of husband and wife, caste, Vedic study,
penances and transmigration. The Dharma Shastras are part of the Smriti
literature, included in the Kalpa Vedanga, and are widely available
today in many languages. See: Deism, Manu Dharma Shastras.

**dhoti:** (Sanskrit) (Hindi) A long, unstitched cloth wound about the
lower part of the body, and sometimes passed between the legs and tucked
into the waist. A traditional Hindu apparel for men. See: veshti.

**dhriti:** (Sanskrit) "Steadfastness." See: yama-niyama.

**dhvaja:** (Sanskrit) "Flag." Part of the pageantry of Hinduism, orange
or red flags and banners, flown at festivals and other special,
occasions symbolize the victory of Sanatana Dharma. See: festival.

**dhvajastambha:** (Sanskrit) "Flag tree, flagpole." (Kodimaram in
Tamil.) A tall cylindrical post usually behind the vahana in Agamic
temples. Metaphysically, it acts as the complementary pole to the
enshrined murti. These two together create an energy field to contain
the temple's power. See: temple.

**dhyana:** (Sanskrit) "Meditation." See: internalized worship,
meditation, raja yoga.

**dichotomy:** A division into two parts, usually sharply distinguished
or contradictory. See: paradox.

**Dieu Siva est amour omnipresent et Realite transcendante:** French for
"God Siva is Immanent Love and Transcendent Reality." It is an
affirmation of faith which capsulizes the entire creed of monistic Saiva
Siddhanta.

**differentiation:** State or condition of making or perceiving a
difference.

**diksha:** (Sanskrit) "Initiation." Solemn induction by which one is
entered into a new realm of awareness and practice by a teacher or
preceptor through the bestowing of blessings and the transmission of
pranas. Denotes initial or deepened connection with the teacher and his
lineage and is usually accompanied by ceremony. Initiation, revered as a
moment of awakening, may be conferred by a touch, a word, a look or a
thought. Most Hindu schools, and especially Saivism, teach that only
with initiation from a satguru is enlightenment attainable. Sought after
by all Hindus is the diksha called shaktipata, "descent of grace,"
which, often coming unbidden, stirs and arouses the mystic kundalini
force. Central Saivite dikshas include samaya, vishesha, nirvana and
abhisheka. See: grace, shaktipata, sound.

**Dipavali:** (Sanskrit) "Row of Lights." A very popular home and
community festival during which Hindus of all denominations light oil or
electric lights and set off fireworks in a joyful celebration of the
victory of good over evil, light over darkness. It is a Hindu solidarity
day and is considered the greatest national festival of India. In
several countries, including Nepal, Malaysia, Singapore, Sri Lanka and
Trinidad and Tobago, it is an inter-religious event and a national
holiday. It occurs in October-November.

**dipolar:** Relating to two poles instead of only one. A philosophy is
said to be dipolar when it embraces both of two contradictory (or
apparently contradictory) propositions, concepts, tendencies, etc. For
example, panentheism is dipolar in that it accepts the truth of God's
being (and being in) the world, and also the truth that He transcends
the world. Instead of saying "it is either this or that," a dipolar
position says "it is both this and that." See: dvaita-advaita.

**discordant:** Not in accord. Disagreeing; clashing; out of harmony.

**discrimination:** Viveka. Act or ability to distinguish or perceive
differences. In spirituality, the ability to distinguish between right
and wrong, real and apparent, eternal and transient, as in the
Upanishadic maxim, Neti, neti, "It is not this, it is not that." See:
conscience.

**disheveled:** Untidy hair, clothing or general appearance. Rumpled.

**dismay:** Loss of courage or confidence before danger. Fearful worry.

**dispassionate:** Free from emotion or passion. Calm; impartial;
detached.

**dispatch:** To send off promptly, especially on an errand. To finish
quickly.

**dispel:** To cause to go in various directions. To scatter and drive
away; disperse.

**dissolution:** Dissolving or breaking up into parts. An alternative
term for destruction. See: absorption, mahapralaya, Nataraja.

**distort:** To twist out of shape. To misrepresent.

**divergent:** Going off in different directions; deviating or varying.

**Divine Mother:** Shakti, especially as Personal Goddess, as conceived
of and worshiped by Shaktas. See: Shakti, Shaktism.

**dominion:** Rulership; domain.**--hold dominion over:** To be king,
ruler, lord, or master of (a world, realm, etc).

**don:** To put on (a piece of clothing).

**door of Brahman:** Brahmarandhra; also called nirvana chakra. A subtle
or esoteric aperture in the crown of the head, the opening of sushumna
nadi through which kundalini enters in ultimate Self Realization, and
the spirit escapes at death. Only the spirits of the truly pure leave
the body in this way. Samsaris take a downward course. See: jnana,
kundalini, videhamukti.

**dormant:** Sleeping; inactive; not functioning.

**dosha:** (Sanskrit) "Bodily humor; individual constitution." Three
bodily humors, which according to ayurveda regulate the body, govern its
proper functioning and determine its unique constitution. These are
vata, the air humor; pitta, the fire humor; and kapha, the water humor.
Vata has its seat in the intestinal area, pitta in the stomach, and
kapha in the lung area. They govern the creation, preservation and
dissolution of bodily tissue. Vata humor is metabolic, nerve energy.
Pitta is the catabolic, fire energy. Kapha is the anabolic, nutritive
energy. The three doshas (tridosha) also give rise to the various
emotions and correspond to the three gunas, "qualities:" sattva
(quiescence--vata), rajas (activity--pitta) and tamas (inertia--kapha).
See: ayurveda, kapha, pitta, vata.

**dross:** Waste matter; useless byproduct.

**dual:** Having or composed of two parts or kinds. --**duality:** A
state or condition of being dual.**--realm of duality:** The phenomenal
world, where each thing exists along with its opposite: joy and sorrow,
etc.

**dualism:** See: dvaita-advaita.

**duly:** At the proper time, in the proper manner; as required.

**Durga:** (Sanskrit) "She who is incomprehensible or difficult to
reach." A form of Shakti worshiped in Her gracious as well as terrifying
aspect. Destroyer of demons, She is worshiped during an annual festival
called Durga puja, especially popular among Bengalis. See: Shakti,
Shaktism.

**Durvasas:** (Sanskrit) A great sage (date unknown) who, according to
Kashmir Saivism, was commissioned by Lord Siva to revive the knowledge
of the Saiva Agamas, whereupon he created three "mind-born"
sons--Tryambaka to disseminate advaita, Srinatha to teach monistic
theism, and Amardaka to postulate dualism.

**dvaita-advaita:** (Sanskrit) "Dual-nondual; twoness-not twoness."
Among the most important terms in the classification of Hindu
philosophies. Dvaita and advaita define two ends of a vast
spectrum.**--dvaita:** The doctrine of dualism, according to which
reality is ultimately composed of two irreducible principles, entities,
truths, etc. God and soul, for example, are seen as eternally
separate. --**dualistic:** Of or relating to dualism, concepts,
writings, theories which treat dualities (good-and-evil, high-and-low,
them-and-us) as fixed, rather than transcendable. --**pluralism:** A
form of non-monism which emphasizes three or more eternally separate
realities, e.g., God, soul and world.**--advaita:** The doctrine of
nondualism or monism, that reality is ultimately composed of one whole
principle, substance or God, with no independent parts. In essence, all
is God.**--monistic theism:** A dipolar view which encompasses both
monism and dualism. See: anekavada, dipolar, monistic theism,
pluralistic realism.

**dvaitic (dvaita) Siddhanta:** (Sanskrit) "Dualistic final
conclusions." Refers to schools of Saiva Siddhanta that postulate God,
soul and world as three eternally distinct and separate realities. See:
Pati-pashu-pasha, Saiva Siddhanta.


