E
=

**earrings:** Decorative jewelry worn in the ears by Hindu women and
many men. Yogis, especially those of the Natha tradition, wear large
earrings to stimulate the psychic nadis connected to the ears.
Traditionally, the ascetic Kanphatis ("split-eared ones") split the
cartilage of their ears to accommodate massive earrings. Ear-piercing
for earrings is said to bring health (right ear) and wealth (left ear).
See: Kanphati, samskaras of childhood.

**ecclesiastical:** "Of the church or clergy." By extension, relating to
the authoritative body of any religion, sect or lineage. Having to do
with an assembly of spiritual leaders and their jurisdiction.

**ecology:** The science of relations between organisms and their
environment.

**ecstasy (ecstatic):** State of being overtaken by emotion such as joy
or wonder. Literally, "standing outside oneself." See: enstasy, samadhi.

**ecumenical:** General or universal. --**ecumenism:** the principles or
practices of promoting worldwide cooperation and better understanding
among differing denominations, especially among Christians. From the
Greek oecumene, "the inhabited world." A Christian term. The broader
term interfaith is used by all religions striving for peace and harmony.

**efficacious:** Producing or capable of producing the desired effect.

**efficient cause:** Nimitta karana. That which directly produces the
effect; that which conceives, makes, shapes, etc. See: cause.

**effulgent:** Bright, radiant; emitting its own light.

**egalitarian:** Equalitarian. Characterized by the belief in the equal
sharing of powers, rights or responsibility among all people.

**ego:** The external personality or sense of "I" and "mine." Broadly,
individual identity. In Saiva Siddhanta and other schools, the ego is
equated with the tattva of ahamkara, "I-maker," which bestows the sense
of I-ness, individuality and separateness from God. See: ahamkara,
anava.

**eligible:** Qualified; suitable; desirable.

**eliminate:** To remove; get rid of; reject.

**elixir:** Hypothetical substance that would change any metal into gold
or prolong life indefinitely. An English term for soma, a magical
beverage celebrated in ancient Vedic hymns and which played an important
role in worship rites. See: amrita.

**elliptical:** Having the shape of an ellipse (more or less
egg-shaped).

**elusive:** Tending to escape one's grasp or understanding. Hard to
capture.

**emanation:** To "flow out from." Abhasa. To come forth from a source,
to be emitted or issued from. A monistic doctrine of creation whereby
God issues forth manifestation like rays from the sun or sparks from a
fire. See: abhasa.

**emancipator:** That which, or one who, liberates.

**eminent:** High; above others in stature, rank or achievement.
Renowned or distinguished; prominent, conspicuous. Not to be confused
with: 1) imminent, about to happen; 2) emanate, to issue from; 3)
immanent, inherent or indwelling.

**empower:** To give power or authority to a person or society.
Strengthen.

**emulate:** To imitate. To attempt to equal or surpass someone,
generally by copying his ways, talents or successes.

**encompass:** To surround or encircle; to include.

**endow:** To give. To provide with a quality or characteristic.

**enhance:** To improve, make better.

**enlightened:** Having attained enlightenment, Self Realization. A
jnani or jivanmukta. See: jivanmukta, jnana, Self Realization.

**enlightenment:** For Saiva monists, Self Realization, samadhi without
seed (nirvikalpa samadhi); the ultimate attainment, sometimes referred
to as Paramatma darshana, or as atma darshana, "Self vision" (a term
which appears in Patanjali's Yoga Sutras). Enlightenment is the
experience-nonexperience resulting in the realization of one's
transcendent Self--Parasiva--which exists beyond time, form and space.
Each tradition has its own understanding of enlightenment, often
indicated by unique terms. See: God Realization, kundalini, nirvikalpa
samadhi, Self Realization.

**enshrine:** To enclose in a shrine. To hold as sacred and worthy of
worship.

**enstasy:** A term coined in 1969 by Mircea Eliade to contrast the
Eastern view of bliss as "standing inside oneself" (enstasy) with the
Western view as ecstasy, "standing outside oneself." A word chosen as
the English equivalent of samadhi. See: ecstasy, samadhi, raja yoga.

**enthrall:** To hold in a spell; captivate; fascinate.

**entourage:** A group of accompanying attendants, associates or
assistants.

**entreat:** To ask earnestly; to beseech, implore, plead or beg.

**epic history:** Long narrative poem in a high style about grand
exploits of Gods and heroes. The Ramayana and Mahabharata are India's
two great epic histories, called Itihasa. See: Itihasa, Mahabharata,
Ramayana.

**equanimity:** The quality of remaining calm and undisturbed. Evenness
of mind; composure.

**equilibrium:** Evenly balanced. A quality of good spiritual
leadership. "Having attained an equilibrium of ida and pingala, he
becomes a knower of the known." See: jnana.

**equivalent:** Equal, or nearly so, in quantity, volume, force,
meaning, etc.

**erotic:** "Of love (from the Greek eros)." Of or arousing sexual
passion.

**erroneous:** Containing or based on error; wrong.

**eschew:** To shun, avoid, stay away from.

**esoteric:** Hard to understand or secret. Teaching intended for a
chosen few, as an inner group of initiates. Abtruse or private.

**essence (essential):** The ultimate, real and unchanging nature of a
thing or being.**--essence of the soul:** See: atman, soul.

**esteem:** To respect highly; to value.

**estranged:** "Made a stranger." Set apart or divorced from.

**eternity:** Time without beginning or end.

**ether: A** kasha. Space, the most subtle of the five elements. See:
akasha, tattva.

**ethics:** The code or system of morals of a nation, people, religion,
etc. See: dharma, pancha nitya karmas, punya, purity-impurity.

**etymology:** The science of the origin of words and their development.
The history of a word. See: Nirukta Vedanga, Sanskrit.

**evil:** That which is bad, morally wrong, causing harm, pain, misery.
In Western religions, evil is often thought of as a moral antagonism to
God. This force is the source of sin and is attached to the soul from
its inception. Whereas, for Hindus, evil is not a conscious, dark force,
such as Satan. It is situational rather than ontological, meaning it has
its basis in relative conditions, not in ultimate reality. Evil
(badness, corruption) springs from ignorance (avidya) and immaturity.
Nor is one fighting with God when he is evil, and God is not standing in
judgment. Within each soul, and not external to it, resides the
principle of judgment of instinctive-intellectual actions. God, who is
ever compassionate, blesses even the worst sinner, the most depraved
asura, knowing that individual will one day emerge from lower
consciousness into the light of love and understanding. Hindus hold that
evil, known in Sanskrit as papa, papman or dushta, is the result of
unvirtuous acts (papa or adharma) caused by the instinctive-intellectual
mind dominating and obscuring deeper, spiritual intelligence. (Note:
both papa and papman are used as nouns and adjectives.) The evil-doer is
viewed as a young soul, ignorant of the value of right thought, speech
and action, unable to live in the world without becoming entangled in
maya.**--intrinsic evil:** Inherent, inborn badness. Some philosophies
hold that man and the world are by nature imperfect, corrupt or evil.
Hinduism holds, on the contrary, that there is no intrinsic evil, and
the real nature of man is his divine, soul nature, which is goodness.
See: hell, karma, papa, Satan, sin.

**evoke:** To call forth; to conjure up; to summon, as to summon a
Mahadeva, a God. See: puja, yajna.

**evolution of the soul:** Adhyatma prasara. In Saiva Siddhanta, the
soul's evolution is a progressive unfoldment, growth and maturing toward
its inherent, divine destiny, which is complete merger with Siva. In its
essence, each soul is ever perfect. But as an individual soul body
emanated by God Siva, it is like a small seed yet to develop. As an
acorn needs to be planted in the dark underground to grow into a mighty
oak tree, so must the soul unfold out of the darkness of the malas to
full maturity and realization of its innate oneness with God. The soul
is not created at the moment of conception of a physical body. Rather,
it is created in the Sivaloka. It evolves by taking on denser and denser
sheaths--cognitive, instinctive-intellectual and pranic--until finally
it takes birth in physical form in the Bhuloka. Then it experiences many
lives, maturing through the reincarnation process. Thus, from birth to
birth, souls learn and mature.

Evolution is the result of experience and the lessons derived from it.
There are young souls just beginning to evolve, and old souls nearing
the end of their earthly sojourn. In Saiva Siddhanta, evolution is
understood as the removal of fetters which comes as a natural
unfoldment, realization and expression of one's true, self-effulgent
nature. This ripening or dropping away of the soul's bonds (mala) is
called malaparipaka. The realization of the soul nature is termed
svanubhuti (experience of the Self).

Self Realization leads to moksha, liberation from the three malas and
the reincarnation cycles. Then evolution continues in the celestial
worlds until the soul finally merges fully and indistinguishably into
Supreme God Siva, the Primal Soul, Parameshvara. In his Tirumantiram,
Rishi Tirumular calls this merger vishvagrasa, "total absorption. The
evolution of the soul is not a linear progression, but an intricate,
circular, many-faceted mystery. Nor is it at all encompassed in the
Darwinian theory of evolution, which explains the origins of the human
form as descended from earlier primates. See: Darwin's theory, mala,
moksha, reincarnation, samsara, vishvagrasa.

**exalt:** To make high. To raise in status, glorify or praise.

**excel:** To stand out as better, greater, finer than others. To do
well at something.

**exclusive:** Excluding all others. Saivites believe that there is no
exclusive path to God, that no spiritual path can rightly claim that it
alone leads to the goal.

**exemplar:** One regarded as worthy of imitation; a model. An ideal
pattern to be followed by others.

**exhaustive:** "Drawn out." Very thorough; covering all details;
leaving nothing out.

**existence:** "Coming or standing forth." Being; reality; that which
is.

**experience:** From the Latin experior, "to prove; put to the test."
Living through an event; personal involvement. In Sanskrit, anubhava.

**expound:** To explain or clarify, point by point.

**extended family:** Brihatkutumba or mahakutumba. One or more joint
families plus their broader associations and affiliations. Unlike the
joint family, whose members live in close proximity, the extended family
is geographically widespread. The extended family is headed by the
patriarch, called brihatkutumba pramukha (or mukhya), recognized as the
leader by each joint family. He, in turn is under the guidance of the
kulaguru, or family preceptor. It includes the following, in order of
their precedence: priests of one's faith; elder men and women of the
community; in-laws of married daughters; married daughters,
granddaughters, great-granddaughters, and the spouses and children of
these married girls; members of the staff and their families and those
closely associated with the joint family business or home; maternal
great-grandparents and grandparents, parents, uncles and their spouses,
aunts and their spouses, children and grandchildren of these families;
very close friends and their children; members of the community at
large. See: grihastha, grihastha dharma, joint family.

**extol:** To praise highly.

**exultant:** Rejoicing greatly. Immensely happy or triumphant.


