H
=

**hallowed:** Sacred.

**hamsa:** (Sanskrit) "Swan;" more accurately, the high-flying wild
goose Anser indicus. The vahana, vehicle, of the God Brahma. It has
various meanings, including Supreme Soul and individual soul. It is a
noble symbol for an adept class of renunciates (paramahamsa)--winging
high above the mundane, driving straight toward the goal, or of the
discriminating yogi who--like the graceful swan said to be able to
extract milk from water--can see the Divine and leave the rest. The
hamsa mantra indicates the sound made by the exhalation (ha) and
inhalation (sa) of the breath. See: paramahamsa.

**Harihara:** (Sanskrit) "Vishnu-Siva." Also known as Shankaranarayana,
an icon of the Supreme One, in which the right half is Siva and left
half is Vishnu. It symbolizes the principle that Siva and Vishnu are not
two separate Deities. See: Brahma, murti, Parameshvara, Vishnu.

**hatha yoga:** (Sanskrit) "Forceful yoga." Hatha yoga is a system of
physical and mental exercise developed in ancient times as a means of
rejuvenation by rishis and tapasvins who meditated for long hours, and
used today in preparing the body and mind for meditation. Its elements
are 1) postures (asana), 2) cleansing practices (dhauti or shodhana), 3)
breath control (pranayama), 4) locks (bandha, which temporarily restrict
local flows of prana) and 5) hand gestures (mudra), all of which
regulate the flow of prana and purify the inner and outer bodies. Hatha
yoga is broadly practiced in many traditions. It is the third limb
(anga) of Patanjali's raja yoga. It is integral to the Saiva and Shakta
tantra traditions, and part of modern ayurveda treatment. In the West,
hatha yoga has been superficially adopted as a health-promoting,
limbering, stress-reducing form of exercise, often included in aerobic
routines. Esoterically, ha and tha, respectively, indicate the
microcosmic sun (ha) and moon (tha), which symbolize the masculine
current, pingala nadi, and feminine current, ida nadi, in the human
body. The most popular hatha yoga manuals are Hatha Yoga Pradipika and
the Gheranda Samhita. See: asana, kundalini, nadi, yoga, raja yoga.

**Hatha Yoga Pradipika:** (Sanskrit) "Light on hatha yoga." A
14th-century text of 389 verses by Svatmarama Yogin which describes the
philosophy and practices of hatha yoga. It is widely used in yoga
schools today.

**havana:** (Sanskrit) "Fire pit for sacred offering; making oblations
through fire." Same as homa. Havis and havya name the offerings. See:
Agni, homa, yajna.

**heart chakra:** Anahata chakra. Center of direct cognition. See:
chakra.

**heaven:** The celestial spheres, including the causal plane and the
higher realms of the subtle plane, where souls rest and learn between
births, and mature souls continue to evolve after moksha. Heaven is
often used by translators as an equivalent to the Sanskrit Svarga. See:
loka**.**

**hell:** Naraka. An unhappy, mentally and emotionally congested,
distressful area of consciousness. Hell is a state of mind that can be
experienced on the physical plane or in the sub-astral plane (Naraka)
after death of the physical body. It is accompanied by the tormented
emotions of hatred, remorse, resentment, fear, jealousy and
self-condemnation. However, in the Hindu view, the hellish experience is
not permanent, but a temporary condition of one's own making. See:
asura, loka, Naraka, purgatory, Satan.

**heterodox:** "Different opinion." Opposed to or departing from
established doctrines or beliefs. Opposite of orthodox, "straight
opinion." See: nastika.

**heterosexual:** Of or characterized by sexual attraction for only
members of the opposite sex. See: bisexual, homosexual, sexuality.

**hierarchy:** A group of beings arranged in order of rank or class; as
a hierarchy of God, Gods and devas.

**higher-nature, lower nature:** Expressions indicating man's refined,
soulful qualities on the one hand, and his base, instinctive qualities
on the other. See: kosha, mind (five states), soul.

**Himalayan Academy:** An educational and publishing institution of
Saiva Siddhanta Church founded by Satguru Sivaya Subramuniyaswami in
1957. The Academy's objective is to share the teachings of Sanatana
Dharma through travel-study programs, The Master Course, books and other
publications--particularly the monthly newspaper Hinduism Today and
Dancing with Siva, Hinduism's Contemporary Catechism--as a public
service to Hindus worldwide. See: Hinduism Today, Subramuniyaswami.

**Himalayas:** (Sanskrit) "Abode of snow." The mountain system extending
along the India-Tibet border and through Pakistan, Nepal and Bhutan.

**himsa:** (Sanskrit) "Injury; harm; hurt." Injuriousness,
hostility--mental, verbal or physical. See: ahimsa.

**Hindu:** (Sanskrit) A follower of, or relating to, Hinduism.
Generally, one is understood to be a Hindu by being born into a Hindu
family and practicing the faith, or by declaring oneself a Hindu.
Acceptance into the fold is recognized through the name-giving
sacrament, a temple ceremony called namakarana samskara, given to born
Hindus shortly after birth, and to self-declared Hindus who have proven
their sincerity and been accepted by a Hindu community. Full conversion
is completed through disavowal of previous religious affiliations and
legal change of name. While traditions vary greatly, all Hindus rely on
the Vedas as scriptural authority and generally attest to the following
nine principles: 1) There exists a one, all-pervasive Supreme Being who
is both immanent and transcendent, both creator and unmanifest Reality.
2) The universe undergoes endless cycles of creation, preservation and
dissolution. 3) All souls are evolving toward God and will ultimately
find moksha: spiritual knowledge and liberation from the cycle of
rebirth. Not a single soul will be eternally deprived of this destiny.
4) Karma is the law of cause and effect by which each individual creates
his own destiny by his thoughts, words and deeds. 5) The soul
reincarnates, evolving through many births until all karmas have been
resolved. 6) Divine beings exist in unseen worlds, and temple worship,
rituals, sacraments, as well as personal devotionals, create a communion
with these devas and Gods. 7) A spiritually awakened master or satguru
is essential to know the transcendent Absolute, as are personal
discipline, good conduct, purification, self-inquiry and meditation. 8)
All life is sacred, to be loved and revered, and therefore one should
practice ahimsa, nonviolence. 9) No particular religion teaches the only
way to salvation above all others. Rather, all genuine religious paths
are facets of God's pure love and light, deserving tolerance and
understanding. See: Hinduism.

**Hindu cosmology:** See: loka, three worlds.

**Hinduism (Hindu Dharma):** (Sanskrit) India's indigenous religious and
cultural system, followed today by nearly one billion adherents, mostly
in India, but with large populations in many other countries. Also
called Sanatana Dharma, "eternal religion" and Vaidika Dharma, "religion
of the Vedas." Hinduism is the world's most ancient religion and
encompasses a broad spectrum of philosophies ranging from pluralistic
theism to absolute monism. It is a family of myriad faiths with four
primary denominations: Saivism, Vaishnavism, Shaktism and Smartism.
These four hold such divergent beliefs that each is a complete and
independent religion. Yet, they share a vast heritage of culture and
belief--karma, dharma, reincarnation, all-pervasive Divinity, temple
worship, sacraments, manifold Deities, the guru-shishya tradition and a
reliance on the Vedas as scriptural authority. From the rich soil of
Hinduism long ago sprang various other traditions. Among these were
Jainism, Buddhism and Sikhism, which rejected the Vedas and thus emerged
as completely distinct religions, disassociated from Hinduism, while
still sharing many philosophical insights and cultural values with their
parent faith. Though the genesis of the term is controversial, the
consensus is that the term Hindu or Indu was used by the Persians to
refer to the Indian peoples of the Indus Valley as early as 500 bce.
Additionally, Indian scholars point to the appearance of the related
term Sindhu in the ancient Rig Veda Samhita. Janaki Abhisheki writes
(Religion as Knowledge: The Hindu Concept, p. 1): "Whereas today the
word Hindu connotes a particular faith and culture, in ancient times it
was used to describe those belonging to a particular region. About 500
bce we find the Persians referring to 'Hapta Hindu.' This referred to
the region of Northwest India and the Punjab (before partition). The Rig
Veda (the most ancient literature of the Hindus) uses the word Sapta
Sindhu singly or in plural at least 200 times. Sindhu is the River
Indus. Panini, the great Sanskrit grammarian, also uses the word Sindhu
to denote the country or region. While the Persians substituted h for s,
the Greeks removed the h also and pronounced the word as 'Indoi.' Indian
is derived from the Greek Indoi."

Dr. S. Radhakrishnan similarly observed, "The Hindu civilization is so
called since its original founders or earliest followers occupied the
territory drained by the Sindhu (the Indus) River system corresponding
to the Northwest Frontier Province and the Punjab. This is recorded in
the Rig Veda, the oldest of the Vedas, the Hindu scriptures, which give
their name to this period of Indian history. The people on the Indian
side of the Sindhu were called Hindus by the Persians and the later
Western invaders. That is the genesis of the word Hindu" (The Hindu View
of Life, p. 12). See: Hindu.

**Hindu solidarity:** Hindu unity in diversity. A major contemporary
theme according to which Hindu denominations are mutually supportive and
work together in harmony, while taking care not to obscure or lessen
their distinctions or unique virtues. The underlying belief is that
Hinduism will be strong if each of its sects, and lineages is vibrant.
See: Hinduism.

**Hinduism Today:** The Hindu family magazine founded by Satguru Sivaya
Subramuniyaswami in 1979, published by Himalayan Academy to affirm
Sanatana Dharma and record the modern history of a billion-strong global
religion in renaissance. This award-winning, lavishly illustrated, all
color, computer-produced news and information resource reaches over
150,000 readers in over 100 countries throughout the world. See:
Himalayan Academy.

**Hiuen Tsang:** Chinese pilgrim who toured India about 630. His travel
diary is a rare and colorful source of information about the India of
his day.

**holy feet:** The feet of God, a God, satguru or any holy person, often
represented by sacred sandals, called sri paduka in Sanskrit and
tiruvadi in Tamil. The feet of a divine one are considered especially
precious as they represent the point of contact of the Divine and the
physical, and are thus revered as the source of grace. The sandals or
feet of the guru are the object of worship on his jayanti (birthday), on
Guru Purnima and other special occasions. See: padapuja, paduka,
satguru.

**holy orders:** A divine ordination or covenant, giving religious
authority. Vows that members of a religious body make, especially a
monastic body or order, such as the vows (holy orders of renunciation)
given a sannyasin at the time of his initiation (sannyasa diksha), which
establish a covenant with the ancient holy order of sannyasa.
Sannyasins, the wearers of the ocher robe, are the ordained religious
leaders of Hinduism. See: sannyasa diksha.

**homa:** (Sanskrit) "Fire-offering." A sacred ceremony in which the
Gods are offered oblations through the medium of fire in a sanctified
fire pit, homakunda, usually made of earthen bricks. Homa rites are
enjoined in the Vedas, Agamas and Dharma and Grihya Shastras. Many
domestic rites are occasions for homa, including upanayana and vivaha.
Major pujas in temples are often preceded by a homa. See: agni, havana,
yajna.

**homosexual:** Of or characterized by sexual attraction for members of
one's own gender. A modern synonym is gay, especially for males, while
female homosexuals are termed lesbian. See: bisexual, gay, heterosexual,
sexuality.

**hri:** (Sanskrit) "Remorse; modesty." See: yama-niyama.

**hued:** Having specific color.

**human dharma:** The natural growth and expression through four stages
of life. Known as ashrama dharma. See: ashrama dharma, dharma.

**humors (or bodily humors):** See: ayurveda, bodily humor, dosha.


