I
=

**iccha shakti:** (Sanskrit) "Desire; will." See: Shakti, trishula.

**icon:** A sacred image, usually of God or one of the Gods. English for
murti. See: aniconic, murti.

**iconoclastic:** Opposed to widely accepted ideas, beliefs and customs.
Also [but not used as such in this text], opposed to the worship or use
of religious icons, or advocating their destruction.

**ida nadi:** (Sanskrit) "Soothing channel." The feminine psychic
current flowing along the spine. See: kundalini, nadi, odic, pingala.

**illusion (illusory):** A belief, opinion or observation that appears
to be, but is not in accord with the facts, truth or true values, such
as the illusion created by a magician. See: avidya.

**illustrious:** Very luminous or bright; distinguished, famous;
outstanding.

**immanent:** Indwelling; present and operating within. Relating to God,
the term immanent means present in all things and throughout the
universe, not aloof or distant. Not to be confused with imminent, about
to happen; emanate, to issue from; eminent, high in rank.

**immature:** Not ripe; not fully grown, undeveloped. Still
young.**--immature soul:** See: atman, evolution of the soul, soul.

**immemorial** (**from time immemorial):** From a time so distant that
it extends beyond history or human memory.

**immutable:** Never changing or varying. See: Absolute Reality,
relative.

**impasse:** A dead end; a passage with no escape. A difficulty with no
solution.

**impede:** To obstruct or delay something; make difficult to
accomplish. (Noun form: impediment.)

**impediment:** "That which holds the feet." Hindrance; obstacle.
Anything that inhibits or slows progress.

**impending:** That which is about to happen; threatening.

**imperishable:** That which cannot die or decay; indestructible;
immortal. With capital I, imperishable refers to God--the Eternal,
Beginningless and Endless.

**impermanence:** The quality of being temporary and nonlasting.

**impersonal:** Not personal; not connected to any person.

**impersonal being:** One's innermost nature, at the level of the soul's
essence, where one is not distinguished as an individual, nor as
separate from God or any part of existence. The soul's essential
being--Satchidananda and Parasiva. See: atman, essence, evolution of the
soul, soul.

**impersonal God:** God in His perfections of Pure Consciousness
(Parashakti) and Absolute Reality beyond all attributes (Parasiva)
wherein He is not a person. (Whereas, in His third perfection,
Parameshvara, Siva is someone, has a body and performs actions, has
will, dances, etc.)

**impetus:** Anything that stimulates activity. Driving force; motive,
incentive.

**implore:** To ask, beg, beseech or entreat earnestly or pathetically.

**impoverished:** Poor; reduced to a condition of severe deprivation.

**inanimate:** See: animate-inanimate.

**inauspicious:** Not favorable. Not a good time to perform certain
actions or undertake projects. Ill-omened. See: auspiciousness, muhurta.

**incandescent:** Glowing with heat; white-hot. Radiant; luminous; very
bright.

**incantation:** Mantraprayoga. The chanting of prayers, verses or
formulas for magical or mystical purposes. Also refers to such chants
(mantra). Vashakriya is the subduing or bewitching by charms,
incantation or drugs. Incantation for malevolent purposes (black magic)
is called abhichara. See: mantra.

**incarnation:** From incarnate, "to be made flesh." The soul's taking
on a human body.**--divine incarnation:** The concept of avatara. The
Supreme Being's (or other Mahadeva's) taking of human birth, generally
to reestablish dharma. This doctrine is important to several Hindu
sects, notably Vaishnavism, but not held by most Saivites. See: avatara,
Vaishnavism.

**incense:** Dhupa. Substance that gives off pleasant aromas when
burned, usually made from natural derivatives such as tree resin. A
central element in Hindu worship rites, waved gently before the Deity as
an offering, especially after ablution. Hindi terms include sugandhi and
lobana. A popular term for stick incense is agarbatti (Gujarati). See:
puja.

**incisive:** "Cutting into." Sharp or keen, such as a penetrating and
discriminating mind. See: discrimination.

**incognito:** Without being recognized; keeping one's true identity
unrevealed or disguised.

**increment:** An amount of increase, usually small and followed by
others; a measure of growth or change.

**individual soul:** A term used to describe the soul's nature as a
unique entity, emanated by God Siva (the Primal Soul), as a being which
is evolving and not yet one with God. See: atman, essence, kosha,
Parameshvara, soul.

**individuality:** Quality that makes one person or soul other than, or
different from, another. See: ahamkara, ego, anava, soul.

**indomitable:** Not easily discouraged, defeated or subdued.
Unconquerable.

**Indra:** (Sanskrit) "Ruler." Vedic God of rain and thunder, warrior
king of the devas.

**indriya:** (Sanskrit) "Agent, sense organ." The five agents of
perception (jnanendriyas), hearing (shrotra), touch (tvak), sight
(chakshus), taste (rasana) and smell (ghrana); and the five agents of
action (karmendriyas), speech (vak), grasping, by means of the hands
(pani), movement (pada), excretion (payu) and generation (upastha). See:
kosha, soul, tattva.

**induce:** To bring about, cause, persuade.

**Indus Valley:** Region of the Indus River, now in Pakistan, where in
1924 archeologists discovered the remains of a high civilization which
flourished between 5000 and 1000 bce. There, a "seal" was found with the
effigy of Siva as Pashupati, "Lord of animals," seated in a yogic
posture. Neither the language of these people nor their exact background
is known. They related culturally and carried on an extensive trade with
peoples of other civilizations, far to the West, using sturdy ships that
they built themselves. For centuries they were the most advanced
civilization on Earth. See: Saivism.

**indwell:** To dwell or be in. "The priest asks the Deity to indwell
the image," or come and inhabit the murti as a temporary physical body.
See: murti.

**I-ness:** The conceiving of oneself as an "I," or ego, which Hinduism
considers a state to be transcended. See: ahamkara, anava, mind
(individual).

**inexhaustible:** Cannot be exhausted, used up or emptied. Tireless.

**inexplicable:** Beyond explaining or accounting for.

**inextricable:** Cannot be disentangled or separated from another
thing.

**infatuation:** The magnetic condition of being captured by a foolish
or shallow love or affection.

**infinitesimal:** Infinitely small; too small to be measured.

**inflict:** To give or cause pain, wounds, etc.

**infuse:** To transmit a quality, idea, knowledge, etc., as if by
pouring. To impart, fill or inspire.

**ingest:** To take food, medicine, etc., into the body by swallowing or
absorbing.

**inherent (to inhere in):** Inborn. Existing in someone or something as
an essential or inseparable quality.**--inherent sin:** See: sin.

**inherit:** To receive from an ancestor, as property, title, etc.--or
to reap from our own actions: "...seed karmas we inherit from this and
past lives."

**initiation (to initiate):** Entering into; admission as a member. In
Hinduism, initiation from a qualified preceptor is considered invaluable
for spiritual progress. Usually the beginning of more advance learning.
See: diksha, shaktipata, sannyasa diksha.

**injunction:** An urging; an order or firm instruction.

**inmost:** Located deepest within.

**innate:** Naturally occurring; not acquired. That which belongs to the
inherent nature or constitution of a being or thing.

**inner (innermost):** Located within. Of the depths of our
being.**--inner advancement (or unfoldment):** Progress of an individual
at the soul level rather than in external life.**--inner bodies:** The
subtle bodies of man within the physical body.**--inner discovery:**
Learning from inside oneself, experiential revelation; one of the
benefits of inner life.**--inner form (or nature) of the guru:** The
deeper levels of the guru's being that the disciple strives to attune
himself to and emulate.**--inner law:** The principles or mechanism
underlying every action or experience, often hidden. Karma is one such
law.**--inner life:** The life we live inside ourselves, at the
emotional, mental and spiritual levels, as distinguished from outer
life.**--inner light:** A moonlight-like glow that can be seen inside
the head or throughout the body when the vrittis, mental fluctuations,
have been sufficiently quieted. To be able to see and bask in the inner
light is a milestone on the path. See: vritti.**--inner mind:** The mind
in its deeper, intuitive functions and capacities--the subsuperconscious
and superconscious.**--innermost body:** The soul body.**--inner
planes:** Inner worlds or regions of existence.**--inner self:** The
real, deep Self; the essence of the soul, rather than the outer self
with which we usually identify.**--inner sky:** The area of the mind
which is clear inner space, free of mental images, feelings,
identifications, etc. Tranquility itself. The superconscious mind,
Satchidananda. See: akasha.**--inner truth:** Truth of a higher
order.**--inner universes (or worlds):** The astral and causal worlds.
See: kosha.

**innumerable:** So many as to be beyond counting.

**inscrutable:** That cannot be analyzed or understood. Mysterious;
beyond examining.

**insignia:** Plural of insigne. Signs or symbols of identity, rank or
office, such as a badge or emblem.

**dakshina:** (Sanskrit) A fee or honorarium given to a priest at the
completion of any rite; also a gift given to gurus as a token of
appreciation for their infinite spiritual blessings.

**instinctive:** "Natural or innate." From the Latin instinctus,
"staff," "prick," a participle of instigere, "impelling," pricking,"
"instigating." The drives and impulses that order the animal world and
the physical and lower astral aspects of humans--for example,
self-preservation, procreation, hunger and thirst, as well as the
emotions of greed, hatred, anger, fear, lust and jealousy. The first
steps on the spiritual path consist in learning to harness these
tendencies and impulses and transmute their energies into the higher
nature. See: manas, mind (individual), mind (three phases), yama-niyama.

**instinctive mind:** Manas chitta. The lower mind, which controls the
basic faculties of perception, movement, as well as ordinary thought and
emotion. Manas chitta is of the manomaya kosha. See: manas, manomaya
kosha, yama-niyama.

**instrumental cause:** Sahakari karana. Cosmologically, the means of
implementing creation. See: cause.

**intellect:** The power to reason or understand; power of thought;
mental acumen. See: buddhi, intellectual mind.

**intellectual mind:** Buddhi chitta. The faculty of reason and logical
thinking. It is the source of discriminating thought, rather than the
ordinary, impulsive thought processes of the lower or instinctive mind,
called manas chitta. Buddhi chitta is of the manomaya kosha. See:
buddhi, mind (individual).

**internalize:** To take something inside of oneself.

**internalized worship:** Yoga. Worship or contact with God and Gods via
meditation and contemplation rather than through external ritual. This
is the yogi's path, preceded by the charya and kriya padas. See:
meditation, yoga.

**interplay:** Interaction between two or more things.

**intervene:** To come between, especially two people or parties, with
the intent to effect a change between them. See: mediatrix.

**interweave (interwoven):** To weave together like threads into cloth.
To closely interrelate; to blend.

**intimacy:** The state of being intimate or very close. Having a close
rapport.

**intrigue:** Secret plotting or scheming.

**intrinsic:** Inward, essential; inherent. Belonging to the real nature
of a being or thing.**--intrinsic evil:** See: evil.

**intuition (to intuit):** Direct understanding or cognition, which
bypasses the process of reason. Intuition is a far superior source of
knowing than reason, but it does not contradict reason. See: cognition,
mind (five states).

**invigorate:** To give vigor, life or energy.

**invocation (to invoke):** A "calling or summoning," as to a God,
saint, etc., for blessings and assistance. Also, a formal prayer or
chant. See: mantra.

**Iraivan:** (Tamil) "Worshipful one; divine one." One of the most
ancient Tamil names for God. See: San Marga Sanctuary.

**Iraivan Temple:** See: San Marga Sanctuary.

**Isha:** (Sanskrit) "Lord, master of all; superior, commanding,
reigning." Isha and its derivative Ishana are very old names for God
Siva found in the Rig Veda.

**Ishanyaguru:** (Sanskrit) ite brahmin of the Kalamukha sect who
Basavanna, principal founding teacher of Vira Saivism, received
instruction from in his youth. See: Basavanna, Vira Saivism.

**Isha Upanishad:** (Sanskrit) Last of the 40 chapters of Vajasaneyi
Samhita of the Yajur Veda. A short, highly mystical scripture. See:
Upanishad.

**Ishta Devata:** (Sanskrit) "Cherished or chosen Deity." The Deity that
is the object of one's special pious attention. Ishta Devata is a
concept common to all Hindu sects. Vaishnavas may choose among many
Divine forms, most commonly Vishnu, Balaji, Krishna, Radha, Rama,
Lakshmi, Hanuman and Narasinha, as well as the aniconic shalagrama, a
sacred river rock. Traditionally, Smartas choose from among six Deities:
Siva, Shakti, Vishnu, Surya, Ganesha and Kumara (or any of their
traditional forms). For Shaktas, the Divine is worshiped as the Goddess,
Shakti, in Her many fierce forms and benign forms, invoking the furious
power of Kali or Durga, or the comforting grace of Parvati, Ambika and
others. Saivites direct their worship primarily to Siva as represented
by the aniconic Siva Linga, and the human-like murtis, Nataraja and
Ardhanarishvara. In temples and scriptural lore, Siva is venerated in a
multitude of forms, including the following 23 additional
anthropomorphic images: Somaskanda, Rishabarudra, Kalyanasundara,
Chandrashekhara, Bhikshatana, Kamadahanamurti, Kalari, Jalandara,
Tripurari, Gajari, Virabhadra, Dakshinamurti, Kiratamurti, Nilakantha,
Kankala, Chakradana, Gajamukhanugraha, Chandesanugraha, Ekapada,
Lingodbhava, Sukhasana, Uma Maheshvara and Haryardha. See: murti,
Shakti, Siva.

**Ishtalinga:** (Sanskrit) "Cherished, chosen or personal mark of God."
(Ishta: "sought, desired.") For Vira Saivites it is the personal
Sivalinga, ceremonially given by a priest shortly after birth, and worn
on a chain or cord around the neck thereafter. See: Sivalinga, Vira
Saivism.

**Islam:** The religion founded by Prophet Muhammed in Arabia about 625
ce. Islam connotes submission to Allah, the name for God in this
religion. Adherents, known as Moslems, follow the "five pillars" found
in their scripture, the Koran: faith in Allah, praying five times daily
facing Mecca, giving of alms, fasting during the month of Ramadan, and
pilgrimage. One of the fastest growing religions, Islam has over one
billion followers, mostly in the Middle East, Pakistan, Africa, China,
Indochina, Russia and neighboring countries. See: Koran, Mohammed.

**issue forth:** To come out; be created. To start existing as an
entity. E.g., creation issues forth from Nataraja's drum**.** See:
emanation, Nataraja, tattva.

**Ishvara:** (Sanskrit) "Highest Lord." Supreme or Personal God. See:
Parameshvara.

**Ishvarapujana:** (Sanskrit) "Worship." See: yama-niyama.

**Itihasa:** (Sanskrit) "So it was." Epic history, particularly the
Ramayana and Mahabharata (of which the famed Bhagavad Gita is a part).
This term sometimes refers to the Puranas, especially the Skanda Purana
and the Bhagavata Purana (or Srimad Bhagavatam). See: Mahabharata,
Ramayana, Smriti.

**itinerant:** Traveling from place to place, with no permanent home.
Wandering. See: monk, sadhu, vairagi.


