Ayat no.  26-29
===============

***In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful***  
***It was said: Enter the garden. He said: O would that my people had
known; Of that on account of which my Lord has forgiven me and made me
of the honored ones! And We did not send down upon his people after him
any hosts from heaven, nor do We ever send down.***  
***It was naught but a single cry, and lo! they were still.
(36:26-29)***  
*** ***  
 When they killed the believer of Aale Yasin in front of the messengers
whom also they killed, he was told, “Enter paradise.” And as he entered
paradise, he said, “I wish my community should know that my Lord has
absolved me of all sins and placed me among the honored ones. Would that
those who killed me knew how much forgiving God is?”

Messengers and divine callers are true well-wishers of all, as they have
nothing but sympathy. They want that this creation (people) should get
salvation and bliss from God though they are beaten up and even killed
at their hands. Yet they never cursed them, but showed only sympathy and
said, “I wish these ignorant people accept our admonition and
understand.”

As we have mentioned, this paradise is in the grave and it is for the
believer to enjoy from the hour of his death until the Day of
Resurrection. Though if one is a believer but had committed some sins
and died without repentance, one remains in torture in Barzakh for a
certain time until one’s account is finally cleared.

Sometimes he gets enough punishment in Barzakh to clean his past sins
and so when he comes to the field of Gathering on the Day of Judgment,
he does not have to account for any more sins.  
 Some commentators have said that in the verse, “It was said: Enter the
garden,” the news must have been given before the killing of this
believer because there is no mention of his killing.

Actually it is not so because the same verse shows that the death took
place earlier, “And We did not send down upon his people after him any
hosts from heaven, nor do We ever send down.” The words ‘after him’
indicate that it is after his death and hence it is not necessary to
specify that he was killed.

A martyr enters paradise at the very moment of his martyrdom
------------------------------------------------------------

There is one more fine point here. It is not said, “They killed him and
it was said to him,” in order to show the contiguity. For example saying
that as soon as he was killed he entered paradise. The Quranic wording
indicates emphatically that when the last moment of the martyr arrived
he was already in his place in paradise; that there was no time gap at
all.

Imam Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have said in respect of some noble Shias
that there is no distance between you and what will brighten your eyes
except the reaching of your life to your neck. You at once reach the
place promised by God.

Words of Imam Hasan (‘a) in his last moments
--------------------------------------------

Fifteenth of Ramadan is the auspicious birth anniversary of Imam Hasan
(‘a), the elder grandson of Prophet (‘s). In this connection, let us
read a narration about the last moments of Imam Hasan (‘a).  
 In *Amali,* Tusi has quoted in the chapter of the martyrdom of Imam
Hasan Mujtaba (‘a) that at the time of his departure from this world,
his brother Husain (‘a) was at his bedside.

His hand was in Husain’s hand. Husain (‘a) asked, “My brother! How are
you?” The Imam said, “This is the last day of my life in the world and
the first day of my life in the Hereafter, while I am restless due to
separation from you and other relatives.”

According to this narration, he immediately added, “I seek pardon from
God for what I said. I long to see my grandfather, the Holy Prophet (‘s)
and my father, Amirul Mo-mineen (‘a) and my mother Fatima (s.a.). Though
I regret the separation from Husain in this world yet I will be very
happy to reach my grandfather.”

You too, believing men and women, should be like this. Though you suffer
separation from your near and dear ones, you also reach the mercy of the
Lord and the nearness to the great good personalities in the Hereafter.
In the Barzakh life of grave, you meet the holy spirits of those who
proceeded there before you, your friends who are awaiting you.  
    
***And whoever obeys Allah and the Apostle, these are with those upon
whom Allah has bestowed favors from among the prophets and the truthful
and the martyrs and the good, and a goodly company are they! (4:69)***  
*** ***  
 So you will need friends after your death, friends with perfect faith,
all true and truthful ones having true love and affection.

Also there is no jealousy in paradise and if there is any jealousy in
someone he would never enter Paradise.

Friendship becomes manifest there. Believers meet their brothers, who
are brothers in the true sense. World like relationship is not there at
all.

Hereafter is a place of gathering together. In the Holy Quran, God had
promised at two places in Quran that the believer and his children would
be together at one place. As for example in the verse:  
    
***And (as for) those who believe and their offspring follow them in
faith, We will unite with them their offspring… (52:21)***  
*** ***  
 And their affection will be of the highest quality.

We killed them all with a shriek
--------------------------------

   
***And We did not send down upon his people after him any hosts from
heaven, nor do We ever send down. It was naught but a single cry, and
lo! they were still. (36:28-29)***  
*** ***  
 These two verses describe God’s anger. A believer is very dear to Him.
Killing of a believer is a very serious misdeed. The Merciful Lord
describes His favor and support to Habib Najjar. According to one
narration, at that very moment (when Habib was martyred), and as per
another narration the next day and according to a third tradition, after
three days thereafter, God decided to punish the oppressors.

A wit prior to description He says, “After they killed My favorite
servant, We did not send on them any army from heaven – they never
deserve that We may send any troops from the sky to finish them. So We
annihilated them merely with a heavenly shriek.”

According to a tradition, God ordered Jibraeel to smite them with a
frightening cry or shriek. Who can bear the sound of Divine anger? Man
is weak. Just look at our own weakness and observe our deeds.

A weak person who disobeys the strong
-------------------------------------

It is said that once a born-rich person who oppressed others and
committed sins went to a religious lecture. One sentence of the speaker
changed his condition. It was, “I wonder how a weak person can disobey
the strong One?”

He pondered over his weakness and changed his thoughts and deeds
completely. It was as if an arrow had pierced his heart, which
overturned his lifestyle. He turned towards God.

A time comes when you want to say a word but you cannot utter even a
word. You are unable even to move your hand. You become weaker than a
mosquito.

Thus Allah says, “We did not send on the community of Habib, after him,
an army from heaven and it also does not befit us to do (such a little
work which was not necessary for them).”

Our chastisement was but a cry and a shriek and instantly all became
silent. The kind of shriek it was is known only to God, which uproots
the heart from its position, strangles the throat or kills man due to
fear while man has no strength to bear it.

Umar bin Abdul Aziz falls hearing the cry
-----------------------------------------

It is written in *Hayatul Haiwan* that: It was spring season during the
caliphate of Umar bin Abdul Azeez and he was sitting on this throne. The
atmosphere changed and rainy winds arrived with many clouds and dazzling
flashes of lightning, and the caliph fell down from his throne. The
terrible fright shook him.

Yahya bin Muaz Razi who used to give beneficial admonishments said, “O
Caliph! This is the fear of the Beneficent Lord.”

If lightning, thunder and the arrival of rains and good tidings of
bounties shake you so much, how would you respond to the sound of Divine
anger?

After the departure of the Last Prophet (‘s) such kinds of calamities,
which generally used to kill all at a time were postponed by the
blessing of the Prophet of mercy.  
    
***And We have not sent you but as a mercy to the worlds. (21:107)***  
*** ***  
 Devastating calamities were postponed but occasional punishment is
there. A few years ago some earthquakes struck Iran and they could also
be a kind of divine warnings.  
    
***Alas for the servants! there comes not to them an apostle but they
mock at him. (36:30)***  
*** ***  
 Meaning: Woe unto such people. Ever since the creation until the time
of the Last Prophet (‘s) whenever a warner arrived from God, they made
fun of him.

Now, we are also like this. There are people in the Islamic world who,
on seeing a religious man, make fun of him. They deride him when he
tries to stop an evil. They call him reactionary. They pay no attention
to the promises and warnings of the Holy Quran. Rather, as a matter of
fact, they give no ear to it like the community of Noah; who used to put
their fingers in their ears to avoid hearing the words of their
prophet.  
    
***And whenever I have called them that Thou mayest forgive them, they
put their fingers in their ears…(71:7)***  
*** ***  
 Now, in fact, one does not even come to the masjid to hear the
admonitions, to understand the path to success and to hear the
invitation or the call of divine messengers.

Words of Imam Sajjad (‘a) and guidance of a man
-----------------------------------------------

It is reported in the chapter pertaining to the forbearance of Imam
Sajjad (‘a), that the Imam was passing through a lane of Medina with a
cloak on his shoulders. One of the mean fellows of the city told his
companions, “Let me put my hand today on Ali bin Husain (‘a).” To make
fun of the Imam, he caught and pulled the Imam’s cloak from behind.

The Imam turned back and said, “The Day is to come when every wrong doer
will be a loser. O Wrongdoers! Your loss will become manifest on the Day
of Judgment. God’s frowning will terrorize you, but you are making a
mockery of these truths. This world has made you mad, deceiving you
fully but very soon you will wake with the cry of death.”  
    
***And leave those who have taken their religion for a play and an idle
sport, and whom this world's life has deceived…(6:70)***


