Ayat no.  32-25
===============

***In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful***  
***And all of them shall surely be brought before Us. And a sign to them
is the dead earth: We give life to it and bring forth from it grain so
they eat of it. And We make therein gardens of*** ***palms and
grapevines and We make springs to flow forth in it, That they may eat of
the fruit thereof, and their hands did not make it; will they not then
be grateful? (36:32-35)***

All come up before God, willingly or otherwise
----------------------------------------------

Allah says:  
    
***Do they not consider how many of the generations have We destroyed
before them, because they do not turn to them? (36:31)***  
*** ***  
 It means that don’t you see how the past people were destroyed by Us?
You should take lesson from their fate and not adopt their ways. People
imagine death means destruction; that it is annihilation forever whereas
what is meant is passing away from this world and arriving in the world
of requital. As we have said, death, from the superficial viewpoint of
man, is absolute annihilation. But from the point of view of
intelligence and religion, death is not for anyone. Rather it is a
change of place and dress.  
    
***And all of them shall surely be brought before Us. (36:32)***  
*** ***  
 That is, without exception, each and everyone will come to Us. No one
would ever be able to escape or remain absent. Allah says in Surah
Rahman: O group of men and jinn! If you have power to cross the regions
of the earth and the skies, do so.  
    
***O assembly of the jinn and the men! If you are able to pass through
the regions of the heavens and the earth, then pass through; you cannot
pass through but with authority. (55:33)***  
*** ***  
 In the explanation of this verse it is mentioned that on the Day of
Judgment, angels of the first heaven would surround the grand field of
gathering. They in turn would be surrounded by angels of the second
heaven and so on till the angels of the seventh heaven.

Then a voice will be heard: O groups of men and jinn! If you can cross
these parameters, escape from this horizon.  
 All have to appear before the supreme court of Divine Justice. Two
divine functionaries would be there with each and every person.  
    
***And every soul shall come, with it a driver and a witness.
(50:21)***  
*** ***  
 They will not be able to move either this side or that. Guards would
there along with them. At their hint one will have to march on upto the
highest court of God.

Let me be sacrificed for the one who does not need a pusher or watcher
and who comes up on his own and submits his accounts himself readily.
That is the ‘Mumzaroon’ – Those who will come up. The place for meeting
with God is mentioned here as ‘Meeqaat-e-Ilaahi’:  
    
***Shall most surely be gathered together for the appointed hour of a
known day. (56:50)***  
*** ***  
 He also gives proof of this in other verses, that is, proofs of the
Return and Resurrection; rather of practical monotheism.

Sign of Qiyamat—enlivening of a dead earth
------------------------------------------

   
***And a sign to them is the dead earth… (36:33)***  
*** ***  
 The Arabic word ‘Ayat’ means sign, proof and evidence. Here it is a
sign to show that you have to live in another world after your death
where all your good fortune will come out openly.

They say: How this rotten and decomposed body will come to life again?
Look at the earth beneath your feet and observe how God gives it life
after it has dried and was dead.

Life and death of everyone and everything is like this. Earth also has
life and death. Its death has grades and levels. One of its grades is
growing and not growing. The season of fall and winter is death of
earth. The beginning of spring is life for earth.

How much life grows with it and is added to it. The earth wherein no
movement was seen is lashed with spring breeze. Seeds show up their
heads in the form of plants. All sorts of vegetables and grass grow. Who
gave it this life? Did it happen itself? Why couldn’t it do so in fall
and winter? This fresh life is a proof of the life after death, that is,
Resurrection.

From a grain of wheat, he gives seven hundred or even more
----------------------------------------------------------

   
***And a sign to them is the dead earth: We give life to it and bring
forth from it grain so they eat of it.***  
*** ***  
 Here ‘grain’ means a corn seed. The chief grains are wheat, barely,
lentils and rice etc. By way of development, a seed of wheat becomes a
ear or cluster. Thereafter, a seed gives seventy to seven hundred seeds.
This shows God’s Might and indicates that the universe is being directed
by a limitless power.

You sowed a date seed. Then it bears branches and leaves producing
hundreds of dates, each of which contains the same seed stone. This is
manifestation of God’s powerful might. The One Who created wheat also
gave you teeth to eat it. Who created taste in your tongue and Who made
this date fruit so sweet in taste?

Whether movement in quality or quantity, every movement requires a
mover. Nothing shakes without a shaker. Every cluster of grapes, in the
beginning, is smaller than a seed of wheat. But then gradually it
increases in size. Who gives it this quantitative movement and who
evolves it with a fixed order and regularity?

The grape fruit, in the beginning, was very sour and then it gradually
sweetened. Sometimes its extreme sweetness sickens man. Every movement
or turn requires a mover, a driver, or pusher. Who is behind the
quantitative and qualitative changes in grapes? Is it anyone except Only
One God? He gives life to a dry barren earth. He makes the grass to
grow. As Sadi Shirazi has said:

**The clouds, the winds, the moon, the sun, the sky, all are doing their
work.**  
**So that you may eat your bread and may not remain heedless.**  
**All of them are working for you and are at your service.**  
**It is, therefore, not just on your part not to obey (The Almighty
God)**

Germination of a seed is a sign of resurrection
-----------------------------------------------

Monotheism is clearly understood from this verse from the aspect of
resurrection. The farmers know that the seed they sow in the earth,
after getting water, is changed. The seed was hard when placed in the
soil but after it settled down and got water, it sprouted.

Thereafter, it turns green and raises its head from the ground. Half of
it comes up and half remains under ground. Half of it secures its root
and base and the other half looks after its top and stem.

The point to be noted here is that after its disintegration who has
given it a new life again? Only One God! Exactly like my body and your
body. You ask what is going to happen after its disintegration? You have
seen the events in this world how there is life after death. Why do you
not think of hereafter?  
    
***And certainly you know the first growth, why do you not then mind?
(56:62)***  
*** ***  
 The bones will be disintegrated and after the Almighty wills they would
again be resurrected. There will be a life-giving blow making all atoms
and molecules alive again.  
    
***And the trumpet shall be blown, when lo! from their graves they shall
hasten on to their Lord. (36:51)***  
*** ***  
 Of course there would be changes therein. This time the body would be
subtle, especially if it is of the people of paradise. It is mentioned
about the female dwellers of paradise that the houries will be jealous
of them as these (women of paradise) will be extremely fine and
beautiful.

The substance of body is the same substance but appearance is changed.
Of course its deeds will be like those of the angels. God willing,
nothing but good will be done by them. On the other hand those who will
be punished will get hard and coarse bodies corresponding to the
harshness of divine torture.  
    
***And We make therein gardens of palms and grapevines and We make
springs to flow forth in it, (36:34)***  
*** ***  
 That is, look at these gardens of dates and grapes, which are just
before your eyes; where was this sweetness? From where did it come? Say,
‘Praise be to Allah, Allah is the Greatest, from the inner fold of dry
wood from earth and from water.’

What a wonderful drawing of essence in this systematic and
well-organized manner. How it reached in this form to each and every
cell of the fruits! What a marvelous relationship between a seed and the
complete fruit! Indeed He is powerful over everything…  
 After this Quran says:  
    
***and We make springs to flow forth in it, that they may eat of the
fruit thereof, and their hands did not make it; (36:34-35)***  
*** ***

God produces both sweet juice and sour vinegar from grapes
----------------------------------------------------------

   
***…and their hands did not make it…***  
*** ***  
 Meaning it is *‘We’* not the people, who has created these fruits. It
is God Who created grapes but man extracts juice from them, which is
pleasing to taste. Similarly he makes vinegar from grapes, which was
among the diet of messengers.  
    
***…will they not then be grateful?***  
*** ***  
 Meaning: Are you then not thankful? O ungrateful one! O disloyal
fellow! Should you not be thankful to God Who granted you such precious
and delicious things? Is it not necessary for you to chant His praise
constantly?

Praising of the intermediary is good provided its being intermediary is
not forgotten. But the fact is that One in Whose hand is the original or
main bounty must be thanked. None should be made partner in this main
thanksgiving and appreciation.

If the water supply is stopped to you who is it that makes palatable
water available to you?  
    
***Say: Have you considered if your water should go down, who is it then
that will bring you flowing water? (67:30)***  
*** ***  
 Whatever bounty reaches us, it is from Him and there is no bounty for
us except from God.  
    
***And whatever favor is (bestowed) on you it is from Allah; then when
evil afflicts you, to Him do you cry for aid. (16:53)***  
*** ***

Bounty worship or benefactor worship
------------------------------------

Though the comparison is rather awkward, there is no harm. Does a dog,
with all of its lowness, give more importance to a bounty or to its
benefactor? Dog is, indeed, a benefactor worshipper, not bounty
worshipper. It harkens to the call of the owner of the house, not to its
food.

Several times, its owner forgets to feed it, but the dog does not ignore
him. It remains meek; it flatters him, and wags its tail for him.

It is an animal and does not have more intelligence than this. But you,
O man! In spite of the fact that God gave you intelligence, why did you
forget your Benefactor? You knew your Lord and you said: There is no god
except Allah. Now, do you have anything to do with the Benefactor or
with the bounty (given by him)? Are you a Benefactor worshipper or a
bounty worshipper?

Since God has granted the precious bounty to you, you should praise and
glorify Him alone so that He may increase the bounty.  
    
***If you are grateful, I would certainly give to you more, and if you
are ungrateful, My chastisement is truly severe. (14:7)***  
*** ***  
 In fact it is prohibited to say, “Such and such food has harmed me.”
Rather, you should say, “I was not fit for that food.” Of course foods
having opposite effects should not be taken together.  
 It is narrated that, among reasons of chastisements like squeeze of
grave, is thanklessness for bounties. So, to avoid such ungratefulness,
kiss the bread and respect it, let it not fall down and be trampled.

It is a must for all of us to repent from the bottom of our hearts for
whatever thanklessness has been shown by us. There are things about
which we did not realize that they are great bounties of Allah. For
example, we did not consider a son a big bounty from God. But when he
died we say, “God took him away from me.” Now this is ungratefulness.

We should say, “O God! Whatever we have is only from You. There is no
God except You. We are monotheists. We are thankful people and we are
shamed of our past when we did not realize that all bounties were from
You. I seek forgiveness from You and I turn towards You (in repentance).


