Ayat no.  33-35
===============

***In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful***  
***And a sign to them is the dead earth: We give life to it and bring
forth from it grain so they eat of it. And We make therein gardens of
palms and grapevines and We make springs to flow forth in it, That they
may eat of the fruit thereof, and their hands did not make it; will they
not then be grateful? (36:33-35)***

Eat dates and grapes and be thankful
------------------------------------

These verses are related with the Uniqueness of God and the Hereafter
and the proofs of both are very clear. You have seen how life is blown
into a dead dry earth:  
    
***We give life to it and bring forth from it grain…***  
*** ***  
 Various kinds of seeds grow out of it, which you eat – that is date
trees and grapevines. Rivers are made to flow between them. So eat these
fruits, think upon it and derive a lesson. Eat and be grateful and
thankful to God by recognizing and worshipping Him.

Be God worshippers. See who is their Originator. Also remember that what
you see is only a drop, which shows the Might of God. The greater thing
is God’s power, which will be clear to you in the world, which is after
death.  
    
***And there is not a thing but with Us are the treasures of it, and We
do not send it down but in a known measure. (15:21)***  
*** ***  
 Dry and wet (fresh) dates are from the original sweetness, treasured in
the higher world, which you will taste after your death. Then you will
understand and realize what true sweetness is. All the greenery, flavor
and fragrance are stored with the Lord of the worlds.

He is the bestower of bounties covering you (like the animals)
--------------------------------------------------------------

   
***…will they not then be grateful?***  
*** ***  
 An animal eats from the bounties of God and does nothing else. Its job
is to graze and chew on barley and alfa alfa and that is all. But it is
the duty of man to eat and go to the giver of this food and thank Him.
Otherwise what is the difference between Him and the animal?  
    
***…and eat as the beasts eat, and the fire is their abode. (47:12)***  
*** ***  
 Human intellect demands that he must be humble before the Benefactor,
the Almighty God. Man must not be a denier (Kafir/ungrateful). ‘Kufr’
means cover, that is, covering or hiding. O the one who wears the bounty
given by God and does not consider it to be from God, God is needless.  
    
***Allah, (there is) no god but He, the Ever living, the Self-subsisting
by Whom all things subsist. (3:2)***  
*** ***  
  Thanking God is better only for you. It is mentioned in the Holy Quran
that if you show thankfulness to God He will add to that bounty. If you
do not realize that the bounty is from God and if you do not appreciate
it, the chastisement of God is very severe.  
    
***…and if you are ungrateful, My chastisement is truly severe.
(14:7)***  
*** ***

Wife, a divine bounty and thanklessness with regard to it
---------------------------------------------------------

Among the bounties bestowed by God is a good wife. This bounty is
mentioned in the Holy Quran at several places. It is narrated in *Usul
Kafi* that, second to Faith, nothing is higher in rank than a wife who
safeguards and protects the faith of man. Such a wife is a sign of God
that brings peace and love to her husband.  
    
***And one of His signs is that He created mates for you from yourselves
that you may find rest in them, and He put between you love and
compassion…(30:21)***  
*** ***  
 But some people do not regard her as a divine bounty and turn
ungrateful. In marriage functions and likewise in matrimony, which is an
occasion of having invocations answered, they indulge in sins and show
ungratefulness to God with regard to this bounty.

A thankful companion of Prophet Dawood in paradise
--------------------------------------------------

There is a brief story on the topic of thankfulness.  
 Prophet Dawood (‘a) once prayed to God to show him his companion in
paradise from among the faithful persons God loved. Came the voice from
the unseen, “Tomorrow morning, go to the gate of the city and see who it
is.”

Next morning when Dawood (‘a) went to the city gate he met Mata, father
of Yunus, carrying some firewood on his shoulders, in search of a buyer.
Then came a man who bought that wood. Dawood stepped forward, shook
hands with him, hugged him and then asked, “Is it possible for you to
have me as your guest today?” Mata replied, “It would be my pleasure.
Come along.”

Mata bought some flour and salt with the firewood money to suffice three
persons, viz, he himself, Dawood and Sulaiman. Finally he baked bread.
Then before eating that bread, Mata raised his head towards the sky and
said with tears running down his cheeks, “O Lord! It was You Who had
sown the tree from which I obtained this wood.

You gave me strength and ability to do this work. You also gave me
capability to carry its burden. You sent its buyer. The wheat from which
I got this flour was also created by You and Only You. You made all this
possible whereby we are now able to use Your bounty.”

Dawood turned towards Sulaiman and said, “Thankfulness enhances a man’s
status.”

Bounties of life, wealth, and thankfulness for it
-------------------------------------------------

A great wise man has said, “Do not go on saying, ‘O’ God! give me, give
me,’ rather say, ‘O Lord! Make me thankful to You for Your bounties.
Make me realize the truth so that I may be grateful to You by
appreciating Your bounties.’”

Now these hours in the Holy month of Ramadan are divine bounty. Ask
those who have died. They yearn to be in the world to earn its benefits.
Really we should repent over our ungratefulness during these precious
nights (Shab-e-Qadr) of Ramadan, because we did not appreciate the
divine bounties. We did not recognize the Real Benefactor.

We destroyed the bounty by utilizing it inappropriately. Frittering away
of wealth is also ungratefulness. You should either eat or feed with it
but do not squander money by extravagant spending like carpeting the
staircases etc. Give it to a person who has no money. You should take
benefit from this divine bounty and not waste it.

Thankfulness with regard to money is to spend it in the path of God
-------------------------------------------------------------------

Haji Noori has described a story in *Darus Salam.* A devoutly pious
worshipper had been busy in his worship for several years. He was
informed in one of his dreams that Almighty God had decided that, “Half
of your life span will be spent in poverty and in the other half you
will be rich and wealthy. Now it is for you to choose which part of your
life you prefer first”.

He replied in that dream, “I have a wise wife. Let me consult her.” Of
course there is no harm in consulting a pious lady who is intelligent
and not mad after wealth and worldly desires.

The wise lady said, “Choose the first half for ease and needlessness.”
Thus their wealth began to increase from the next morning. Then the wife
said, “O man! As promised by God, just as He gives you bounty, you too
should spend it in His path.”

So wealth came to one hand and it was given to the poor and spent in
God’s path with the other. Thus half of his age passed. Now, he awaited
poverty. But there was no change. God’s bounties continued to rain on
them as before. He asked, “O God! How is it like this?”  
 He was informed, “You thanked Us for the bounties so We increased them
further.”  
    
***If you are grateful, I would certainly give you more, and if you are
ungrateful, My chastisement is truly severe. (14:7)***  
*** ***  
 Thankfulness of wealth is to spend it in God’s path, and similarly,
squandering it away is ingratitude and thanklessness.


