Ayat no.  36-38
===============

***In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful***  
***Glory be to Him Who created pairs of all things, of what the earth
grows, and of their kind and of what they do not know. And a sign to
them is the night: We draw forth from it the day, then lo! They are in
the dark; And the sun runs on to a term appointed for it; that is the
ordinance of the Mighty, the Knowing. (36:36-38)***  
*** ***

We created pairs from earth
---------------------------

In the description of the proofs of God’s Might and Wisdom, also in
knowing God and Resurrection, is mentioned the knowledge about Divine
power and intelligence and of making the dead alive again.  
    
***Glory be to Him Who created pairs of all things, of what the earth
grows, and of their kind and of what they do not know.***  
*** ***  
 The apparent meaning of this Holy verse is that without any blemish or
error is God Who created pairs of all that grows from earth, like
vegetables and also yourselves.

Previously man had no knowledge of these pairs. Earlier commentators
have said that ‘pairs’ means ‘kinds and sorts’ created by God. Some
others said that it means composition and combination of matter and
giving of form to matter.

Wind and insect pollination
---------------------------

The above interpretations were due to unawareness of the important
subject of the machinery of creation. Uptil now, man was ignorant of the
fact that the matter of pairing or coupling refers to the entire
universe. Formerly they believed that the case was such only in date
trees in addition to living animals or animate things.

Therefore, they thought that the date tree has male and female genders
and hence a part from male should be given to the female tree in order
to get fruits. But at last it became known that not only the date or
palm tree every plant needs pollination.

Firstly, it is not correct to say that pair means kinds and sorts;
rather it is so in Persian, where the word denotes coupling or mating of
male and female. The Almighty Lord wants to state in this verse that the
entire machinery of creation has pairing. It is not exclusive for
animals and date trees; rather in all trees the male cell reaches the
female organ. Winds are also agents of pollination.  
    
***And We send the winds fertilizing, (15:22)***  
*** ***  
 It (the air or wind) takes the male particles, which fertilize the
female tree. Insects are also among the agents of pollination. They sit
on male portions of some plants and carry them on their legs to the
female parts of other plants.

Exploding of the atom proved the pairing of things
--------------------------------------------------

   
***…and of what they do not know.***  
*** ***  
 Perhaps the hint is towards what has lately been discovered about the
atom. Hitherto it was considered that the atom is indivisible but lately
man has succeeded in splitting it with the help of advanced technology
and discovered that the atom also has a pair, an active and a passive
partner. It has electrons and protons.

So, one of the miracles of the Quranic knowledge is that since man could
not believe that all things have pairs, upto the basic unit (atom), he
said that pairs meant kinds and sorts. But finally, the fact was
revealed that God has created pairs of everything.  
    
***And of everything We have created pairs that you may be mindful…and
of their kind… (51:49)***  
*** ***  
 It is worth pondering about the astonishing roles of the male and
female in creation of a third living being. Imam Sadiq (‘a), in one of
his talks to Mufaddal reminds of the same subject. Think deeply over the
reproductive organs and in the manner of coupling and conception. The
more you think the more you are amazed.

Night—a sign of God and having benefits
---------------------------------------

   
***And a sign to them is the night:***  
*** ***  
 Think deeply over the signs and proofs of Allah’s Might. How the day
and the night occur? Apparently it is due to the movement of sun around
the earth but actually it is due to the rotation of the earth around its
own axis. Thus 24 hours of a day and a night occur. Think over these
points.  
    
***And a sign to them is the night:***  
*** ***  
 How does night occur? Allah caused the night and removed the day to
provide peace and rest for all creatures so that they can relax in the
darkness.

With reference to the words, “We draw forth from it the day…” some
commentators say that it denotes ‘taking out’ as there are the words
“from it”. But if drawing out means ‘digging out’ it should have been
Arabic ‘an’ and not ‘min’ as is the case. Hence it means taking away the
light We brought darkness. We took away the brightness of the
atmosphere, so darkness fell.  
    
***…then lo! they are in the dark;***  
*** ***  
 If His overwhelming Power had not made the earth rotate, for example,
and there had been a bright day forever, then the benefits hidden in the
night would not have been available. Moreover, were the sun to shine all
24 hours at one point, it would have burnt the place.

The Sun moves towards its resting place
---------------------------------------

   
***And the sun runs on to a term appointed for it…***  
*** ***  
 According to some it conveys that the sun is moving and it is the
movement of it going around the earth. Now this is against the facts.
The sun along with its constellation system is moving towards a very big
star, Nasr and which is finally named ‘Wakaa’. When it reaches the star,
the age of the constellation of sun will come to an end.

Thus the resting place of the sun is that huge star. That will be the
time when it will be Resurrection (Qiyamat). It is also said in modern
astronomy that the constellation of the sun is in its last age. When the
sun will fall from its course, its brightness will cease, just like our
own age.

When its end arrives all the signs of our life will also end. This
movement of the sun is not eternal and it will one day reach its resting
place.  
    
***…that is the ordinance of the Mighty, the Knowing.***  
*** ***  
 Meaning that this is the great and powerful Will and plan of God
Almighty Who is Most Wise and Intelligent. He has the super most power
over all things and He is fully aware of His entire creation.

Force of gravity ensures safety of the universe
-----------------------------------------------

   
***And (as for) the moon, We have ordained for it stages till it becomes
again as an old dry palm branch. Neither is it allowable to the sun that
it should overtake the moon, nor can the night outstrip the day; and all
float on in a sphere. (36:39-40)***  
*** ***  
 Just think over the system of night and day. During your fifty years of
age have the days and the nights changed? They have not even slightly
strayed away from their course. They have run neither faster nor slower
(earlier or later), from their fixed course.

Neither the sun overtakes the moon nor the moon overtakes the sun. How
great the force of gravity is! The sun is situated millions of miles
away yet it has a pull over the earth and other planets while the moon
is subdued by the earth. A balance between the spheres and their orbits
has been created. Why is it so?

Crescent moon and the lunar calendar
------------------------------------

The crescent moon seen on the first day of the month is like a curved
thread. Its size doubles the next night. Then by the thirteenth and
fourteenth night a whole round moon is sighted. Then from the sixteenth
it goes on thinning until in the last night, called moonless night, it
disappears completely; so the counting of days of the month may be
known. The Quran explains this in a clear way:  
    
***He it is Who made the sun a shining brightness and the moon a light,
and ordained for it mansions that you might know the computation of
years and the reckoning. Allah did not create it but with truth; He
makes the signs manifest for a people who know. (10:5)***  
*** ***  
 As for the words:  
    
***…as an old dry palm branch.***  
*** ***  
 They compare the appearance of the moon to an old withered branch of
date palm curved like an arch, yellow and weak. If you look at the moon
in the last nights of the month you will find that it is exactly so.  
 It is also like the last phase of my and your age. Repentance has much
value now and not when one sees the angel of death.  
    
***We have ordained for it stages…***  
*** ***  
 There are 27 stages for the moon. Look at it night by night, to follow
its course. Zamakhshari has written in *Rabiul Abrar,* quoting *Sharhe
Sahifa* that it was the night of fourteenth of the month when Imam
Sajjad (‘a) woke up before dawn for Tahajjud prayers.

He put his hands in the can of water for making ablution. When he raised
his head towards the sky he observed the moon. He remained in that
position until the Muezzin (caller from the minaret of the mosque)
cried: “God is the Greatest (Allahu Akbar).”  
    
***Most surely in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the
alternation of the night and the day there are signs for men who
understand. (3:190)***  
*** ***  
 Observe the greatness of God in the sky; planets in the limitless
space, especially according to modern scientific research all these
things are indeed amazing.

A big world is woven in the body of man
---------------------------------------

Here is a hint regarding the analogy between the outer horizons and
man’s inner self: As said by Ali (‘a), “Have you imagined that yours is
a little body? The truth is that a great world is rolled within you.”

Whatever is in the outer world is also found in the inner being of man.
The existence of man is also like that of the night and the day. Just
ponder, over this example:

Egyptian commentator Tantanavi has given a very nice explanation of the
flowing of blood in our entire body. From the top of head to the toe of
foot, the flow of blood is connected with the heart and it is being
cleaned therein.

The blood thus purified in the heart then runs through veins and reaches
all the organs. In half of the body there is always black blood and in
the other half red (fine). Every minute the blood circulates in our
bodies. The black blood is like the night and the pure blood like day.

Day of the soul is remembrance of God and its night is mindlessness
-------------------------------------------------------------------

Your soul also has days and nights. Its night is being regardless of
God. It is darkness. You (your soul) do not see the truth and reality.
Alas, if we sin, it is like a dark and cloudy night.  
    
***Or like utter darkness in the deep sea: there covers it a wave above
which is another wave, above which is a cloud, (layers of) utter
darkness one above another… (24:40)***  
*** ***  
 Likewise its day is the remembrance of God. The part of your life,
which passed in remembering God, is bright.

**For men of God, night is like a world-brightening day; for such bright
persons there is no dark night at all.**

This fact becomes quite clear from the very moment of death and
thereafter its truth is realized. Woe, unto him whose night is joined
with resurrection. The darkness of immorality is very bad. False beliefs
push him in such a difficult bottleneck that, in the words, of the Holy
Quran, he cannot see even his own hands.  
    
***…when he holds out his hand, he is almost unable to see it; and to
whomsoever Allah does not give light, he has no light. (24:40)***  
*** ***  
 Contrary to it there are faithful men and women whose light or
brightness runs before and in front of them and this shedding of light
(Noor) is from their right side.

Ali is right and Muawiyah wrong in everyone’s life
--------------------------------------------------

Shaykh Shustari (r.a.), in the matter under discussion that whatever is
in the greater world is also found in the little world (in ourselves),
says: In your existence there is Muhammad and also there is Abu Jahl. In
your life are both Habeel Qabeel.

He thus makes important analogies. Your Abu Jahl is the same ignorance,
mindlessness and pride in yourself. The humility for truth in your heart
and mind is Muhammad. Let not Abu Jahl in your selves overcome Muhammad.

Ali means justice and truth. Muawiyah means oppression, injustice and
falsehood. Let not oppression overcome justice and truth.

Religious blindness due to prohibited acts
------------------------------------------

A man once described his dream among friends. He said, “I saw
Imam-e-Zaman (‘a) in my dream.” His right eye was blind. Firstly it is
strange that one who does not believe in the Imam can see him in his
dream. It may be confused thoughts or superstition, or it could be
having some hidden meaning.

I told myself that if I do not reply to him, he might imagine that
Imam-e-Zaman (‘a) has something to do with this. Hence, I said, “This
Imam-e-Zaman (‘a) is there in your own self. Your own religion is blind.
I tell you from this pulpit publicly that the work you do and which is
not legal has made you blind.” The man went away and abstained from bad
deeds.

Sometimes it also so happens that this unlucky fellow allows negligence
and ignorance to overpower him whereby he becomes another Ibne Muljim.
Hate and jealousy against others chain him from head to foot.


