Ayat no.  58-59
===============

***In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful***  
***Peace: a word from a Merciful Lord.And get aside today, O guilty
ones! (36:58-59)***  
*** ***  
 On that Day which is full of terror, hardships and harshness, the
people of paradise are enjoying the bounties and tastefulness. There is
no fear for them. Rather, they do not even think of those things  
    
***They and their wives shall be in shades, reclining on raised
couches.***  
*** ***  
 They and their wives are reclining on royal divine thrones under the
divine shade.  
    
***They shall have fruits therein…***  
*** ***  
 There are heavenly fruits for the people of paradise. As I have said
earlier, the similarity is only in name while their qualities are very
different. No one in this world can even imagine the fruit available in
paradise as to what kind it would be. It has to be experienced and
perceived, it cannot be explained. Whatever the description in this
world, the reality is very much different.  
    
***…and they shall have whatever they desire.***  
*** ***  
 Whatever they want or desire is easily and immediately available to
them.

Allah directly salutes the people of Paradise
---------------------------------------------

   
***Peace: a word from a Merciful Lord. (36:58)***  
*** ***  
 That is Salam to you. Its predicate is ‘upon them’ but another
explanation is that it could be the object of the verb. That is, Salam
on the people of paradise from the Merciful Lord.

The apparent meaning of this Holy verse is that the Salam is without any
intermediary, directly from the Lord of the worlds. Salam for the
Faithful is usually through mediatories. At the moment of death, it is
through the angel of death and his assistants.  
    
***Their salutation on the day that they meet Him shall be, Peace, and
He has prepared for them an honourable reward. (33:44)***  
*** ***  
 It is one of the indirect Salams. Then, after the faithful sits on the
royal divine throne, twelve thousand angels arrive from the Lord of the
worlds saluting him.

The appointees say that the faithful is currently with a Hourie. They
seek permission to be present. Today is the day of honor, respect and
manifestation of the dignity of the Faithful. The angels arriving from
every gate say:  
    
***Peace be on you because you were constant, how excellent, is then,
the issue of the abode. (13:24)***  
*** ***  
 Greetings from God to you because of the patience you showed in the
world. You were forbearing; you fulfilled your duties painstakingly. You
remained steadfast facing hardships and calamities. You restrained
yourselves in front of luring sins. Paradise is the dwelling place of
the patient ones. No one arrives in paradise without showing patience.

This residence and rank, which you got, is as a reward of your
forbearance in your worldly life. This dwelling place is so very nice. O
Faithful! Congratulations to you for achieving this position. You are
among the lucky ones. Many congratulations, how nice is this great and
high rank. The greatest news is about eternity. It is being intimated
that this position will never end and you too are eternal.

In the world, if you possess even the best of mansions and gardens, you
have to leave them in the end. Either the possessions go away first or
the one who possesses them dies. Just also think about the sorrow, which
one has to experience at the time of losing them.

Two big defects in a beautiful palace
-------------------------------------

It is written in *Tafsir Ruhul Bayan* that: One of the past kings
founded a palace with an intention to make it unparalleled. Then, when
it was complete, he invited all sections of people to visit it. He also
kept a notebook at the exit so that anyone who observes any defect may
note it and then it can be removed.

When he checked the visitor book he saw that all had praised this palace
except two, who had criticized it. The king called these two persons.

He asked them what defect they had noted. They replied, “There are two
defects in this mansion. But what is the use when there is no remedy?”
They also said, “We are afraid, if we mention our observation, the king
may become angry.” The king said, “No harm. Tell me what you feel.”

They said, “The first defect is that this building will finally be
destroyed and another is that its owner will depart from it. How can you
fall in love with a thing, which is with you only for a little time?”

I want to point out that the house of the hereafter would be so really
good and without defects that it would never be taken away from you, nor
would it ever be destroyed.

Salam from God—what a great honor for the Faithful
--------------------------------------------------

Salamun Alaikum – O Believer! The direct Salam is for you. After those
indirect Salams, in the sight of those who are intelligent and who know,
is the great heavenly bounty in the form of this direct Salam. The
bounties of God on one side and the bounty of a dialogue with Him on the
other. God Almighty says direct Salam to His servants. This remembrance
by God and that too with congratulations and praise!

**If even once you say: O My Lord! I am Your servant**

**It makes Him happy on the Great Throne.**

O handful of dust! God talks to you. Woe unto that fellow who gets lost
in the worldly futile things and loses the opportunity of God speaking
to him.

Salam is not only a greeting but also a great and important event,
especially when it is from a spiritual person, messenger, Imam or angel.
Then what to say when it is from God Himself! It is absolute safety and
security. It is safety from every kind of pain, trouble or annihilation,
from every illness, every weakness. So much so that there will be
nothing like slumber, laziness or weariness.  
    
***A reward for what they used to do. They shall not hear therein vain
or sinful discourse, (56:24-25)***  
*** ***  
 The happiness is also absolute and there will be nothing like aversion,
hatred or jealousy. If anybody has an iota of jealousy, his place is in
the house of sick in hell so that he may become pure and clean.
Thereafter he is admitted to the House of Safety, which is one of the
names of paradise.  
    
***They shall have the abode of peace with their Lord, and He is their
guardian because of what they did. (6:127)***  
*** ***  
 There will be no trouble and illness. What is most important is that
there will be no mortality or perishing.

Letter from the Lord to the Faithful servant
--------------------------------------------

Prophet Muhammad (‘s) is reported to have said, “After a believer is
admitted to paradise, he will receive greeting from God Almighty, which
is ‘Salam from the Merciful Lord’”. In this narration, it is mentioned
under the heading of ‘Correspondence’ that an angel hands over to the
believer a letter from the Lord of the Worlds.

The letter is then opened and it would read as follows: This letter is
from the Everlasting Lord and the Protector of everything and Who never
dies. It is addressed to the one who too is alive and will never die. We
are the Lord Whose intention is sufficient for attainment of everything.
From this day, We have given you a thing whereby whatever you wish will
happen within a moment.

Has whatever I said about paradise during the last two or three days
evoked any longing in the speaker and the hearer? Have we or have we not
become those who yearn for Paradise? You ought to be like that Shia of
Ali (‘a) who said: Had it not been destined by God, people who are
faithful, might have desired that their souls should immediately leave
the body and proceed towards the high world to enter the guest house of
God.[^1]

Are you ready to seek death?
----------------------------

What is meant is not that you should want to die. It is wrong. It is
prohibited. Is there any benefit in it? Do you rightly imagine that, at
the time of your death, you will be on the right path? May be you will
first see hardships and punishments.

A man expressed to the Imam his desire for death. The gist of this
narration is that the Holy Imam asked that man, “Have you made prior
arrangements? Have you made provision for the journey? Suppose the hour
of death has arrived. Have you readied yourself for it?”

Rather you should say, ‘O God! Give me respite so that I may prepare
myself for the journey’”[^2] In these Holy nights of Ramadan, I say: O
Lord! Forgive me please. Of course this also is an introduction. Where
is the real longing for death so that pressure and trouble may decrease?
One may repent.  
    
***And if Allah should hasten the evil to men as they desire the
hastening on of good, their doom should certainly have been decreed for
them… (10:11)***  
*** ***  
 But this appeal to which Ali (‘a) refers is with regard to longing for
paradise, longing to meet God, consequent to a strong desire for reward
and to avoid chastisement. He is also afraid of divine chastisement and
fears the separation from God’s friend and hence wants that his body
should get rid of fear.

But you can see the current situation: People love everything except
paradise and divine reward and they fear everything except God’s anger
and punishment!

It is distressing to go from company to loneliness
--------------------------------------------------

See how Fatima (‘a) longed to meet God. You have heard that when the
Holy Prophet merely informed her: You are the first among my household
who will meet me, she became extremely happy. This is the sign of a
friend of God.  
    
***Say: O you who are Jews, if you think that you are the favorites of
Allah to the exclusion of other people, then invoke death If you are
truthful. (62:6)***  
*** ***  
 It is written in *Kashkol* of Shaykh Bahai that a man asked Imam Hasan
(‘a), “Why are we terrified of death?” He replied summarily that it is
because you live in an inhabited place and for you the Hereafter is a
lonely ruin. The one who has ruined his Hereafter and this world, who
has nothing in that world becomes unhappy while leaving this world.

Sinners must get separated in Mahshar
-------------------------------------

   
***And get aside today, O guilty ones! (36:59)***  
*** ***  
 It means, ‘Get away!’ It is a destined order and not a matter of
choice. In the beginning, a voice will be heard in the Field of Grand
Gathering: “Get aside, O Sinners! Today”. In the past world there was a
veil over your deeds. Nothing was known. No one knew what was in the
heart of others because a number of hypocrites had placed themselves
among the believers. But today truth is manifest.

***On the day when hidden things shall be made manifest, (86:9)***  
*** ***  
 Here there is no scope for false claims. There is nothing except what
is right, truthful and actual. The sinners must separate themselves from
every side; by their appearance, words, place and time – The sinners
must get aside until the forceful voice is heard: Whosoever is sinful,
his face is black and whosoever is among the people of paradise, his
face is bright. Thus the sinners would be recognized by their faces.  
    
***The guilty shall be recognized by their marks… (55:41)***  
*** ***  
 Some of the sinners who were fond of monkeys and pigs will get their
faces changed to these forms. Some will have the face of a dog. Some
will arrive as ants because they were arrogant. The more one is mean at
heart the more proud he is in his attitude.

The proud fellow is not known here. How can it be known? Tomorrow in the
field of Mahshar he will arrive in the form of a mean little lowly ant.
Everyone will be recognized by his appearance that will tell what kind
of a man he was in his worldly life. His belly is so bloated that he is
unable to move. Everyone will know that he took usury. He was eating
fire.  
    
***Those who swallow down usury cannot arise except as one whom Shaitan
has prostrated by (his) touch does rise. (2:275)***  
*** ***

They will not be asked, as they are known
-----------------------------------------

   
***So on that day neither man nor jinni shall be asked about his sin.
(55:39)***  
*** ***  
 They will not be asked anything as everything will be apparent in
various ways and their own organs will witness as we have seen earlier.

The late Faiz has also quoted a narration in *Ainul Yaqeen:* Every
drunkard entering the field of Mahshar will be holding a bottle of wine.
Every violinist will be holding his violin, which would be thrashing his
head. The Holy Quran also hints at this:  
    
***On the day that every soul shall find present what it has done of
good and what it has done of evil… (3:30)***  
*** ***  
 Everyone who had done a wrong and a bad deed would desire to distance
himself from it; that this cup of wine and this instrument of gambling
should remain at a distance from him but they will not go away. Strange
indeed is the situation on the Day of Judgment! Just read any chapter of
the Holy Quran. It reminds one of that World of Tomorrow. Rather it
makes us frightful.

Recite these supplications of Ali (‘a) during the remaining nights of
this Holy month: O God! Grant us safety from these frightening
conditions of Qiyamat.

One who is guilty would be given the scroll of deeds in ones left hand.
Everyone who is to go to paradise will get it in his right hand. This is
a kind of differentiating the sinners. Everyone who will raise his head
from the grave will say: Alas! Who raised us from our grave?

This is a sign of one being guilty. On the other hand would be those
who, emerging from the grave say: Thanks to God Who fulfilled His
promise and made us the inheritors of land whereby we may live in this
paradise. So how nice is the Reward of those who worked for God!  
    
***And they shall say: (All) praise is due to Allah, Who has made good
to us His promise, and He has made us inherit the land; we may abide in
the garden where we please; so goodly is the reward of the workers.
(39:74)***  
*** ***  
 Of course, in the world, everyone whose tongue was free, used to say
whatever one liked. In hell also, the people of hell are in trouble and
harassed by the tongues of one another. So it is mentioned in a
narration that the hell dweller, due to feeling of shame, in the
dangling of chains, will not even groan because of chastisement.

They will fall on hell fire like bats
-------------------------------------

You have a fire extinguisher for putting out the fire. In Qiyamat in the
front would be the people of hell. They become separated from all. They
arrive like that until they are turned away from the Sirat Bridge. The
Holy Prophet describes that it is like a moth that leaps directly into
the fire. Similarly the sinner criminals will fall in hell fire.
Everyone will take his own place. The people of paradise also will take
their place in the ‘correct seat’ (Maqad-e-Sidq).  
    
***And you shall see the angels going round about the throne glorifying
the praise of their Lord; and judgment shall be given between them with
justice, and it shall be said: All praise is due to Allah, the Lord of
the worlds. (39:75)***  
*** ***  
 O God! Grant us the Faith whereby we may understand this meaning. We
are afraid of the humiliation on the Day of Judgment tomorrow. May we
not be dishonored in front of the former and latter nations. O you, who
are having self-respect and who like to be honored!

Remove negligence from yourselves. Let your hearts not harden. Desires
and passions, aspirations and negligence reduce faith, that faith, which
makes you reach your place in the Hereafter.

Drag me to fire, perhaps I may wake up
--------------------------------------

In *Asrarus Salat* of Tabrizi, it is written in the story of the well
known scholar Allamah Shaykh Muhammad Mazandarani that when this great
man felt that he was being negligent, he used to go out of city into
wilderness along with his son and a servant. The Shaykh first asked
them, “Is it not necessary for you to obey my orders?”

After the two said ‘yes’ the Shaykh said, “I am collecting fuel wood.
You also do so.” Then he lit the fire and told the two that they drag
him towards the fire saying, “O aged sinner! Imagine that Qiyamat has
come up.” The scholar used to order them, “Drag me to the fire, that
perhaps, the heat may awaken me.”

When Ali (‘a) fired the furnace of a destitute woman, he drew his face
near that fire saying, “O Ali! Taste the heat of this fire. You have no
ability to bear the fire of hell.” [^3]

Remembrance of death cures negligence
-------------------------------------

Negligence hinders the growth of faith. Faith is weak and negligence is
more dangerous. Every one of you should, to the best of his ability,
provide means of remembrance and admonition for himself. What come in
the way of spiritual progress are the same aspirations and desires.[^4]
Unless and until you trample upon your desires and passions, how can you
develop a longing to meet God?

Ali (‘a) says, “Two things which worry me are your pursuit of desires
and lengthening of your aspirations.”[^5] If you can see that death is
near, you would slow down.

In the night of Ashura, Husain saw that Zainab was very restless. He
employed a remedy for her and it made her quiet. It was the remembrance
of death. “My grandfather was better than me. He passed away from this
world and so was my father…”

[^1]: Nahjul Balagha

[^2]: Safinatul Bihar, vol.2, pg.555

[^3]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 9

[^4]: Dua Abu Hamza Thumali

[^5]: Nahjul Balagha


