Ayat no.  60-63
===============

***In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful***  
***Did I not charge you, O children of Adam! that you should not serve
the Shaitan? Surely he is your open enemy, And that you should serve Me;
this is the right way. And certainly he led astray numerous people from
among you. What! could you not then understand? This is the hell with
which you were threatened. (36:60-63)***  
*** ***  
 Meaning, “Did We not command you from Adam till the last Messenger? Did
not all the messengers warn you, awakened you, and alerted you that you
must never worship Satan who is your open and severe enemy?

You should regard him as your enemy. If you befriend and follow him he
will lead you to a very bad place. O Children of Adam! Beware and do not
follow the paths of Satan. Do not walk on the footsteps of Satan, as he
is your deadly foe.”  
    
***…and do not follow the footsteps of the Shaitan; surely he is your
open enemy. (2:168)***  
*** ***  
 We have already discussed something about the enmity of Iblees (Satan)
and now we shall deal with the rest of this subject.

How to avoid the unknown enemy?
-------------------------------

If someone asks, “How shall we flee from an unknown and unrecognized
enemy?” The reply is, “Take him as a foe.” Well then, let us know some
of his signs so that we may oppose him. First, I will give an example
and thereafter, the aim will be explained.

If a true believer informs you that today an armed gang will invade the
town and hence the door of every house, the gate of every shop should be
closed, common sense demands that precaution should be taken and all
houses and shops must be closed down fast so that they may not be
plundered.

Now, the one who is senseless and ignorant says, “This is either
imagination or simplicity. Let us first find out whether they are Turk
or Lor (from Loristan)? Are they Arab or non-Arab? Have they weapons or
not?” What is the use of such questioning?

This is stupidity; first of all you must lock up your houses and shops
irrespective of whosoever the invaders may turn out to be. By the time
you wait for details about their nationality, you will be destroyed.

Whether you know the whereabouts and type of enemy or not, you should
get ready and stand up to face the situation so that you may not fall in
his trap and be ruined. Is Satan alone or does he have helpers? How does
he suggest evil? What is his army like? Now, do you want to be like that
fool who had gone to Sho’ba?

Is Satan male or female?
------------------------

A man went to Sho’ba who was one of the famous scholars of his time, and
said, “I have a problem. Please solve it for me.” “Sure,” said the
scholar. The man asked, “Does Satan have a wife?” Sho’ba remembered a
verse of the Holy Quran, which establishes Satan’s offspring.

So he replied, “Satan does have children. It is likely that he marries
and has wives also.” The fellow further asked, “What is the name of his
wife?” The scholar said, “Was I present in his marriage ceremony that I
should know it?”

The fact is that you must remain alert in every possible way because he
may overpower you. Block his path by worship of Allah:  
    
***And that you should serve Me; this is the right way. (36:61)***  
*** ***  
 If you have adopted the path of Faith you rely on God, Satan will have
no power on you.  
    
***Surely he has no authority over those who believe and rely on their
Lord. (16:99)***  
*** ***  
 But if you deviate from God’s path, sins will make you fall in the trap
of Satan. So beware. His trap means discarding your obligatory deeds and
even leaving the traditions of the Holy Prophet (‘s).

Whatever God and His Messenger dislike is very dear to Satan. Satan
hates prayers, Ramadan, fasts, charity, humility and every good deed.
Satan also dislikes that there should be reconciliation between two
persons who have had a disagreement.

O followers of Quran! Indeed Our Apostle has come to you explaining to
you all this, lest you say, “There came not to us a giver of good news
or a warner,” so indeed there has come to you a giver of good news and a
warner; and Allah has power over all things.  
    
***The Shaitan only desires to cause enmity and hatred to spring in your
midst by means of intoxicants and games of chance, and to keep you off
from the remembrance of Allah and from prayer. (5:19)***  
*** ***  
 Satan is entirely displeased by every good deed. He orders everything
that is prohibited by God and prohibits whatever God commands.

God says, “Spend for the poor in the path of God,” and Satan suggests,
“You will become old. You will be weak. You may become poor.”  
    
***Shaitan threatens you with poverty and enjoins you to be niggardly…
(2:268)***  
*** ***  
 Then how do people fall in his trap even after recognizing him? If it
is asked, “How can a man knowing his enemy, accept his suggestions?” A
Muslim believes and possesses the Quran. He knows that Quran is the Word
of God. The Holy Quran says, “Satan sees you and you do not see him”, as
mentioned earlier.

Then how is he deceived and indulges in sins while he has already known
the enemy and also his trap? The reply is that the Satan’s traps are
commensurate with desires of the heart. The cause is that Satan has
ability to put a cap of his choice on a man’s head if man likes it.
Whatever the Messenger of God asks for is against the selfish desires.

You see that, for getting a cinema ticket, you line up in hot sun and
stand there for long so that you may pass some time as desired by your
heart. But, at the time of prayer, the caller from the minaret of the
mosque cries: Hasten towards prayer. Masjid is the house of God, so come
towards God.  
 But that place (cinema house) is according to the inclination of heart
(one runs to it) despite knowing that it is the abode of Satan.

One knows that it will surely end in harm; that there is destruction in
it and it is likely that one may have to suffer a lifelong
disappointment and weakness thereafter. His eye falls on a woman or a
girl. Various kinds of problems and corruptions arise from such
senseless entertainments and from gambling and drinking.

On the other hand, there is a program of Majlis, supplications and
remembrance of God, which is full of true friendship and amity. They
know this and yet follow the heart’s passions and despite certainty of
destruction.

One prefers death to thirst
---------------------------

It is said that when the Umayyad caliph, Abdul Malik captured Kufa he
fell in a big calamity. He developed the terrible illness of ‘extreme
thirst’. It seemed as if there was fire inside him. The more water he
drank, the thirstier he became. The doctor said, “You should not take
any water for 24 hours. The problem is serious because if you drink more
water, you will die.”

The caliph was also very afraid. He decided not to take any water for
the next 24 hours. But how long could he remain like a camel in
waterless desert? So after a few hours he called for water even if it
meant death. Thus he drank water and died since he could not bear the
thirst.

Man can understand that he will have to suffer for entire life, but
since the suggestion of Satan is agreeable to the heart, he follows the
devil. Think of any sin. Satan has no ability to force man to indulge in
it. Satan only creates doubts and inclination. He only invites and
creates hopes of happiness.

But he can never compel man to commit a sin forcibly.  
    
***And the Shaitan shall say after the affair is decided: Surely Allah
promised you the promise of truth, and I gave you promises, then failed
to keep them to you, and I had no authority over*** ***you, except that
I called you and you obeyed me, therefore do not blame me but blame
yourselves… (14:22)***  
*** ***  
 It is man himself who is following the inclinations of his heart. How
does man commit a sin despite certainty of destruction? There have been
people who having certainty about the Divine punishment did not stop
disobeying God.

Let us pray: O Lord! Be Thou my friend and my helper so that I may
subjugate my own heart and the Satan.

How to overpower Satan
----------------------

It is narrated that the Messenger of God said, “Whenever a calamity
befalls you, Satan ignites fire into you.” Suppose your deceased son was
still young, he suggests, “What a pity! Had he been alive he would have
become a doctor or an engineer.

He would have been a great support for his father.” He goes on murmuring
thus until you can bear it no more and say something against the divine
Will. In this way, Satan wants you in trouble. Therefore you must at
once say, “Indeed we all belong to Allah and to Him we shall return.”

Let us be rational. Who in this world has remained forever, that your
son should? All are dying, one earlier and another later. So, oppose the
satanic suggestions soonest otherwise many people have become lunatic
due to such losses. (Impatient) people fall in mental illness and become
psychiatric cases.

Secondly the Prophet says that if someone has ill-treated you and Satan
instigates you saying: See, what he has done to you. He insulted you.
Why do you not retaliate? Why are you silent? You must say: I myself
have done worse than this to others. Do not always look at the wrongs
committed by others on you.

Thirdly whenever you lose money; for instance a thief stole it and you
suffered. If Satan makes you restless you must say: I thank God, Who
lifted a burden from me. My responsibility has decreased.  
 More wealth means more responsibilities. If a rich man does not give
Khums (even to the extent to one dirham) he has usurped the property of
the orphans of Aale Muhammad (‘s). Yes, those who do not pay Khums are
worthy of curse.

Or, for example, your relatives or kinsmen are in trouble or your
neighbor is in distress and you are able to help them but you don’t.
Then you will be held responsible. But if your wealth is lost you will
not be responsible any more.

Moreover, reply the Satan saying, “O devil! I myself have to go to the
grave. What if I have lost my house? It was not my personal property. It
was like a rented house. My life is but a short one.” You must
definitely fight the Satan when he makes wrong suggestions to you.
Otherwise, he worsens the mental condition of people.

In Shiraz, there was a businessman who became bankrupt. He took to a
corner of his house and sold out whatever he had and began to spend. One
day, sitting his house, he calculated, “If I sell a thing today, how
long can I subsist on its income?” He realized that it would be for
three years. He slapped his forehead and said, “What would I do after
three years? Would I sit on the road begging?”

So he committed suicide by consuming poison. Thus Satan makes man
submissive. Are you sure to live for another three years? Even if you
do, your sustenance is with God. How many ups and downs will there be
during this period?

Thus Satan does not leave man until he becomes a denier or an ungrateful
disbeliever. Such troubles befall everyone. We must accept the
admonition of the Holy Prophet and Satan must be opposed in a proper way
and he should never be followed or obeyed.

The Holy Prophet (‘s) says that after every act of charity the Satan
says, “You have lost your money. You are at loss. There are many wealthy
persons having more than you but they do not spend on charities.” Say to
yourself at once, “What I spent is less than what I have,” and look at
those who gave away all their wealth.

Whenever you worship or pray he (devil) wants that you should feel proud
of it. Say at once, “My sins are more than my good deeds.” Whenever you
recite Ziyarat of Ashura, he (Satan) wants that you should be proud. You
must at once remember how many prohibited things have been spoken by
this mouth; like lies, backbiting, false allegations, slander, insults….

Are these things not against the commands of the Holy Quran? Sometimes
it so happens that Satan defrauds people in such a way that one is
unable to understand until it is too late and then there is disbelief.
So it is absolutely essential that we should seek refuge of God
Almighty. Here is a tradition, which is both a story and a sure way to
show Satan’s deceit and the Kindness and Grace of God.

Worshipper deceived by false piety
----------------------------------

It is mentioned in the fourteenth volume of *Biharul Anwar:* In Bani
Israel, there was a worshipper always busy in prayers. Day and night, he
used to remain engaged in prayers, fasts and late-night vigils. Satan
did his best to decrease the worshipper’s faith but failed. So he called
out and a number of little satans gathered around him and asked, “What
happened?”

The Satan replied, “This worshipper has made me helpless. I have tried
very much to deviate him from God worship but he has remained
unshakable.” One of the small devils got up and said, “I am prepared to
deviate him by lust.” The big Satan said, “You are mistaken, he is not a
man of that type.” Another one said, “I may deceive him by wealth.”

The Satan said, “You are also mistaken.” Yet another small Satan said,
“I will deceive him by piety.” The big Satan said, “Yes, if there is any
way, this is the one.” Thereafter, he will be drawn towards allowed
things, then towards the prohibited and finally he will be dragged into
disbelief. Yes, you will be able to deal with him successfully.”

So the Satan arrived, spread his prayer mat and began to worship by the
side of that worshipper. He remained engaged in prayers without eating,
drinking or sleeping for days at length. The worshipper was astonished
and he expressed his desire to speak to him but the devil signaled,
“Please do not disturb me.”

The worshipper made repeated requests to speak to him and finally the
devil said, “All right, what do you want?” The worshipper asked, “How
could you attain this rank? You are engaged in worship without food or
sleep. Don’t you get tired?”

The Satan said, “First I sinned and then made such a repentance, that it
made me much stronger in worshipping.” “Please teach this unlucky fellow
also,” requested the worshipper. Satan told him, “Take these three
dirhams, go to the town and enter such and such street and step in such
and such house. Give this money to the prostitute living therein and
sleep with her. Then make repentance and you will also achieve proximity
to God as I have.”

The silly worshipper lacking in knowledge could not understand that
sinning can never bring one near to God. He was neither a scholar
himself nor did he approach one to seek knowledge.

He came down from his hilltop, went to the town and sought directions to
the prostitute’s house. People wondered what business a worshipper had
with a prostitute. However they justified that maybe he wants to reform
her and make her repent.

The worshipper went to the woman’s door who also wondered why a famous
worshipper had come to her!

It seems this woman had Faith, because she asked, “What has brought you
here? This is not a place for you!” The worshipper said, “It is none of
your business. Take this money and do your job.” The woman said, “No.
You must tell me what the matter is?” At last when the woman insisted
too much, the worshipper told her everything.

He said, “A man worshipping more rigorously than me has guided me to
visit you.” The woman said, “O worshipper! Don’t you know that avoiding
a sin is better than committing it and then repenting over it? Is it
proper to tear and then mend or it is better not to tear at all?

How did you know that after committing this sin you would be able to
repent and succeed? Suppose you succeed in making repentance, how do you
know God would accept your repentance? How will you regain your honor
and rank? That fellow was a Satan who wants to spoil your fortune and
degrade your position.”

The worshipper did not believe her till she said, “I am here. You go
back and see if that man is still there. If you find he is still there,
you may return and I would be ready for you.”

By the way, whenever Satan is disgraced, he runs away immediately. When
the worshipper came to his synagogue, the impostor was nowhere to be
found.

God is kind to those who show kindness to others
------------------------------------------------

The rest of this story is also interesting. That night was the last one
in that woman’s life for she died the next morning. The messenger of
that time got revelation from God: You should attend the funeral of that
woman. When the Prophet was astonished, came the voice from unseen: We
have forgiven her because she retrieved one of My misguided servants.
She did not allow My servant to commit a sin.

This lady was kind to the worshipper and she saw that if he commits a
sin he would be doomed. God is the Kindest of all those who are kind. He
showed kindness to that lady and pardoned her. God wants that His
servants should come to His house and keep away from Satan.

So, as far as possible, make reconciliation between the creation and the
Creator. Let not Satan assume power. God will be kind to you and to them
also.

Satan’s advises Nuh
-------------------

A narration in *Khisal* of Sadooq says: After Prophet Nuh (‘a) cursed
and the entire community, except those who had put faith in him, were
drowned, Satan came to him and said, “O Nuh! You have done a great
service to us. You have reduced our workload and sent them all to hell.
In return of this I intend to give you some advice.”

Nuh (‘a) initially drove him away but a voice from unseen urged, “Just
see what he says. His word is true,” that is, now he does not have any
adverse aim to delude you.

So Nuh said, “All right what do you want to say?” The Satan said, “There
are three instances when I don’t leave a man until he commits a sin. One
is staying with an alien woman in privacy.” For example in a house or a
closed room where none else can enter.

Unless they are husband and wife they should never be alone like this,
because the third of them is Satan who does not leave them until they
succumb to temptation.

“Secondly in the condition of anger, which is very much liked by us.
Third is in adjudicating or giving a decision.” If the judge inclines
towards one of the parties in dispute, he is ruined. In Islamic
judiciary, utmost effort must be made to remain just.

Impartiality with contending parties
------------------------------------

It is mentioned in the events of Amirul Mo-mineen (‘a) that, in the time
of Umar Ibne Khattab, a man went to court against Ali (‘a). It was
decided to approach Umar, the judge. Then Amirul Mo-mineen, along with
the complainant, went to Umar. Umar called up the name of the
complainant. For example he said: O Zaid! Please sit. But addressing
Ali, he said: O Abal Hasan! Imam Ali (‘a) looked rather harshly at Umar
who asked, “What happened?”

Imam Ali said, “Why did you discriminate between us? You gave more
respect to me by addressing me by my title, whereas you addressed him by
name. You should have addressed both either by their names or by their
titles.” In a court case, it is not permissible for the Judge to give
preference to one of the disputing parties. Likewise in greeting he
should get up for both or for neither.

Women demanding rights have objected saying why they are deprived of the
position of a judge when they have taken so much trouble, studied deeply
and know all about the law?

Now in Islamic law, it is not allowed for a woman to be a judge. This is
so because the woman is full of emotions and sentiments. Her perceptions
are in beautification and making herself attractive.  
    
***What! that which is made in ornaments… (43:18)***  
*** ***  
 A woman is not qualified to be a judge as it is impossible for her to
judge a matter without involving her emotions.

Similarly rulership and Wilayat (authoritative sanctity) is also
prohibited for woman as she cannot do full justice to the position.

Our jurisprudence is needless. We do not need to take orders from either
east or west.

Understand the job of Satan
---------------------------

If someone asks, “Since I have not seen, nor do I see Satan, then how
shall I not be deceived by him? How will I not follow him?” It is true
that you don’t see him, but surely you can understand his technique. You
know that creating doubts and making inner suggestions is the main job
of Iblees.

When he wants to mislead he drops a suggestion in the man’s heart in the
words of others also, like for example, an improper friend. Come, we may
go to such and such place and see how people opposed to Islamic
revolution engage in idle talks of irreligiousness and communism. Let us
observe the working of Satan. He either suggests himself or through the
tongue of others.

How will you know that it is a Satanic suggestion? Well whatever is
against Shariat is prohibited and who is it that orders against the
commandment of God? Only Satan. So, in such circumstances, you must
always remain alert. Some say, “If Satan is an enemy of man, then how
does man obey him?”

Satan’s instigation is accompanied by heart’s inclination
---------------------------------------------------------

Yes, this enemy has his traps. Passions and desires of heart are the
traps of Satan. The heart is pleased with all that is prohibited by God.
So the devil also inspires from there.

Here there is another test to understand this problem. Is this thought
satanic or not? Just see if it is pleasing to your heart?

One of the shorter sayings of Ali (‘a), in *Nahjul Balagha* says:
Paradise is surrounded by good and generous deeds and hell is surrounded
by passions.

According to a narration, after the creation of Paradise Jibraeel asked,
“O Lord! Who that would not come to this great house?” A voice said,
“Look at the path that leads to it.” He saw that there were pits,
thorns, straws and ghouls and so on. That is, how many deprivations one
must bear? One must control hunger for fifteen hours and control the
tongue also. In short nights it is nice to sleep and very difficult to
wake up early and yet one must pray the dawn prayer. Such is the path
leading to Paradise.

Money must be given less importance. A fifth of the profits must be
spent in God’s path. Jibraeel said, “If this is the path to Paradise
then indeed there would be few buyers.” It demands courage and requires
self-control.

Likewise when hell was created, Jibraeel asked, “O God! Who is it that
would willingly step towards this terrible torture?” Again came the
voice, “Look at the paths leading to it.” He saw that the ways were
smooth and according to the desires of the heart. Its forms are gambling
and adultery, overeating and all the things palatable to the heart,
attractive and deceiving…Jibraeel said, “O God! Many would opt for
this.”

By God! Hell is so fearsome that it should not be exchanged with worldly
pleasures. Think of the hour, which separate man from all relations,
think of the grave, Barzakh and Resurrection. What more should I say!

Even if a single flame is reduced
---------------------------------

Lessening of harm from any angle is always better. If fire burns one’s
hand but the legs are saved, it is better than getting the whole body
burnt. Or if the body is burnt but the head is spared, it is better
again. Even if only one flame is turned away, it would be a lot better.
A degree of heat makes a lot of difference. The lesser the sins the
better it would be.

In the Dua of Imam Zainul Aabedeen (‘a) you recite: O My Lord! I am
making a condition with You. You also make a condition with me. Clear me
of my past. From today, I will not turn towards any sin. I will not
proceed on the path of hell. I will not turn away my face from the
Beneficent. My Lord! I make this condition but the fulfillment of this
covenant is not possible unless You help me. My heart wants to fulfill
my covenant. But what to do, I am powerless. I have made a pledge but
please kindly help me. Please save me.

Someone asked the Imam, “If a believer makes a pledge not to sin but
thereafter breaks that vow, what should he do?”  
 Imam said, “He must return and repent again.”

“What if he repeats the breach?”

Imam said, “He should return again.”

The questioner wondered and asked, “Sir, how many times such repentance
is allowed after sinning?”

The Imam replied, “Even if one has broken Tawbah a hundred times he
should again come with a true heart for repenting. God does forgive.”

The questioner asked, “Will such attitude not decrease God’s mercy?”

Imam replied, “It is wrong to think in this way. You must always have a
good opinion about God. Come back, even if you have broken the
Tawbah.”[^1]  
    
 Man, by nature is prepared and inclined for God-worship. The slave is
obedient and humility is his instinct but he is on a crossroad. He will
be the slave or servant of either the Beneficent or of Satan. He has no
third option. He cannot say, “I will obey neither God nor devil.” He has
to choose between this world and the Hereafter. He will obey either his
desires (Satan’s suggestions) or God’s Commandments. He would be either
near God or near Satan.

Considering death near, is a sign of coming under God’s guardianship
--------------------------------------------------------------------

There is a narration in *Wafi* about one of the sermons of the Holy
Prophet. In a sermon of either Friday or Eid, the Holy Prophet (‘s)
said, “O People! When someone goes in the guardianship of Satan, he
forgets his death. Then he can see only his aspirations and desires. But
if one enters the guardianship of the Beneficent Lord and of the Aale
Muhammad (‘a) his eyes are constantly on his death and he pushes back
his aspirations and desires.”

Such a person says, “Perhaps this is the last month of Ramadan in my
life.” He sees his death near.  
 In short it is to be either with God or Satan. Either you are connected
to God related things or with Satan related things.

There is no third way. If you did not prostrate before God, if you did
not lower yourself before God then you have bowed before others than
God, be that money, passion, power or fame. Everyone who is not a
servant of God is a servant of his desires and passions. It is mentioned
in prophecies for the people of the last period of time that their women
are their qibla (to bow to).  
 While God’s path is:  
    
***And that you should serve Me; this is the right way. (36:61)***  
*** ***  
 It comprises of performing obligatory acts and giving up the prohibited
things. Satan’s way is opposed to it. It consists of giving up commanded
deeds and indulging in the unlawful. One has to be either obedient to
God or obedient to satan. Either one is worshipping or sinning.

When you worship you are the servants of Allah and when you are sinning
you are slaves of Satan. If you arrive in masjid early for Maghrib
prayers, you are God’s servant. If you turn your face towards the cinema
house, you have obeyed the Satan. One of the Satan’s sirens attracts his
followers. What is his whistle or siren?  
    
***And beguile whomsoever of them you can with your voice… (17:64)***  
*** ***  
 They are the sensual and obscene pictures displayed at the cinema
houses, which attract the followers of the devil into the theatre.

Bigger ropes of Satan for Shaykh Ansari
---------------------------------------

It is mentioned in the events of Shaykh Ansari that once a
student-scholar participating in discussions with him said, “I have seen
a dream about you but I feel ashamed of relating it.” The Shaykh said,
“Do relate it.” He said, “Last night I saw the Satan in my dream,
carrying different kinds of thin and thick ropes.

I asked him, ‘For whom is the thick rope?’ He replied, ‘It is for your
teacher, Shaykh Ansari. He requires much strength to pull him.
Yesterday, I had applied much force to drag him to the bazar but he
broke my ropes and ran away.’ Now I do not know whether this dream has
any truth in it or it is merely a disturbed vision (jumble of dreams)?”

The Shaykh smiled and said, “The cursed one has told the truth.
Yesterday, some lady guests had been to my house. It was suggested to me
that I should purchase some fruits for the guests while I did not have
enough money for this purpose. Since I had a copy of Quran, I thought I
would take it to the bazar and pawn it with the fruit seller in exchange
of fruits so that I can take it later when I have the money.

But when I approached the shop a thought came to me, “If you die, O
Murtaza! How will you repay your debt?” So I retreated immediately and
that was the breaking of that thick rope.”

More noteworthy is the last part of this dream. That respected scholar
says, “When I asked the devil, ‘Where is my rope?’ He just looked at me
and replied, ‘You do not require any rope.’”

On my word! You have no strength to restrain yourself if you see a
picture at the cinema house or just hear a melodious song.

In the cinema hall, there is a gathering of beasts—What do you get from
that gathering? But it you enter a masjid, with the total intention of
remembering God and Aale Muhammad (‘a) how many bounties you take from
there?

Pleasure of the heart is in Allah’s remembrance. So sit for a while with
those who have hearts so that you may understand the meaning of true
happiness. If possible, right from the hour you wake up in the morning
till you go to sleep at night, remain only on the path of God.

Tranquility and peace in the servant of God, restlessness in the path of Satan
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

But who is there such that he never deviates from the straight path of
God worship and always runs away from Satan, the devil who is forever
the internal enemy of every soul? The way of Satan is full of excitement
and apprehension. Contrary to it, the path of God is all peace and
security.

From the morning, look at the people in markets and offices. They are
running after money and position with much anxiety, fear and
restlessness. You do not find anyone who is contended; who is happy with
what God has provided; who is not greedy, who considers God as the
provider of sustenance.

They all rely on themselves and suffer restlessness. Visit the hospitals
to understand this trouble better. This restlessness is from Satan. You
left the path of God worship and thus fell in restlessness.

You must be a servant and slave of Only One God in every condition. When
you fall ill, it is God Who cures. If your relative passes away, it was
God’s will. It is He Who gives life and causes death. Objecting to God’s
will is against God worship. One Who had given life has now taken it
back.  
 In every circumstance, you should rely only on God.

Know that God is with you. It is only God Who solves difficult problems.
When you go out of your house you must utter God’s name and rely only on
His decision. Whatever God wishes and whatever God did (must be
accepted). This peace is the result of adopting God’s path. If you
listen to the evil suggestions of the devil you will fall on the way of
Satan.

Do not remain alone in the house because when you remain alone, the
suggestions of Satan will not leave you. Satan is always behind you.
Excessive company of women results in immorality, therefore:

Men must guard women from slipping
----------------------------------

Woman, due to her inclination to beauty and embellishments is mostly
preoccupied with these matters, but man should reform her and makes her
an obedient servant of God like he himself is. So fetch her out from the
slavery of her self and of the Satan.

It is narrated that God praises a man who wakes up for night prayers and
also wakens his wife for the same; that is to face and bow down before
God.

In brief, to remain firm on God worship is very difficult. It is indeed
hard not to fall in the trap of Satan day and night because the traps of
Satan are very luring, hence the need of help from God.

Seek help from Prayer to repel Satan
------------------------------------

The Holy Quran says:  
    
***Seek help from Prayer and fasting. (2:45)***  
*** ***  
 God is kind to us even though we are made of dust. He has ordered that
we must turn our face towards Him five times a day, to obtain the
strength to evade the Satan. We must gain power from the presence of the
Lord of the Worlds. We must offer Prayers so that our restlessness may
decrease.

All are unlucky except those who pray. All have complaints and fears.
They do not have enough power or strength to control themselves. They
fall in greed due to fear of poverty. In how many prohibited things they
indulge while saying: We worship only You and we seek help only from
You.

In every Prayer, we recite again and again: O My God! You be my helper
and friend in every difficulty. If you offer two units of Prayer in
every hardship, it becomes easy for you to bear it.

A nomadic woman and patience in calamity
----------------------------------------

In the book, *Mustatarf,* there is a story of a nomadic woman. A caravan
of Hajj pilgrims arrived at her tent in the desert for taking some rest.
So they sought permission and then entered her tent. The woman said, “O
visitors to the House of God! You are welcome. My camels have gone to
graze. I will host you when they return.”

The woman left the tent but after some time shepherds arrived weeping
and crying and told her that when her camels approached a well they
became rowdy and pushed her son into the well. “Since that well is very
deep there is no hope of your child’s survival,” they added.

The lady rushed to them and said, “We have guests. Please do not speak
loudly, otherwise they will become sad. Attending nicely to guests is a
must for Muslims.” At once she ordered that a sheep be slaughtered to
prepare food for the guests.

When the lady came to the guests they said, “We are extremely sorry that
such a tragedy took place and we interrupted you at such moment.” The
lady replied, “Respected pilgrims! I never wanted that you should know
this and be sorry for it.

But now, that you have already known, allow me to offer two units of
Prayer, because God says in Quran: Seek help through Prayer. So I must
also, to gain patience, at this moment of calamity, offer Prayer.” You
see how the nomadic woman acted according to one verse of the Quran
about Prayer.

Then the lady asked the pilgrims, “Who among you can recite the Quran?”
One of them began to recite verses relating to forbearance. The lady
said, “O God! If anyone in this world should have lived forever he would
have been the Prophet (‘s).

My Lord! You have, in Your Quran, asked us to be patient and have
promised us a good reward for doing so. I am being patient at this
moment of losing my son. You also make him a partner in this reward.
Please forgive my son.”

Then she engaged herself in her routine work as if nothing had happened.
This is the power of remembering God.

Inspire your children to offer Prayer
-------------------------------------

O the one who breaks down at every difficulty! You are catching fire.
You begin to cry and shout. When someone harms you, what do you do? You
have no ability to control yourself.  
    
***Surely man is created of a hasty temperament; being greatly grieved
when evil afflicts him, and miserly when good befalls him, except those
who pray, (70:19-22)***  
*** ***  
 You are so weak that you cannot spend out of what God has given you. As
you have no power, you fear that it will decrease. How disabled you are!
Come, offer Prayer so as to get power and strength.  
 Come and make all efforts to make your children offer Prayer. Encourage
your daughter from the age of seven and your son from twelve years.
Inspire them.

Do this, so that by the time they become responsible and answerable,
they may themselves become regular in Prayer. If you show slackness in
this matter, it will not be certain that, even after becoming major they
would pray regularly. You must gradually explain to them the religious
duties.

[^1]: Usoole Kafi, Chapter: Taubah


