Ayat no.  63-65
===============

***In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful***  
***This is the hell with which you were threatened. Enter into it this
day because you disbelieved. On that day We will set a seal upon their
mouths, and their hands shall speak to Us, and their feet shall bear
witness of what they earned. (36:63-65)***  
*** ***

God took covenant from the prophets about worshipping Only One God
------------------------------------------------------------------

   
***Did I not charge you, O children of Adam! that you should not serve
the Shaitan?***  
*** ***  
 Meaning, O people! Did I not take promise from you that you will not
worship Satan?

By this is meant either the ethereal world or it is an oath taken
through knowledge and nature. Or it may mean the covenant obtained by
God from the prophets and divine books, particularly through the Holy
Quran and the last Prophet Muhammad (‘s). Anyone who accepts Quran must
know that monotheism or worship of Only One God is the foremost
condition.

Muslim is one who has vowed that he will worship Only One God; that he
will not worship the desires of his heart or the Satan. He will not obey
but the commands of Only One God.

This is the Straight Path, which means monotheism, the worship of none
or nothing but Only One God.  
    
***And certainly he led astray numerous people from among you.***  
*** ***  
 This is mentioned so that the hearer may hate Satan worship. God says,
“By all means and in every way, Satan has misguided many people before
you. So will you not take lesson?” Will you not think over it? Will you
not look in front of you and observe how many people are led astray by
the devil? Remember the fate of the people of Aad, Thamood, Lut, Pharaoh
and Nuh.

How many people are there about whom everyone knows that they fell in
Satan’s trap and died faithless; who spent their life in sins following
their desires and passions and became losers both in this world and in
the Hereafter.

Instead of making life long efforts to gather wealth only to leave it
behind and then feel ashamed, O man! You should spend your life in
worshipping God and in earning virtues and making good use of wealth. O
intelligent man! Take lesson.  
    
***This is the hell with which you were threatened.***  
*** ***  
 This is the same hell about which you were warned.

A hundred thousand ropes of hell in the hands of a hundred thousand angels
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

According to a narration related from Imam Sadiq (‘a) hell has a hundred
thousand ropes and that every rope is in the hands of a hundred thousand
angels.[^1] One hundred thousand angels are pulling hell towards the
field of Grand gathering. What a frightening scene! The furious flames
leaping out of hell are like mountains. The sight would makes everyone
fall on their knees.  
    
***And you shall see every nation kneeling down… (45:28)***  
*** ***  
 So much so that all except Prophet Muhammad (‘s) will worry about their
own selves. As mentioned in some narrations and in other verses of the
Holy Quran, good tidings are given to some who will be protected from
this terror.  
    
***Whoever brings good, he shall have better than it; and they shall be
secure from terror on the day. (27:89)***  
*** ***

Wilayat of Aale Muhammad is protection from the terror of Qiyamat
-----------------------------------------------------------------

One who has accepted the guidance and friendship of Aale Muhammad (‘s),
if he had earned safety in his lifetime, if he had lived in the
governance of his Master; he is now in safety and protection. An
announcer would announce, “This is the hell of which you were warned.
You were told to be afraid of it. Now you have reached here.”  
    
***Enter into it this day because you disbelieved.***  
*** ***  
 Here ‘enter it’ means go inside it or it may also denote ‘taste it’ –
enter or taste the chastisement of God’s anger because you were a
denier.

Some scholars have mentioned a point about the word ‘enter’, which has
occurred many times in Quran. There is a difference between the Arabic
‘Islawhaa’ and ‘Udkhuloohaa’. It is generally understood that ‘Islawhaa’
means entering for good, that is, there will be no exit.

Going into hell is of two kinds. One is such that there is a way for
exit after remaining in it for a time. ‘Islawhaa’ means stick in hell
from where there is no exit. For all who die in a state of denial it is
‘Islawhaa’ – They do not stick permanently (without an exit) who did not
gave a lie to God turning their backs to Him. Those others, who were not
disbelievers, will be released from hell one day.

A sinner believer will get salvation at last
--------------------------------------------

However those who are not deniers and who did not gave a lie to God and
His Prophet but who had also done wrong deeds, about them Imam Ali bin
Moosa Reza (‘a) is reported to have said[^2] that they will go to hell
but will not remain therein forever. They will come out, at last, by
intercession. God is able, due to His Kindness and Mercy to take us up
with Faith from this world.

Thus the verse implies that you dwell in the fire from which there is no
exit because of your denial.  
    
***On that day We will set a seal upon their mouths, and their hands
shall speak to Us, and their feet shall bear witness of what they
earned.***  
*** ***  
 Today that is the Great Resurrection, O deniers! We seal your mouths
and now your hands and feet will testify what you have done using them
in the worldly life.

Tongues of the liars will be sealed, not of the confessors
----------------------------------------------------------

In this Holy verses there is a point relating to: We will seal their
mouths. Imam Reza (‘a) says that it is for the disbelievers, that is
those who died in a state of disbelief. Their tongue is sealed because
the tongue of every denier is not truthful, neither in the world nor in
the Hereafter. His tongue always utters falsehood. He denies makes false
claims.

Nothing makes a man’s tongue truthful except Faith in heart, in the
absence of which man falsely claims to be pious and it is habit for such
people. There is a proverb in Persian: No one says that his curd is
sour.

The tongue of only that person is truthful whose heart is full of Faith.
Prophet Muhammad (‘s) is reported to have said, “By the One in Whose
power is my life, the faith of anyone of you does not become good until
his tongue is good and the tongue of one does not become good until his
heart has become good.”[^3]

So long as the heart is sick, it has pride, it does not have humility
and it is unwell. With a diseased soul the tongue too falls sick. Such a
tongue can say nothing except make hollow claims of piety. One who is
crooked here is crooked in the Hereafter as well, to such an extent that
when his scroll of deeds is shown to him he says, “This is not mine.”

In Qiyamat, truth is manifested. It is the Day when secrets are exposed.
It is the absolute Truth (Haqqah).

Therefore a tongue, which is false and crooked, will be sealed for the
establishment of justice and manifestation of truth. His organs will be
made to speak. Hand will say what it did and foot will say where it
went. What the eyes saw? The heart will say to what it harbored within
itself.  
    
***And follow not that of which you have not the knowledge; surely the
hearing and the sight and the heart, all of these, shall be questioned
about that. (17:36)***  
*** ***  
 Everything becomes so much open that by no means they can be denied.
The legs will speak out: I had gone to such and such place. So much so
that the tongue too will testify against itself.

Several witnesses in the court of divine justice
------------------------------------------------

The Day of Resurrection will be the day of full and complete
manifestation of Divine Justice. The good of the tiniest good deed will
not be omitted. Organs of body will start speaking for the manifestation
of Justice and for the finality of arguments.

In Islam, it is God’s commandment that every fact can be established
with the testimony of two just witnesses. This is clear argument of
religion. There must be either self-confession or the appearance of two
just and selfless witnesses with stipulated conditions. But tomorrow on
the Day of Resurrection, notwithstanding that man himself is aware:  
    
***…your own self is sufficient as a reckoner against you this day.
(17:14)***  
*** ***  
 The fellow does not confess. But then so many testimonies begin to pour
from every side that he has to submit willy-nilly. The first witnesses
are his physical organs. Can he deny the testimony of his own organs?
The second witness is the ground. Every part of earth on which one
sinned will speak out. Likewise if he had worshipped God that part of
earth will testify to that also.  
    
***On that day she shall tell her news… (99:4)***  
*** ***  
 Time too will testify. Qiyamat is the world of gathering. The days of
one’s lifespan become a stage of time (existence) and it will testify
how and what happened. We recite in the daily supplications of Imam
Sajjad (‘a): O day! You have ended and you will testify what I have
done.

Among the witnesses are also the two recording angels. The Imam of every
age will testify about the deeds of the people of his time. The Holy
Quran also says:  
    
***And thus We have made you a medium (just) nation that you may be the
bearers of witness to the people and (that) the Apostle may be a bearer
of witness to you; and We did not make that which you would have to be
the qiblah but that We might distinguish him who follows the Apostle
from him who turns back upon his heels, and this was surely hard except
for those whom Allah has guided aright; and Allah was not going to make
your faith to be fruitless; most surely Allah is Affectionate, Merciful
to the people. (2:143)***  
*** ***  
 Also we recite in the Ziyarat Jamia that martyrs are witnesses of the
world. The Imams are the witnesses over the deeds of the people of their
respective age. Imam Hujjat Ibnul Hasan (‘a) must be the witness of time
and space on the day of Divine Justice. Angles will testify and so also
all the organs of sinners.

No testimony against sinners who repent
---------------------------------------

Woe unto us if we have to stand up when this Divine Court is
established. Imam Sadiq (‘a) has given a good tiding. He says, as
reported in the chapter of Repentance in *Usul Kafi:* When a servant
indulges in a sin and then he repents over it (special repentance for
this particular sin, as said by some) the angels recording the deeds are
ordered: As this servant has repented, do not testify against him in the
matter of this sin. Likewise the earth or ground is ordered: Do not
testify against this person. Thus God prevents witnesses from testifying
against the one who has repented for his sin.

If one has made efforts for repentance, the witness is summoned to
testify about his repentance. They say, “O Lord! This person was saying,
‘Please pardon me (Al Afw)’; he has appealed for forgiveness.” All the
organs testify to his goodness.  
    
***…so these are they of whom Allah changes the evil deeds to good ones;
and Allah is Forgiving, Merciful. (25:70)***  
*** ***  
 However the tongues of the believers are free. Sealing of mouth was the
‘recompense’ of one whose tongue had refrained from saying, “O God”. But
in the case of those who used to say all their life, “O Allah! There is
no god except Allah, truly, truly we worship You…”, their mouths are
open here also.

Above all witnesses is the everlasting Almighty and Unique God. One of
its reasons is that though acceptance or rejection (of truth) is
voluntary, witnessing is not. The heart accepts or rejects whatever it
likes. Mouths are being sealed. The exception is testimony to Truth and
factuality. Nothing except truth is required and truth becomes manifest
through limbs and organs. The tongue itself confesses the truth…

How limbs and organs testify?
-----------------------------

Some have interpreted saying it means witness of the condition. When one
comes in the Qiyamat gathering tomorrow, his appearance and condition
testify what kind of a man he was.  
    
***The guilty shall be recognized by their marks… (55:41)***  
*** ***  
 For example, fire erupts from his tongue or he is chewing his protruded
tongue with his own teeth and blood and pus drip therefrom. All would
know he had been a scholar without actions, that is, one who asked
others to do good but did not do so himself. This condition shows his
falsehood. Or a fellow arrives with a bloated stomach, so big that it is
impossible for him to move because of its weight. This man took usury.  
    
***Those who swallow down usury cannot arise except as one whom Shaitan
has prostrated by (his) touch does rise. (2:275)***  
*** ***  
 The shapes will show what kind of a fellow one was in the world, and
what sins one had committed. Therefore, if his forehead is radiant, it
means he was regularly prostrating to God. Bright foreheads are due to
prostrations for God. Or the handing over of the scroll of deeds in the
right hand indicates that he had done more good deeds.

In brief, some have said that the meaning of “speaking of organs” means
testimony through condition or appearance as testified by the above
verse (Surah Rehman 55:41).

However it seems that more correct is what most of the commentators have
said and it is besides the witness through conditions, the apparent
meaning of the Holy verse is that limbs and organs will speak out. Still
clearer is the Holy verse:  
    
***And they shall say to their skins: Why have you borne witness against
us? They shall say: Allah Who makes everything speak has made us speak…
(41:21)***  
*** ***  
 So, after the testimony of his limbs and organs, the poor fellow
complains to his organs, “Why did you testify against me?” The organs
reply, “God made us speak out (This is the meaning of another part of
the same verse explaining that the God Who gave the faculty of speaking
to all, made us also speak out).”

For God Almighty, making hands and feet speak is just like speaking of the tongue
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The reason why some have interpreted in another way is because they
thought that talking is only possible with the tongue, and so how can
hands and feet talk? Hence they have interpreted that the witnessing
will be by way of condition or appearance. The explanation is that
speaking is not due to and only through tongue; it is only a lump of
flesh.

But God Almighty, with His subduing and overwhelming power decided that
words should be heard by the moving of the human tongue at a particular
place in the mouth, aided by the windpipe. It is only the Will of God
and His making. No cause and effect is in question. Otherwise tongue of
a cow and a donkey are bigger.

Thus it is known that talking or speaking is merely the Will of God for
man. This distinction is granted by God only to man. This is one of the
innumerable honors given to man by God, the greatness of which can be
appreciated by intelligence. Then the tongue becomes a translator of his
thoughts, saying words like “Allah is the Greatest”, “Glory be to
Allah”. An animal has no such sense and intelligence, so it cannot
appreciate in this way.

Every intelligent person understands that the original faculty of speech
is not restricted to the tongue. Rather it is a special gift from God to
man. The Almighty Lord of the Worlds Who made His Might manifest in this
manner will make your fingers talk on the Day of Judgment. What
difference is there between this part of the body and that?

Do you remember that with this very finger you had pointed to such and
such person to humiliate him? Or what you wrote, holding a pen by these
fingers. You had misused these fingers to slap a believer. It is
narrated that even the hair on one’s body will begin to speak and
testify.

Another proof is also mentioned in the Holy Quran in the verse referred
above. Objection will be taken to these organs, “Why did you testify
against us?” They will reply, “The Almighty God Who made all others
speak made us also speak.”

The ability to speak is common to all in this universe. All the
particles of the existing universe, which in our eyes are dumb, from the
view of the unseen world they are capable of speech.  
    
***The seven heavens declare His glory and the earth (too), and those
who are in them; and there is not a single thing but glorifies Him with
His praise… (17:44)***  
*** ***  
 After death, man goes to the ethereal world. If now you understand, you
can hear the voice in the cosmos. Walls and doors are saying, “Glory be
to God”. The organs of your own body also are glorifying God. Of course
this glorification is beyond the comprehension of matter and hence man
does not understand it.  
    
***…but you do not understand their glorification… (17:44)***  
*** ***  
 Tomorrow, on the Day of Judgment, the same God Who has made all the
particles of the universe speak in the spiritual plane, will make them
speak and order them to confess what they had done in the world.

Even the tiniest deed will not be omitted and in that Grand Witness Box
in the Supreme Court, witnesses will not be able to lie. They will
testify absolutely truthfully. However they will not testify to sins for
which man had sincerely repented, as mentioned in some narrations.

Count glorification on your fingertips, they will testify to it
---------------------------------------------------------------

There is a narration in the *Tafsir Ruhul Bayan* the summary of which is
that the Holy Prophet (‘s) told some women, “Say, ‘Glory be to Allah’
very often.” In another tradition it is mentioned that, “During the
ascension, I saw an angel busy making a palace. He was placing a gold
brick and then a silver one. Then he stopped for a while.” I asked him,
‘Why do you stop working?’

He replied, ‘Whenever a believer glorifies God, we build a house for him
here. When he stops, we also halt the construction.’” So the Prophet
said, “Count the glorifications on your fingertips. Tomorrow these
fingertips will give witness for you.”

In the days of early Islam, there were no rosaries like we have today.
People used to count recitations on their finger digits. Every finger
has three digits. Ten fingers can count upto thirty.

These fingers will testify, “O Lord! This servant of yours had recited
Your glory with these fingers.”

Rosary (Tasbih) of Kerbala soil is a part of Paradise
-----------------------------------------------------

Let us see about the Tasbih. The first to prepare a Tasbih was Fatima
(s.a.). She took up some soil from the grave of Hamzah, the leader of
martyrs in Uhad and made a rosary for remembering Allah constantly and
frequently.

In the days of Imam Sadiq (‘a), he recommended, “Take benefit of the
soil of Kerbala for making rosaries. If such a rosary is made of the
earth of the grave of Husain (‘a), it will fetch rewards even without
recitation.”

Since the particles of the soil of the grave of Husain in Kerbala
themselves are busy glorifying God, the one holding its rosary will
benefit even when he does not recite anything. Shaykh Shustari (a.r.)
says, “This glorification is not like all other glorifications made by
everything in the world. This one is extraordinary as it belongs to a
part of paradise.” A tradition says, “O Jabir! Visit the grave of Husain
(‘a). Verily Kerbala is a part of paradise.”

[^1]: Biharul Anwar vol.3

[^2]: Uyoonul Akhbar

[^3]: Nahjul Balagha


