Ayat no.  66-67
===============

***In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful***  
***And if We please We would certainly put out their eyes, then they
would run about groping for the way, but how should they see? And if We
please We would surely transform them in their place, then they would
not be able to go on, nor will they return. (36:66-67)***  
*** ***  
 The apparent meaning of the verse is that if We wish We can rub out
their eyes. The Arabic word ‘Tamas’ means rubbing out in such a way that
no sign of it remains. ‘Tamas’ means total erasing and rubbing out after
which there will not be any sign or mark that an eye existed at that
place.  
    
***…then they would run about groping for the way,***  
*** ***  
 That is they would proceed on a path, which is straight, without any
curve, but they cannot see. How can one go on the right path whose eyes
are totally removed?  
    
***And if We please We would surely transform them in their place, then
they would not be able to go on, nor will they return. (36:67)***  
*** ***  
 Meaning, if We wish we may disfigure them. Arabic word ‘Maskh’ means to
transform the shape badly. It means to take away the beautiful shape of
man and turn him into an ugly beast.  
    
***in their place,***  
 That means, We can do this without any delay.  
    
***…then they would not be able to go on, nor will they return.***  
*** ***  
 After this the path of going ahead or turning back is closed on them.
They can neither advance nor retreat.

Deniers warned of the chastisement that befell the people of Lut
----------------------------------------------------------------

These two verses are among the most threatening verses from God for
common disbelievers. Though, apparently, they were revealed in Mecca,
they hint at all deniers. Everyone who did not believe in God and in the
Hereafter and who said jokingly, “These are meaningless talks of the
ancient people, it is superstition.”

If God wills, He makes such people blind in such a way that their eyes
are also blotted out. He did the same to the rebellious people of
Prophet Lut.

When the angels of punishment arrived at Lut’s, his people rushed to his
house demanding that the guests be handed over to them for committing
sodomy. Lut admonished them in every manner but to no avail. Then Lut
said in a sorrowful way, “If only I had the strength to deflect them.”  
 One of these angels signaled and all of them became blind. No sign of
an eye remained on their face.  
    
***And if We please We would certainly put out their eyes…***  
*** ***  
 O one who has become bold in sinning and who is accustomed to
voyeurism! God is able to blind you in such a way that there will not
remain any trace thereof.

May the eyes be blind, which cannot see you
-------------------------------------------

Here is one fine point to ponder. Why is the calamity of “Tamas”
mentioned among several other calamities? The secret, perhaps, is that
the punishment is proportionate to the sin. One who refuses to see the
Truth, which is so manifest, deserves to be blinded. If you can observe
the power of God and see life and death, how do you then deny Qiyamat?

A narration in *Usul Kafi* says: One of the wise sayings of Luqman is,
“I wonder about the one who does not believe in Qiyamat and in becoming
alive after his death when he dies and becomes alive every night and
day.” Sleep is the brother of death.

When you are asleep it is your minor death. When you wake up it is as if
you have become alive again. Thus you see life and death every day and
night and ignore the truth asking, “Will we, after we are dead, become
alive again?”  
    
***What! when we are dead and have become dust? That is a far (from
probable) return. (50:3)***  
*** ***  
 After this blindness they are unable to find the path.  
    
***but how should they see?***  
*** ***  
 How will you see? So long as this bounty is not snatched away from you,
observe the Signs of God. Take benefit from it. Know you Lord better. Do
something for the accounting of the Day of Judgment.  
 Another hint is about the haste in punishment. The one whose heart is
blind in this world will, on the Day of Judgment, find himself blind in
the eyes also.  
    
***And whoever is blind in this, he shall (also) be blind in the
hereafter; and more erring from the way. (17:72)***  
*** ***  
 Meaning that if We want We can make them blind like their hearts are
blind.  
 The lesson here is for the thankfulness for the bounty of the faculty
of sight. A man’s looking or seeing is different from the looking and
seeing of a cow. His seeing signifies his taking lessons.

We would transform them according to their habits
-------------------------------------------------

   
***And if We please We would surely transform them in their place, then
they would not be able to go on, nor will they return.***  
*** ***  
 Arabic “Maskh” means to change the shape into an ugly and a horrible
one. Here it means changing man’s shape into that of a beast. According
to the lexicon it is a change for the worse. It could be transforming
into a pig, monkey, snake or anything else. A narration says, “A monkey
or a pig would look beautiful when compared to it.”

Allah says, “If We so wish We may disfigure them at their place. O one
who left the path of religion and took the path of desires and passions!
We may, if We so desire, change your outward appearance into your inward
state.”

Pig is an example of uncontrolled desires. It eats up every dirty thing
and has no parallel in carnal desires. Sometimes it moves long distances
while copulating. One who acts like a pig in gratifying his carnal
desires and that does not fear committing a prohibited deed, is actually
a pig. His face will, on the Day of Judgment, become like that of a pig.
If God so wills, such disfiguration can take place here also and very
swiftly.

Prophet Muhammad (‘s) is reported to have said that Allah says about him
in a Holy verse:  
    
***We have not sent you but as a mercy for the worlds. (21:107)***  
*** ***  
 One of the mercies relating to the Prophet (‘s) is that in case of past
communities the people’s internal conditions used to manifest very soon.
Shapes of a number of people had been changed badly. But, for the
followers of Muhammad (‘s), God has put a veil over it.

A greedy scholar turned into a dog
----------------------------------

According to a narration, a scholar believing in Torah, and his teacher
were with Prophet Moosa (‘a). When Moosa (‘a) did not see them for quite
a long time, he asked Jibraeel (‘a) about their fate. Jibraeel replied,
“Look at the gate of the house.” Moosa saw a dog and exclaimed, “This is
strange! What has happened?” His interior has become manifest in this
way! Jibraeel said, “He was always after wealth.”

The wealth worshipper man’s interior is like an animal. An ant is very
greedy in gathering provision. Anyone whose only ambition is to gather
wealth is bound to get the shape of an animal in the Hereafter.

Inattentiveness in Prayer
-------------------------

*Asrarus Salat* by Shahid Thani (a.m.) has a tradition related from the
Holy Prophet (‘s): “One who turns his face this side and that, during
Prayer, does he not fear that God Almighty will make his face like a
donkey?”

The Shahid says, “What is meant here is the form of the heart.” His
otherworldly appearance will be like that of a donkey. He does not know
before whom or in front of whom he is standing. What does he intend to
do? We should try to emulate the Imams. Amirul Mo-mineen (‘a) and Hasan
Mujtaba (‘a) were trembling at the time of Prayer. At least do not be
disrespectful. One, who does not show respect for God Almighty, is no
different from an animal.

If Allah wishes He can make the otherworldly appearance manifest here in
this world also. But for this Ummah of Muhammad (‘s) the matter is
postponed till the Day of Judgment.  
 O Lord! Who displays the goodness and Who hides the bad deeds!

O God! Make my interior like my outward appearance, that is, good
looking. May it not be so that I remain like a man in this world, but
God forbid, I become an animal (in the Hereafter).  
 In a narration it is said that there are some whose faces are like men
but their hearts like Satan’s.


