Ayat no.  66-68
===============

***In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful***  
***And if We please We would certainly put out their eyes, then they
would run about groping for the way, but how should they see? And if We
please We would surely transform them in their place, then they would
not be able to go on, nor will they return. And whomsoever We cause to
live long, We reduce (him) to an abject state in constitution; do they
not then understand? (36:66-68)***  
*** ***

Haste in punishment to prevent the convict from flight
------------------------------------------------------

So far we have discussed upto the point where God mentions two kinds of
chastisements for the disbelievers. It is also a warning to those whom
God gave eyes to see the signs of God and take lesson. He made you look
at the growing of vegetables from the earth, to understand the Might of
God.

At the end of this Surah, He says that such seeing should give you the
proof of the hereafter. But what a pity that they normally drown
themselves in the bounties but never see the One Who gave these
bounties!

Verily a man to whom God gave eyes but he does not see and observe the
signs of God’s Might deserves that he should be blinded. So He says,
“They are such that their eyes should be wiped out.” Man is born with
under-developed senses like an insect, which only has the feelings of
touch and taste. He gains other faculties gradually.

At the end of his life he again, if he gets a long life, becomes like a
newborn child. His sight and hearing go away and his memory stops
functioning. God, Who takes away these powers gradually in the old age
of man, can do this in an instant in the Hereafter.

Moreover just as these verses are arguments for the former people, they
are for Muslims also so that they may take lesson.

Benefit from the bounty of youth
--------------------------------

O Youths! Who have not yet reached the old age, derive benefit from the
bounty of youth. Your body is perfect and healthy. As long as your ears
function, listen to the sermons of knowledge and morals. So far as your
eyes can see, look at the signs of God and take lessons, read traditions
and Quran. So long as your legs are working, attend and go to the
gatherings of knowledge and see learned people and attend masjids and
Holy graves.

Gain honor, be it in genuflection (Rukoo), prostration or while standing
in Prayer. In every condition take benefit of the God-given strength.

Imam Sadiq (‘a) reportedly, used to recite the recitations of bowings
and prostrations etc. five hundred times (the narrator says that he
counted only this much). It is mentioned in *Kashful Ghummah* that Imam
Sajjad (‘a) used to recite words of divine glorification and submission
a thousand times. But as the age advances, this strength does not
remain. Man is not able to arise at mid-night in winter, to make
ablution and try to remain in prostration for an hour.

Make the most of five things before the arrival of their opposites
------------------------------------------------------------------

It is quoted in Majlisi’s *Ainul Hayat* that the Holy Prophet (‘s) once
said, “O Abu Zar! Take benefit of five things before you face their
opposites. Youth before old age,” Religious responsibility starts from
the beginning till at the most thirty-three or forty years of age.

Beyond forty it is old age. O those who have not reached forty!
Appreciate your youthfulness. Do not spend your prime life in
wrongdoing. Inability in childhood, mischief making in youth and
weakness in old age! When would you worship God?

Take full benefit of your needlessness before you enter the state of
neediness. Before you are unable to do things, do as many good deeds as
possible. A man who is healthy and safe must make most of these bounties
before they are taken away from him or he falls ill.

One of the scholars fell in trouble. He was unable to speak as he was in
a coma. O those who are able to move your tongues easily! Remember that
a time will come when you will want to utter the Kalima (Testimony of
faith) or a word by your tongue but you will not be able to do so. So
take benefit of your ability now.

A man faces several calamities in his life. One who is well to do now
should make provision for the onward journey towards God by remembering
Him more and more. He should act before he is disabled.

The most important matter is that man must make the most of his life
before his death. Every breath is a pearl, which leads you towards God
as mentioned in a supplication of Imam Zainul Aabedeen (‘a). Seek it
from God in right earnest.

My Lord! Kindly make me successful in what I will be asked tomorrow on
the Day of Judgment. Give me respite in the few years, which are left
from my life so that I may pass them completely in Your worship and in
Your service.

God makes you strong from a weak state and again returns you to weakness
------------------------------------------------------------------------

From the first moment of conception in womb, from the very start of
creation, it is strengthening and gaining of physical abilities. Man’s
creation is complete after four months. Then, after the blowing of
spirit in the body, the baby gets strength to be born physically.  
    
***Surely We have created man from a small life-germ uniting (itself):
We mean to try him, so We have made him hearing, seeing. (76:2)***  
*** ***  
 The last period of attaining strength, as per a narration from Imam
Sadiq (‘a), is the age of thirty-three. Perhaps, it is so in most cases.
One who attains the age of thirty-three years is the one for whom it is
said: He has reached the age of perfection.

It is stagnation from the age of thirty-three to forty years, during
which the strength neither increases nor decreases. After this, it is
the downward line on graph, the arch showing a marked decline of
strength.

“Nakasa” in Arabic means returning or coming back. Now one returns to
weakness after gaining strength. Just as his strength was growing year
after year upto the age of thirty-three, now after forty, it goes on
decreasing. Whatever was given to him is now being taken back:  
    
***Allah is He Who created you from a state of weakness then He gave
strength after weakness, then ordained weakness and hoary hair after
strength… (30:54)***  
*** ***  
 The teeth, which grew from childhood, now begin to weaken. “Nakasa” in
creation means growing weakness in the body. It may reach to such an
extent that one becomes absolutely senseless knowing nothing.  
    
***And Allah has created you, then He causes you to die, and of you is
he who is brought back to the worst part of life, so that after having
knowledge he does not know anything… (16:70)***  
*** ***

Weakness shows up year after year or even earlier
-------------------------------------------------

Some have mentioned that from the age of forty it is declining and
taking away of strength and ability, which man can see himself in his
appearance year after year. For example, if one takes his photograph at
the age of forty-one and if he looks at his physical features after a
year comparing it with the previous year’s photo, he would notice the
weakness himself. This decline can be seen every month between fifty and
sixty years.

By the passing of every month one notices his weakness. This downward
trend can then be seen on a weekly basis from the age of sixty to
seventy years. Then from seventy to eighty years one can observe this
change on a daily basis. From eighty to ninety years it is noticed every
hour. After that there is decline with every breath.

Then, if he still remains alive he again becomes like a baby. All his
faculties are gone and he understands nothing. Such is the case most of
the time. Of course, some see this decline even before forty and in
others it is after a long time. But, according to a tradition of the
Holy Prophet (‘s), “The life span of most of my Ummah is between sixty
and seventy years.”[^1]

Another narration says that those who are between sixty and seventy are
in the battlefield of death.  
 There is a tradition in vol. 3 of *Biharul Anwar* wherein the narrator
says, “We were with Imam Sadiq (‘a) on the outskirts of Medina. The Imam
looked at Uhad Mountain and asked the narrator, ‘Can you see the crevice
in the mountain?’

‘Yes sir”, I replied. The Imam said, ‘But I can see it no more.’ When I
asked, “What happened?” He replied, “I have become old. Weak eyesight is
a sign of old age. The second sign is the bending of back and the third
feebleness of legs.”

So understand that you are in control of God
--------------------------------------------

   
***…do they not then understand? (36:68)***  
*** ***  
 The first thing to be understood by man is this weakness, which proves
that he is under the absolute control of God.  
    
***And He is the Supreme, above His servants… (6:61)***  
*** ***  
 It is clear to you where He brought you from your cradle and then again
brought you back towards weakness. Therefore, know that you are under
nourishment of someone else Who makes you youthful and then makes you
aged; Who gives you strength and then takes it back. It is not in your
control.

Three wishes of the prince
--------------------------

In the details about Alexander, it is mentioned that he once asked the
prince of a country annexed by him, “Be my attendant and come along with
me. I will give you whatever you ask.” The prince said, “I have only
three needs if you can fulfill them. Firstly make me retain my youth
forever.” “I cannot do that for myself,” confessed Alexander. The prince
continued, “Secondly, ensure that I remain healthy and strong and
lastly, make me immortal.” Alexander said, “I cannot provide any of
these and neither can anyone else.”

All this is by the Source of Power, God Himself. All doctors with all
their medical appliances, aids and equipments cannot stop, defer, or
postpone death. So everyone should know that they are helpless servants
in total control of God alone.  
    
***Allah sets forth a parable: (consider) a slave, the property of
another, (who) has no power over anything… (16:75)***  
*** ***

Attain good abilities by forty
------------------------------

Do you not ponder over your weakness and frailty so that you may realize
that the giver and recollector, the preserver, the bestower of strength
and the confiscator is He and only He? Stop being egoistic as you are
actually a subject ruled over by the Supreme King, that is Allah; so
your attitude and behavior should also be like that of a subject.

Also do you not realize from this decline of strength that this would
finally end in death? So, until you reach the age of decline make the
most of your strength. During the remaining years of your life, provide
oil for the lamp of life, which would be put out some day; so that when
it is off you may have something with you.

Before the end of your life, do something for yourself. That is why it
is said, “Toil until you have not reached the age of forty.” Cultivate
good habits and desired virtues. Be an intelligent servant and subject.
Whatever you earn by the age of forty will remain with you thereafter.

[^1]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 3


