Ayat no.  71-76
===============

***In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful***  
***Do they not see that We have created cattle for them, out of what Our
hands have wrought, so they are their masters? And We have subjected
them to them, so some of them they have to ride upon, and some of them
they eat. And therein they have advantages and drinks; will they not
then be grateful? And they have taken gods besides Allah that they may
be helped. (But) they shall not be able to assist them, and they shall
be a host brought up before them. Therefore let not their speech grieve
you; surely We know what they do in secret and what they do openly.
(36:71-76)***

God created the quadrupeds for you
----------------------------------

Let us ponder on the above verses. Did this man not see whom God has
given intelligence? Does he not see that We created him with Our hands
and created the quadrupeds, which are owned by them? Just think upon it.
Firstly, how We created and secondly, how We gave them under your
control; that is man is now their owner. God decided thus.

Otherwise, the One Who is their Creator is also their Owner in the true
sense. If God does not make it man’s property, man would not be able to
benefit from them. God created sheep so that man may take benefit from
them in various ways. He may eat its nice meat and consume its milk and
use it wool for clothing. There is nothing in this animal from which man
does not benefit. So much so that even its hoofs are used in medicines.

Benefits of riding and use of milk, meat and wool
-------------------------------------------------

   
***And therein they have advantages and drinks;***  
*** ***  
 How delicious is the milk of these quadrupeds! What a great benefit
they have in serving as beasts of burden and their meat and wool is
useful too.  
    
***…will they not then be grateful?***  
*** ***  
 Are you not then thankful? Unless man becomes thankful and realizes the
bounty of God, what is the difference between him and an animal? In the
animal like matters of eating, sleeping, passions and anger, man and
animals are alike. In the matter of art and craft too, some animals are
intelligent. There is no difference in things that end in death.

The only exceptions are truthfulness, knowing God and the Hereafter. For
example, man should aim to be a physician that he may serve people. If
his aim is merely material, then he gets its reward only here (in this
worldly life). Anyway, whatever is related with humanism and the value
of which remains forever is the virtue of knowing the Benefactor,
appreciation of the bounties and thankfulness to God.

Rebels try to achieve Godship behind the excuse of idols
--------------------------------------------------------

   
***And they have taken gods besides Allah that they may be helped.
(36:74)***  
*** ***  
 Allah says, “We gave these bounties to man. We put camels, cows, and
sheep under his control. They also ride some of them.” What a wonderful
mount a camel is; it is the ship of the desert. This man, instead of
knowing God better and thanking Him more, and never forgetting Him,
carves out, in place of God, imaginary gods in the form of idols.

At the head of such wayward people are the false Gods who are rebels
against God. Minds get diverted to idols of stone and wood. The truth is
that these idols are shields for the rebels. They feign Godship from
behind these idols. Idols and temples are mere pretexts.

During the days of Pharaoh, idols and idol worship were rampant and
Pharaoh, in the name of (or as) the God of gods, was defrauding the
people.

All dictators are such and they all practice polytheism against God.
These dictators demand from people what God demands from man. God
commands man to carry out His orders and to accept whatever He says.
Sultans, Kings, and Shahs are also like that. It is nothing but royal
decrees against divine commandments!

Mobilized armies have no ability to help
----------------------------------------

   
***(But) they shall not be able to assist them, and they shall be a host
brought up before them. (36:75)***  
*** ***  
 Meaning those who are taken as helpers instead God have no ability to
render any help. Troops are ready but cannot do anything. For example,
during the Islamic Revolution of Iran thousands of American advisers
along with half a million troops armed with modern weapons were present
to protect the kingdom of Muhammad Reza Shah to protect the interests of
America. But, when God decides, none of them could be of any avail.
Despite all the mobilized armies of imperialists there was no one to
help the Shah.  
    
***Therefore let not their speech grieve you; surely We know what they
do in secret and what they do openly. (36:76)***  
*** ***  
 Their talk should not grieve you as We know what they hide and what
they declare. If the non-believers sting you, you will not be harmed.
The disbelievers taunt about the belief in monotheism but the believer
must be pleased with his God and remain steadfast.

In order to weaken the spirit of Iranian people during the revolution
they spread threats and rumors. They played a new mischief daily in one
place or another, but the hearts of the faithful are strong due to their
faith and reliance on God. The God, Who made them reach here, will, if
He so decides, bring them to perfection. The victory of the Islamic
Revolution of Iran was not the handiwork of men; it was God’s. It was
totally beyond the material means. So, just as our eye was only on God
in the beginning it should remain so hereafter also.


