Ayat 18-21
==========

***In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful.***  
***They said: Surely we augur evil from you; if you do not desist, we
will certainly stone you, and there shall certainly afflict you a
painful chastisement from us. They said: Your evil fortune is with you;
what! if you are reminded! Nay, you are an extravagant people. And from
the remote part of the city there came a man running, he said: O my
people! Follow the messengers; Follow him who does not ask you for
reward, and they are the followers of the right course; (36:18-21)***  
*** ***

Attributors of bad omens to others suffer badly
-----------------------------------------------

The people of Antioch, instead of considering the messengers of God as
auspicious for them, attributed bad omens to them and said, “If you do
not stop talking like this, we will stone you and give you a painful
torture. Do not talk about God and Hereafter in this town. Get out of
here at once.”

The messengers replied, “Your bad omen is with you. Adversity is only
with you.” If you are warned about idol making it is not a concocted
talk. Is this word of admonition ominous and sinister? Is it a bad word
if you are asked to make prearrangement for the next world after
death?  
 You are in abomination yourself from head to toe.

Your adversity is the very belief of yours. You think that wood is
lucky, which is a calamity, which you yourselves bring upon yourself.
Everyone who attributes bad omen to others himself gets its bad result.
He is not harmed by outsiders.

By the way, people cast bad omens to others and then get badly affected
themselves. This is self-made trouble. For example you come out of house
and the very first person you see is a blind person; or you see a dead
body. You say, “Alas! What is going to happen to me today?” Or if the
eye falls on a sick person, one returns home saying, “Today I will not
go to work.”

Or, as it used to happen in olden days, when people were preparing to go
on a journey. If then a bird moved from their left side, they considered
it to be a bad omen and they postponed their journey. Even today, some
people think that owl is an inauspicious bird. If it sits on roof they
imagine it to be a bad sign.

They also regard the crowing of a crow as a sign of bad luck. Likewise,
in the night of Wednesday or Sunday, if someone arrives to visit a sick
person they regard it a bad omen, whereas, there is no reservation for
these two days in this world of existence, rather they are also like all
other days of the week.

If some think that this visit worsened the condition of the sick person,
it is superstition. As a general rule, such bad omens do not have any
external harm. The incorrect and superstitious belief itself brings
adverse effect. Its misfortune clings to them. This suffering is due to
the falseness of belief and due to the sinisterness of that point.

Muhammad (‘s) never made a sortilege
------------------------------------

You should be respectful towards the last Prophet, Muhammad (‘s).
Throughout his life he never resorted to bad omen and he always hated
it. On the contrary, he was pleased with good augury. You too must be
like that. For example if you come out of your house and see Mirza
Nasrullaah. You can say, “Good, good! Help (Nasr) of God is with us.”
God would surely fulfill this.

It is mentioned in the events of the Holy Prophet (‘s) that once, while
migrating, a man came to him. The Prophet asked, “What is your name?”
The man replied, “Abu Bardah.” The Prophet said, “Our work became cold.”
That is it was nice.[^1] Then he asked, “To which tribe do you belong?”
The man replied, “Bani Aslam.”

The Holy Prophet said, “We are in safety”.[^2] This is taking good
augury and it is a tradition of the Holy Prophet. Strengthen our hopes
with respect to what we encounter. Hope for good results. Thus you have
relied on God hoping for good, which you would surely get.

If you expect bad as a result of improper belief, coldness from the
Grace of God may overtake you. It then is due to inauspiciousness in
your own self. You did not see God. Instead you looked at the creation.
The adversity of imagining bad omen is by way of polytheism and
disbelief whereas hoping for good is through guidance of God.  
    
***…what! if you are reminded!***  
*** ***  
 Meaning: If we warn you along with admonitions, should you abuse us? Is
the response to admonition hitting with stick and stone? We are your
well-wishers. We are showing the path of salvation and to remedy your
inner diseases, but:  
    
***Nay, you are an extravagant people.***  
*** ***  
 You yourselves are extravagants. You are exceeding limits. Whoever
crossed limits of moderation, acted absolutely against wisdom in his
behavior with God and His creation and even with himself or herself, as
well as with spouse, children and relatives is an extravagant. Every
extremism is extravagance. To abuse an admonisher is extremism. There
are many people who become angry if they are advised.

Supporters of prophets slain
----------------------------

   
***And from the remote part of the city there came a man running,***  
*** ***  
 In this populous town that was twelve miles in length the three sages
did not leave a single area without giving people therein an invitation
towards Oneness of God and Hereafter. According to some narrations the
number of persons who accepted their admonition and put faith in them
were not more than forty.

Then, one day, the unbelievers caught them all, installed gallows and
put the believers to death. They pierced their necks and hanged them on
gallows so as to torture them painfully before killing them. While this
cruelty was being meted out to good people, its news reached the convent
of Habib Najjar at the other extreme of the town.

Habib Najjar rises up to support the messengers
-----------------------------------------------

   
***And a believing man who hid his faith said... (40:28)***  
*** ***  
 Habib Najjar had concealed his faith and he apparently worked as a
carpenter spending half his income in the path of God (charity) and
using half for himself. This sage came out of his monastery and saw that
the lives of the messengers were in danger. He tried his best to reach
them soonest and save their lives. Almighty Allah, praises the supporter
of His Messengers in this verse of the Holy Quran.

Three persons who took lead in putting faith
--------------------------------------------

A narration quoted in the Quranic commentary *Durre Manthur* says that
Habib Najjar was the second of the preceding ones (Sibaaq) among all
men.[^3] It denotes one who is having great status among people after
the messengers. There are three such persons in the nations. The first
is the believer of the people of Firaun.  
    
***And a believing man of Firon's people who hid his faith said: What!
Will you slay a man because he says: My Lord is Allah, and indeed he has
brought to you clear arguments from your Lord? And if he be a liar, on
him will be his lie, and if he be truthful, there will befall you some
of that which he threatens you (with); surely Allah does not guide him
who is extravagant, a liar: (40:28)***  
*** ***  
 Whose details are given in Surah “Ha Mim” Fussilat who came in the way
of the killing of Moosa (‘a) and prevented Firaun from assassinating
him.  
 Second is the believer of Yasin, the same Habib Najjar about whom the
Holy Quran says:  
    
***And from the remote part of the city there came a man running…***  
*** ***  
 The third is the king of Wilayat, the Victorious Lion of Allah, Ali bin
Abi Talib (‘a) who supported the Holy Prophet (‘s) while no one from the
Muslims preceded him in accepting Islam.

Moreover, it is the same person who testified to the Prophethood of
Muhammad (‘s) six hundred years before his advent in this world. It is
mentioned in books of history that Habib Najjar was one of those who had
seen the prophecy of the advent of the Prophet Muhammad (‘s) in the
heavenly books and also read about the attributes of the Holy Prophet
and had put faith in him.

A sympathetic savant and selfless truth-teller is worth following
-----------------------------------------------------------------

This noble man who was a believer in Only One God rushed to the scene
and cried, “O people! Follow the messengers.” Obey them who do not want
any recompense. This is the proof of Prophethood. O wise people! If
someone has three attributes, viz wisdom, selflessness and truthfulness,
then reason demands that he must be followed.

Everyone who has wisdom and who also has no selfishness and is also
speaking nothing but truth is such that his guidance must be accepted.
If there is a doctor, a specialist of some illness and if you know that
he has no lust for money and who examines your children without any
personal gain, then reason demands that you act upon his instructions.
But if he is not knowledgeable or only after moneymaking, then it would
not be advisable to act on his instructions.  
 This noble soul said:  
    
***O my people! follow the messengers; Follow him who does not ask you
for reward,***  
*** ***  
 Meaning: O People! Follow the messengers who do not ask for anything
from you, neither wealth nor kingdom, name or fame in exchange of this
guidance. Do they have any material desire? No! Thus this is the proof
of their Prophethood.  
    
***and they are the followers of the right course;***  
*** ***  
 That is they are rightly guided.  
 What is wealth? Lure a child with it. Muhammad is aware of the Hourie
so how can he overlook the divine invitation for the sake of a woman?
And kingdom? It is nothing except adversity. He accepted the hardship
and painfulness of Prophethood and suffered tortures inflicted by
people.

Messengers never demand compensation for propagation
----------------------------------------------------

They never demanded any wages:  
    
***Indeed my recompense is upon Allah.***  
*** ***  
 In the final days of the Prophet’s life some people assembled and said
among themselves, “Muhammad (‘s) has to entertain many guests. His
expenditure is high. Let us give him some money as he has many rights
over us. The following verse was revealed:  
    
***Say: I do not ask of you any reward for it but love for my near
relatives; (42:23)***  
*** ***  
 You intend to compensate Muhammad (‘s), but it is only God Who will do
this. If you so desire, then do one thing: as a token of recompense of
his messengership, be kind and behave nicely with his household, which
is also for your own good.  
    
***Say: Whatever reward I have asked of you, that is only for
yourselves; my reward is only with Allah, and He is a witness of all
things. (34:47)***  
*** ***  
 It is clearly mentioned in the Holy Quran that what I asked from you in
the form of friendship and ‘Khums’ is also for you and only for your
benefit.

[^1]: In Arabic “Barada” means cold – Tr.

[^2]: In Arabic “Salama” means ‘Safety’

[^3]: Tafsir Noorus Thaqalain vol. 4, pg. 384


