The Aristotelian Expositors
===========================

Al-farabi
---------

Al-farabi was the outstanding contributor to the Aristotelian project,
though not as a translator. Al farabi claimed that logic was
indispensable for analyzing the argument-forms used in jurisprudence and
theology, a claim that was to be taken up a century later by Abu Hamid
al-Ghazali (d. 1111), thereby introducing the study of logic into the
madrasa. To support his claim, Alfarabi wrote The Short Treatise on
Reasoning in the Way of the Theologians …in which he interpreted the
arguments of the theologians and the analogies (qiyâsât) of the jurists
as logical syllogisms in accordance with the doctrines of the ancients.

Maybe Alfarabi is the first truly independent thinker in Arabic logic, a
fact commemorated by bestowing upon him 'the Second Teacher' (after
Aristotle). Al farabi was the first Muslim to bring Greek thinking
closer to Islamic understanding, which, then pivoted around the
codification and clarification of Qur'anic expression. al-Fiarabi was
first and foremost a commentator of Aristotelian texts; his commentary
on Aristotle's Organon served as the work of reference for other Muslim
scholars. His work, however, went further in analogical reasoning to
produce unique ideas not present in the Aristotelian original, and was
dedicated to the inclusion of analogical inferences (transference).
AI-FarabI's original contribution to analogical inference lay in his
systematization of inductive reasoning under the rubric of the
categorical syllogism. His intent was to raise the strength of analogy
to that of a first order Aristotelian syllogism, i.e. a syllogism which
does not deviate from the Greek rendering of two premises, a middle
term, and the production of new knowledge which in turn may serve as a
premise for further inferences. Drawing general or universal conclusions
from premises generated by the scientific study of experience bodes well
with the analogical framework of likewise generating general conclusions
from particular instances of human experience-foreshadowing the methods
of induction not yet fully developed in Western philosophical history.
This commensurability between the formal syllogism and analogy is
defended by al-Farabl when he uses what he calls "inference by transfer"
or, as he notes of the mutakallimiln, "inference from evidence to the
absent", or, as Kant would have it, from the phenomenal to the noumenal
realms. The act of transference requires that the syllogism have a
middle term, what analogy calls similarity. AI-Farabi further contends
that, "if we are determined to have the 'transfer' be correct it is
necessary that the 'matter' which is similar in the two compared objects
be investigated. He presents a case depicting the (evident) createdness
of animals or plants with the (absent) notion of createdness in the sky
and the stars, and sets out to establish not only a middle term that
denotes similarity, but one which also speaks of relevance. If both
similarity and relevance obtain, then analogical inference takes on the
form and strength of a first order syllogism, and a causal connection is
established.

However, problems still arise when similarity might appear to obtain,
but, in fact, does not. When this happens, analogical reasoning contains
at

least one faulty premise that has not been detected by those forwarding
an analogical argument. AI-Farabi refers to this distinction as the
method of "raising" whereby conclusions are raised but do not obtain
upon further logical investigation. However, leaving room for a
legitimate analogy, al-Farabi then speaks of the method of "finding".
'Simply stated, al-Farabl reminds the reader that, "if one establishes a
judgment by 'raising' it does not necessarily result that when one'
finds' this thing (which is 'raised') one will 'find" the judgment (to
be true); rather it is the converse of this that is necessitated, namely
if one 'finds' the judgment, one 'finds' (also) the thing (in
question)". In this sense, al-Farabi anticipates harsh criticisms
against the analogy that he does not necessarily accept. Inductive and
analogical arguments were converted into syllogisms making the cause or
similarity in analogy the middle term in the syllogism", which
compounded the difficulty of defining and determining the exact limits
of qiyas. The force of the inferences made in an analogy is identical to
those of a first figure syllogism because the similarity (' illa) is the
subject term in the major premise and the predicate term in the minor.
If the 'illa is absent when the judgment is absent...and present when
the judgment is present... the 'illa is all the more true. If one
removes animality, for example, from a thing, then one removes from this
thing the property of being a man. But it is not necessarily true that
if one finds an animal he also finds a man. Rather the converse is true;
if one finds a man it necessarily follows that one finds an animal. To
establish the truthfulness of a matter by the method of non existence,
it necessarily follows that when the 'illa is found the judgment is also
found. In order to ensure valid conclusions from an analogy (following
this reasoning) the similarity ('illa), has to be relevant to the two
cases; the judgments must be true of any case if it has the same' illa;
the 'illa itself must be found and verified in each of the cases
considered; it must be established that the judgment exists in all cases
which possess an 'illa in common.  al-Farabi's importance lies in the
fact that he placed heavy emphasis on the necessity and importance of
the 'illa in all inferences: "For a complete inference and for achieving
a high degree of certainty he insists that an illa must accompany the
judgment". AI-Fariibi's marriage of analogy to the first order syllogism
exists within a neo-Platonic and Aristotelian framework of metaphysics,
replete with positivistic inclinations concerning the notions of cause
and effect, and its importance for both logic and onto-logic. Thus, his
legal concerns cross both «Islamic and Greek boundaries at their very
source, and are less tied to simply the a priori sensibilities demanded
by the more literal readings of the Koran that were adhered to by the
mutakallimun. AI-Farabi managed to transform analogy into a first-figure
syllogism, setting a standard by which the legal process could be
developed. AI-Farabi had maintained, in accordance with his Neo-Platonic
Aristotelian emanative position, that Allah was the God of metaphysical
(i.e. causal) statements and that the Koran had to be interpreted
metaphorically. This, along with discussions on logic and other
sciences, was nonetheless accused of being un-Islamic, and the
theological milieu remained highly antagonistic to the Greek
"foreign"/heretical sciences. They rejected the concept of natural
causation (i.e., arguing from cause to effect and from

effect to cause) that maintained that phenomenal acts advance from a
thing's quiddity. They held the view that only divine will held the
power to cause. It was in this manner, that they upheld the concept of
divine omnipotence. And later, al-Farabi would become the focus of
attacks directed against the "School of Baghdad".

Averroes (Ibn Rushd) and the End of Aristotelianism
---------------------------------------------------

Averroes was one of the last representatives of a dying Farabian
Aristotelianism. Averroes was aware of Alfarabi's attempts to make sense
of the difficulties in Aristotle's texts. In one such area, the modal
logic, Averroes was to return to the problems four times through his
career.

Averroes' project is illustrated in his Philosophical Essays, a number
of which are on logical matters. Averroes defends and refines Alfarabi's
account of the conversion of modal propositions and then uses that
account as the basis of a new interpretation of the modal syllogistic. A
second example of the way Averroes works is his reappraisal and
vindication of Aristotle's doctrines of the hypothetical syllogistic
against Avicenna's alternative division into connective and repetitive
syllogisms (Averroes (1983) Maqâlât essay 9, 187-207).

In his fourth attempt to interpret Aristotle's modal system Averroes
differs from Avicenna first and foremost by insisting on a consideration
Avicenna has been at pains to remove from his syllogistic: is the
subject picked out by a term essential to it?

Averroes' final system comprises two distinct aspects. The first
aspect - not original to Averroes nor apparently to the Arabic
tradition - is seeing the modality of a proposition as a function of the
modality of its terms, which in turn is a function of how each term
picks out what it refers to. The second aspect is that different classes
of modal syllogism are differentiated by the types of terms occurring in
them. Rather than looking on the modality of the proposition as
something which belongs irreducibly to the proposition, Averroes
classifies modals in the following way:

You should know that assertoric propositions have assertoric terms,
necessary propositions necessary terms. By “necessary term” I mean that
the term is one per se, and these propositions are composed of a subject
and an essential predicate (mahmûl jawharî) of that subject, or a
subject and an inseparable accident*(‘arad lâzim* ) belonging to that
subject. Those propositions with assertoric terms are those which are
composed of denominative terms which are sometimes present in the
denominated thing and sometimes absent (*sifât tûjad lil-mahmûl târatan
wa-tufqad târatan* ). But when one of these denominative terms is
present in the subject, there must be present another denominative term
that follows on it necessarily which is the predicate, as in: everything
walking is moving. For when walking is actually present the thing must
be moving; and when walking is withdrawn from it (*irtafa‘ minhu* ), so
too is movement. These are the simple assertoric premises
(*al-muqaddamât al-wujûdiyya al-basîta* ) which are atemporal (*fî
ghayri zamân* ), and they are what Aristotle intends firstly to talk
about in this book. Their subject and predicate alike are one per
accidens (*wal-mawdû‘ fîhâ wâhid bil-‘arad wa-ka-dhâlika l-mahmûl* ).
And there exists another kind of proposition that is partly assertoric
and partly

necessary (*min jiha wujûdî wa-min jiha darûrî* ) - that is, the subject
is composed of a substance and a changeable denomination (*jawhar
wa-sifa mutabaddila* ), from which follows a predicate composed of the
substance of the denomination and its intrinsic essential attribute
(*sifa jawhariyya gharîziyya* ). The subject here is one per accidents
and the predicate is one per se, for example, when we say that
everything walking is an animal. And this is assertoric on account of
the denomination of the denominated subject, and necessary on account of
the predicate of the denomination. For walking, when it occurs,
signifies an animal by discontinuous signification (*fal-mashy idhâ
wujida dalla ‘alâ l-hayawân dalâlatan ghayra dâ'ima* ), but for the
times at which walking is present in it. The subject of walking implies
being an animal always (*wa-mawdû‘u l-mashy yalzamuhu wujûdu l-hayawân
dâ'iman* ), because the subject of walking and what is denoted by that
is necessarily an animal. And this proposition is in one respect
necessary and in another assertoric (*darûrîya min jiha wa-wujûdîya min
jiha* ) - necessary per accidens and assertoric per se (*darûrîya
bil-‘arad wa-wujûdîya bidh-dhât* ). A proposition that conversely has a
necessary subject and a predicate of assertoric matter (*mâdda* ) is
just assertoric, and is not necessary per accidens. This is a temporal
assertoric, I say, where the subject implies the predicate for a
specified time, and necessity is not found in it, only a connexion of
the predicate and subject merely for that time. The characteristic of
this [proposition] is that the predicate is not connected to the subject
for all times at which the subject exists, but only for a certain
specified time. And so, as Aristotle says, syllogisms in the sciences
are not constructed from this type of assertoric.

With a per se necessity proposition described above, he has
truth-conditions which will allow him to make sense of Aristotle's claim
that every J is necessarily B converts to some B is necessarily J. In
fact, Averroes is able to replicate Aristotle's results with necessity
and possibility premises (Thom (2003) 199). He does so, however, at the
cost of having to slide between calling a proposition of type 3 a
necessity proposition or an assertoric according to the dictates of the
exegetical moment.


