


Intoduction
There is hardly any subject as vexed and vital for the contemporary
Islamic world as the question of modern science. Since its earliest
encounter with modern Western science in the 18th and 19th centuries,
the Islamic world has had to deal with science for practical and
intellectual reasons. At the level of practical needs, modern science
was seen as the*sine qua non* of the advancement and defense of Muslim
countries in the field of military technology. The Ottoman political
body, which, unlike the other parts of the Islamic world, was in direct
contact with European powers, was convinced that its political and
military decline was due to the lack of proper defense mechanisms
against the European armies. To fill this gap, a number of massive
reforms were introduced by Mahmud II with the hope of stopping the rapid
decline of the Empire, and a new class of military officers and
bureaucrats, who became the first point of contact between the
traditional world of Islam and modern secular West, was created.[^1] A
similar project, in fact a more successful one, was introduced in Egypt
by Muhammad Ali whose aspirations were later given a new voice by Taha
Hussain and his generation. The leitmotif of this period was that of
extreme practicality: the Muslim world needed power, especially military
power, to stand back on its feet, and new technologies powered by modern
science were the only way to have it.[^2] The modern conception of
science as a medium of power was to have a profound impact on the
relation between the Muslim world and modern science, which was then
already equated with technology, progress, power, and prosperity -- a
mode of perception still prevalent among the masses in the Islamic
world.

The second level of encounter between traditional beliefs and modern
science was of an intellectual nature with lasting consequences the most
important of which was the re-shaping of the self-perception of the
Islamic world. Using Husserl’s analysis of*Selbstverstandnis* , a key
term in Husserl’s anthropology of ‘Western man’, von Grunebaum takes the
reception of modern science to be a turning point in the self-view of
the traditional Islamic civilization and its approach to history.[^3]
One of the recurring themes of this epochal even, viz., the
incompatibility of traditional beliefs with the dicta of modern science,
is forcefully stated in a speech by Ataturk, the founder of modern
Turkey, who was as much aware of the practical urgencies of the
post-independence war Turkey as he was passionately engaged in creating
a new identity for Turkish people: ‘We shall take science and knowledge
from wherever they may be, and put them in the mind of every member of
the nation. For science and for knowledge, there are no restrictions and
no conditions. For a nation that insists on preserving a host of
traditions and beliefs that rest on no logical proof, progress is very
difficult, perhaps even impossible’.[^4]

On a relatively smaller scale, the revealing clash between the secular
premises of modern science and the traditional Islamic worldview was
brought home to many Muslim intellectuals with the publication of
Renan's famous lecture*L'Islamisme et la science* given in Sorbonne in
1883, in which he strongly argued for the irrationality and inability of
Muslim peoples to produce science. For us today, Renan's quasi-racist
attack on the

Islamic faith and crude promulgation of positivism as the new religion
of the modern world makes little sense. Nevertheless, it was an eye
opener for the Muslim intelligentsia of the time about the way the
achievements of modern Western science were presented. Spearheaded by
Jamal al-Din Afghani in Persia and Namik Kemal in the Ottoman empire,
the Muslim men of letters took upon themselves the task of responding to
what they considered to be the distortion of modern science at the hands
of some anti-religious philosophers, and produced a sizable discourse on
modern science with all the fervor and confusion of their tumultuous
times.[^5] As we shall see below, Afghani,*inter alia* , came to
epitomize the mindset of his time when he based his historical apology
against Renan on the assumption that there could be no clash between
religion and science, be it traditional or modern, and that modern
Western science was nothing other than the original true Islamic science
shipped back, via the Renaissance and Enlightenment, to the Islamic
world. By the same token, there is nothing essentially wrong with modern
science, and it is the materialistic representation of science that lies
at the heart of the so-called religion-science controversy.[^6] Namik
Kemal joined Afghani with a rebuttal of his own in his*Renan
Mudafanamesi* (The Defense against Renan), focusing, unlike Afhgani, on
the scientific achievements of the Arabs, namely the Muslim countries of
the past.[^7] In contrast to these Muslim intellectuals who sought to
place modern science within the context of Islamic worldview, a number
of prominent Christian writers in the Arab world including Jurji Zaydan
(d. 1914), Shibli al-Shumayyil (d. 1916), Farah Antun (d. 1922) and
Ya'qub Sarruf (d. 1927), begun to advocate the secular outlook of modern
science as a way of joining the European path of modernization, hence
taking primarily a philosophical and secular stance on the ongoing
debate between religion and science.[^8]

These two positions are still with us today as they continue to
represent the ambitions as well as failures of the Islamic world in its
elusive relation with modern science. Islamic countries spend billions
of dollars every year for transfer of technology, science education and
research programs. The goal set by the Ottomans in the 19th century has
remained more or less the same: gaining power through technological
advancement. Furthermore, the financial wedding between science and
technology, begun with the industrial revolution, makes it ever harder
to search for 'pure science', and the bottom line for the Muslim as well
as the Western world becomes technology rather than science. The will of
the Islamic countries to participate in the modernization process
through transfer of technology obscures the philosophical dimension of
the problem, leading to the kind of simplistic and reductionist thinking
upon which we will touch shortly.

As for the intellectual challenge posed by modern science, it can hardly
be said to have dwindled or disappeared in spite of the diminishing sway
of positivism and its allies among the learned. There is a peculiar
situation in the wake of the rise of new philosophies of science with
new developments in scientific research, extending from the ousting of
positivism and physical materialism to quantum mechanics and
anti-realism. The postmodernist wave has shaken our confidence in
science with consequences far beyond the scientific field, and many
young Muslim students and intellectuals see

no problem with adopting the relativist and anti-realist stances of a
Kuhn or Feyerabend. The dike of modern science broken, it is assumed
that religion and science can now begin talking to each other whereas
the truth is that neither has a firm standing because both of them have
been deprived of their truth-value by the anti-realist and relativist
philosophies of our time. The popularity of the current discussions of
philosophy of science in Muslim countries is indicative of the volatile
nature of the subject as well as its long history among the Muslim
intelligentsia.[^9]

It would not be a stretch to say that the contemporary Islamic world is
gripped by the challenges of these two divergent yet related points of
view, which shape its perception of science in a number of fundamental
ways. On the one hand, the governments and ruling elite of Islamic
countries consider it to be of the highest priority to keep up with the
global race of technological innovation from communications and medical
engineering to weapon industry and satellite technology.[^10] Arguments
to the contrary are seen as a call for resisting the irreversible
process of modernization, or for backwardness, to say the least. On the
other hand, it has become common wisdom that the consequences of the
application of modern natural sciences to fields that have never been
encroached upon before pose serious threats to the environment and human
life. This is coupled with the threat of modern science becoming the
pseudo-religion of the age, forcing religion to the margins of modern
society, or at least making it a matter of personal choice and social
ethics. This creates a bitter conflict of consciousness in the Muslim
mind, a conflict between the sacred and the worldly power, between
belief and scientific precision, and between seeing nature as the cosmic
book of God and as a source of exploitation and domination.

When we look at the current discourse on science in the Islamic world,
we see a number of competing trends and positions, each with its own
claims and solutions. Without pretending to be exhaustive, they can be
classified under three headings as ethical, epistemological and
ontological/metaphysical views of science. The ethical/puritanical view
of science, which is the most common attitude in the Islamic world,
considers modern science as essentially neutral and objective, dealing
with the book of nature as it is, with no philosophical or ideological
components attached to it. Such problems as the environmental crisis,
positivism, materialism, etc., all of which are related to modern
science in one way or another, can be solved by adding an ethical
dimension to the practice and teaching of science. The second position,
which we may call the epistemological view, is concerned primarily with
the epistemic status of modern physical sciences, their truth claims,
methods of achieving sound knowledge, and function for the society at
large. Taking science as a social construction, the epistemic school
puts special emphasis on the history and sociology of science. Finally,
the ontological/metaphysical view of science marks an interesting shift
from the philosophy to the metaphysics of science, and its most
important claim lies in its insistence on the analysis of the
metaphysical and ontological foundations of modern physical sciences. As
we shall see below, it is to this school, represented,*inter alia* , by
such Muslim thinkers as Seyyid Hossein Nasr and Naquib al-Attas, that
the

concept of Islamic science goes back, a concept which has caused a great
deal of discussion as well as confusion in Islamic intellectual circles.

Science as the Servant of God: the Dimension of Social Ethics
=============================================================

The most common attitude towards science in the Islamic world is to see
it as an objective study of the world of nature, namely as a way of
deciphering the signs of God in the cosmic book of the universe. Natural
sciences discover the Divine codes built into the cosmos by its Creator,
and in doing so, help the believer marvel at the wonders of God's
creation. Seen under this light, science functions within a religious,
albeit overtly simplistic, framework. The image of science as the
decoder of the sacred language of the cosmos is certainly an old one,
going back to the traditional Islamic sciences whose purpose was not
just to find the direction of the*qiblah* or the times of the prayers
but also to understand the reality of things as they are. Construed as
such, science is surely a noble enterprise, and it was within this
framework that the Muslim intellectuals, when they encountered the
edifice of modern science in the 18th and 19th centuries, did not
hesitate to translate the word '*ilm* (and its plural*'ulum* ) for
science in the sense of modern physical sciences.[^11]

This attitude can best be seen among the forerunners of Islamic
modernism, especially among those who addressed the question of science
as the most urgent problem of the Islamic world. Jamal al-Din Afghani in
his celebrated attack on the 'materialists', i.e.,*Haqiqat-i mazhab-i
naichiri wa bayan-i hal-i nachiriyan* , translated into Arabic by
Muhammad Abduh as*al-Radd 'ala'l-dahriyyin* , was engaged in a
self-proclaimed battle of saving science from the positivists, a battle
for which he derived support from both the history of Islamic and modern
sciences. He had the following to say in his celebrated response to
Renan:

'If it is true that the Muslim religion is an obstacle to the
development of sciences, can one affirm that this obstacle will not
disappear someday? How does the Muslim religion differ on this point
from other religions? All religions are intolerant, each one in its way.
The Christian religion, I mean the society that follows its inspirations
and its teachings and is formed in its image, has emerged from the first
period to which I have just alluded; thenceforth free and independent,
it seems to advance rapidly on the road of progress and science, whereas
Muslim society has not yet freed itself from the tutelage of religion.
Realizing, however, that the Christian religion preceded the Muslim
religion in the world by many centuries, I cannot keep from hoping that
Muhammadan society will succeed someday in breaking its bonds and
marching resolutely in the path of civilization after the manner of
Western society…No I cannot admit that this hope be denied to
Islam.'[^12]

Afghani's voice, which was carried on by such figures as Muhammad Abduh,
Sayyid Ahmad Khan, Rashid Rida, Muhammad Iqbal, Mehmet Akif Ersoy, Namik
Kemal, Said Nursi and Farid Wajdi, was the epitome of the sentiments of
the time: modern science is nothing but Islamic science shipped back to
the Islamic world via the ports of European Renaissance and
Enlightenment. In other words, science is not a culture-specific
enterprise, and as such it is not the exclusive property of any
civilization. Afhgani puts it in the following way:

'The strangest thing of all is that our ulama these days have divided
science into two parts. One they call Muslim science, and one European
science. Because of this they forbid others to teach some of the useful
sciences. They have not understood that science is that noble thing that
has no connection with any nation, and is not distinguished by anything
but itself. Rather, everything that is known is known by science, and
every nation that becomes renowned becomes renowned through science. Men
must be related to science, not science to men. (…)

The father and mother of science is proof, and proof is neither
Aristotle nor Galileo. The truth is where there is proof, and those who
forbid science and knowledge in the belief that they are safeguarding
the Islamic religion are really the enemies of that religion. The
Islamic religion is the closest of religions to science and knowledge,
and there is no incompatibility between science and knowledge and the
foundation of Islamic faith.'[^13]

For this generation of Muslim thinkers, Western science was clearly and
categorically distinguishable from Western values, the underlying
assumption being that the secular worldview of modern West had no
inroads into the structure and operation of the natural sciences. The
task is therefore not to unearth the philosophical underpinnings of
modern science but to import it without the ethical component that comes
from Western culture, which is alien to the Islamic ethos. The best
example of this attitude was given by Mehmet Akif Ersoy, the famous
intellectual of the Ottoman empire and the poet of the national anthem
of Turkey. Akif, who lived at a time when the Ottoman empire and parts
of the Islamic world were being divided and fiercely attacked by
European powers, made a clear-cut distinction between Western science
and European life-style, calling for the full-fledged adoption of
Western science while totally rejecting the manners and mores of
European civilization.

The idea of locating modern science within the framework of Islamic
ethics is an attitude that is still with us today. Most of the
practitioners of science in the Islamic world, namely engineers,
doctors, chemists, physicists believe in the inherent neutrality of
physical sciences, and the questions of justification, domination,
control, etc., simply do not arise for them. Since science is a
value-free enterprise, the differences between various scientific
traditions, if such a thing is allowed at all, come about at the level
of justification, not experimentation and operation. Thus when a
scientist, be he a Muslim, Hindu or simply non-believer, looks at the
chemical components of the minerals, he sees the same thing, operates on
the same set of elements under the same set of conditions, and arrives
presumably at the same or commensurable conclusions. It is the practical
application of these findings to various fields and technologies that
makes the difference, if any, between Ptolemy, Ibn al-Haytham, or F.
Bacon.

It is not difficult to see the imagery of the torch of science inherent
in this view. Being the most prevalent attitude towards the history of
science both in the Islamic and Western world, this view considers
history of science progressing along a linear trajectory of discoveries
and heuristic advancements. The torch of science transmitted from one
nation to another, from one historical period to another, signifies the
constant progress of

scientific research, relegating such facts as religious convictions,
philosophical assumptions and/or social infrastructure to a set of
preparatory conditions necessary for the advancement of science. Thus
the only difference between the science of the 13th century Islamic
world and that of the 19th century Europe turns out to be quantitative,
that is, in terms of the accumulation and further specialization of
scientific knowledge about the physical world. By the same token, the
scientific revolution of the 17th and 18th centuries was a revolution
not in the outlook of the modern man concerning nature and the meaning
of scientific investigation but in the methodological tools and
formulations of the natural sciences. This is how the majority of the
19th century intellectuals would have interpreted the history of science
and the rise of modern natural sciences, and this is how the subject is
still taught today in the schools in the Islamic world.[^14]

A logical result of this view of science is the incorporation of
scientific findings as confirmations of the Islamic faith. In the
pre-modern era when the religious worldview was strong, no scientist
deemed it necessary to subject the Quranic verses to a 'scientific'
reading, hoping, perhaps, to improve one's faith in religion or showing
the religious basis of scientific investigation. As a trait of the
modern period, however, many believers of different religions and
denominations look for possible confirmations from the sciences for
their religious belief, confirmations that would, it is hoped, both
increase the truth-value of the sacred book and ward off the hegemonic
onslaught of the positivists. A good example of this approach in the
Islamic world is without doubt Said Nursi (1877-1960), the famous
scholar, activist and founder of the Nurcu movement in Turkey.

Said Nursi's views on the relation between faith and science were
formulated at a time when the rude positivism of the late 1900s was made
the official ideology of the newly established Turkish republic. Unlike
many of his contemporaries, Nursi had a considerable knowledge of the
scientific findings of his time. His method in confronting Western
science was a simple yet highly influential one: instead of taking a
position against it, he incorporated its findings within the theistic
perspective, thus preempting any serious confrontation between science
and religion. Since Nursi, like many of his contemporaries, was acutely
aware of the power of modern natural sciences, and, as we see in his
great work*Risale-i Nur* , he certainly believed in the universal
objectivity of their discoveries.[^15] For him, reading the verses of
the Qur'an through the eyes of modern physical sciences had not only an
instrumental value for protecting the faith of the youth who were coming
under the sway of the 19th century positivism and empiricism. It was
also the beginning of a new method of substantiating the Islamic faith
on the basis of the certainties of modern physical sciences, and reading
the cosmic verses of the Qur'an within the matrix of scientific
discoveries.

As a religious scholar well grounded in traditional Islamic sciences,
Nursi was aware of the apparent discrepancy between traditional
cosmology articulated by Muslim philosophers and Sufis and the Newtonian
world-picture which contained no religious terms. Instead of rejecting
the mechanistic view of the universe presented by modern science, Nursi
saw an interesting parallel between it and the*kalam* arguments from
design

(*nizam* ). In his view, the classical arguments from design, used
profusely by Muslim and Christian thinkers alike, were meant to prove
the eternal order and harmony built into the texture of the cosmos by
the Divine creator, and as such they do not contradict Newtonian
determinism. If the mechanistic view of the universe presents a
world-picture in which nothing can remain scientifically unaccounted
for, then this proves not the fortuitous generation of the cosmos but
its creation by an intelligent agent, which is nothing other than the
Divine artisan.[^16] Therefore the depiction of the universe as a
machine or clock, the two favorite symbols of the deists of the 19th
century, does not nullify the theistic claims of creation. On the
contrary, rationality as regularity, harmony and predictability, Nursi
would wholeheartedly argue, lies at the heart of the religious view of
the cosmos. Thus the mechanistic view of the universe, which was hailed
by the secularists and positivists of the 19th century as the
indisputable triumph of reason over against religion, poses no threat to
the theistic conception of the universe. As Mardin points out, this
attitude was so influential among Nursi's followers that vocabularies
taken from 19th century thermodynamics and electricity became household
terms of the Nurcu movement. Thus the physical world is described as
'a*fabrika-i kainat* (factory of the universe) (*Lem'alar* , 287); life
is a machine of the future from the exalted benchwork of the universe
(*hayat kainatin tezgah-i azaminda … bir istikbal makinesidir* )
(*Lem'alar* , 371). Sabri, one of the first disciples of Bediuzzaman,
speaks of 'machines which produce the electricity of the Nur factory'
when speaking of the work of disciples.'[^17]

Nursi's approach to modern science has been interpreted in a number of
variant and, sometimes, conflicting ways. There are those who take his
coping with science as a powerful way of deconstructing its metaphysical
claims by using the language of Newtonian physics, chemistry and
astronomy.[^18] The opposite side of the controversy is represented by
those who tend to emphasize the influence of modern science and
positivism on Nursi -- an influence visible in the entire generation of
19th century Muslim scholars, intellectuals, and activists. Even though
one can easily detect an apparent incongruity between what Nursi had
intended by his so-called 'scientific commentary' (*al-tafsir al-ilmi* )
and what his followers made out of it[^19] , the roots of his theistic
scientism, one may claim, are ultimately traceable to his*Risale-i Nur*
.[^20] A few examples will suffice to illustrate this point. When
discussing the miracles of the prophets mentioned in the Qur'an, Nursi
identifies two main reasons for their dispensation by the Divine
authority. The first reason pertains to the veracity of the prophets of
God, viz., they have been sent with an undeniable truth (*burhan* ) to
summon people to God's eternal word. The second reason, and this is what
concerns us here, is that the prophetic miracles contain in them the
seed of the future developments of human civilization. The story of the
Prophet Sulayman (Solomon) mentioned in the Qur'an (Saba', 34/12), for
instance, predicts the invention of modern aviation systems. As Nursi
interprets it, the fact that God has given the wind under Sulayman's
command to travel long distances in a short period of time points to the
future possibility of traveling in the air in general, and to the
invention of aircraft (*teyyare* ) in particular.[^21] Another

example is the Prophet Moses' miracle to bring out water from the earth,
as mentioned in the Qur'an (Baqarah, 2/60), when he and his followers
were searching for water in the middle of the desert. According to
Nursi, this event predicts the development of modern drilling techniques
to dig out such indispensable substances of modern industry as oil,
mineral water and natural gas. Following the same line of thinking, so
typical of his generation of Qur'anic commentators, Nursi explains the
mention of iron and 'its being softened to David' (Saba', 34/10) as a
sign of the future significance of iron and, perhaps, steel for modern
industry.[^22] Another striking example of how Nursi was deeply engaged
in scientific exegesis is his interpretation of the verse of the light
(Nur, 24/35), upon which such colossal figures of Islamic history as Ibn
Sina and Ghazzali have written commentaries. Among many of the other
profound and esoteric meanings of the light verse, which depicts God as
the 'light of the heavens and the earth', is the allusion to the future
invention of electricity whose continuous diffusion of light is compared
to the Qur'anic expression 'light upon light' (*nurun 'ala nur* )
mentioned in the verse.[^23]

These examples, the number of which can easily be multiplied, and the
way they are justified, were in tandem with a presiding idea, which
Nursi adopted and elaborated with full force. This he called the
'miracle of the teaching of Divine names to Adam' (*talim-i esma
mucizesi* ). The Qur'an tells us in Baqarah 2/31 that God, after
creating Adam as his vicegerent on earth, to which the angels had
objected for fear of corruption on earth, taught him 'all the names' (or
according to another reading 'the names of all things',*asma'a kullaha*
). Throughout the Islamic intellectual history, this verse has been
interpreted in a myriad of different ways, ranging from the most
literalist to the most esoteric readings. In a daring statement, Nursi
takes this miracle of Adam, the father of humanity, as greater and more
perfect than those of all the other prophets after him for it embodies
and comprises the entire spectrum of 'all the progress and perfection
human beings will ever achieve in the course of their history'.[^24]
Essentially, it is on the basis of this principle that Nursi justifies
his scientific and 'progressive' exegesis of various verses of the
Qur'an. True, interpretations of this kind can be found in traditional
commentaries on the Qur'an or among the Sufis. What is peculiar about
Nursi's new hermeneutics, if we may use such an appellation here, is the
scientific and modern context in which it is articulated and carried
out.

In its vulgarized version, Said Nursi's encounter with modern science
has led to a torrent of one-to-one correspondences between new
scientific findings and Qur'anic verses, generating an unprecedented
interest in natural sciences among his followers. Moreover, his position
on science as the decoder of the sacred language of nature influenced a
whole generation of Turkish students, professionals and lay people with
repercussions outside the Turkish-speaking world. Today, his followers
are extremely successful in matters related to sciences and engineering,
and continue Nursi's method of integrating the findings of modern
physical sciences into the theistic perspective of Abrahamic religions.
They are, however, also extremely poor and unprepared when it comes to
the philosophical aspects of the subject.

The pages of the journal*Sizinti* , published by Nursi's followers in
Turkish, and its English version*Fountain* , are filled with essays
trying to show the miracle of creation through comparisons between the
cosmological verses of the Qur'an and new scientific discoveries.
Expectedly, every new discovery, in this point of view, is yet another
proof for the miracle and credibility of the Qur'an. In this sense,
Nursi's progeny is the father of what we might call 'Bucaillism' in the
Islamic world. The idea of verifying the cosmological verses of the
Qur'an via the scrutiny of the science of the day is a highly modern
attitude by which it is hoped to confront and overcome the challenges of
modern secular science. The fact that the same set of scientific data
can equally be used within different contexts of justification and thus
yield completely different and incommensurable results does not arise as
a problem, neither the overtly secular nature of the world-view of
modern science is considered to be a threat to the religious view of
nature and the universe. The deliberate ignorance of the problem is
seen, we have to admit, as the solution, and the most poignant result of
this is the rise of a class of Muslim scientists and engineers who pray
five times a day but whose conception of science is largely determined
by the postulates of modern scientific worldview.

This, however, does not prevent the proponents of this view from seeing
the problems inflicted upon the world of nature and human life by modern
science. The environmental crisis, hazards of genetic engineering, air
pollution, rapid destruction of countless species, nuclear and chemical
weapon industry are all admitted as problems we have to deal with. Yet
the proposed remedy is an expected one: inserting a dimension of social
and environmental ethics will put under control, if not completely
solve, the problems mentioned. In other words, science should be
subjected to ethics at the level of policy decisions. Accordingly, the
aforementioned problems of modern science can be overcome by better
management and advanced techniques of environmental engineering.
Reminiscent of Habermas' defense of the project of modernity which he
considers incomplete as of yet, this view looks for the solution in the
problem itself: further advancement in scientific research and
technologies will create new methods of controlling the environmental
crisis and all the problems associated with modern science. In short, we
need more science to overcome its misdeeds.

The great majority of people in the Islamic as well as Western world
share the sentiments of the above view of science that we have just
summarized. Many people from all walks of life believe in the necessity
of upholding an ethical framework within which scientific investigation
should be carried out and controlled. This has certainly important
policy implications for scientific research funded by federal
governments and business corporations in many parts of the world. The
point that is inevitably obscured, however, is much more crucial than
having an influence on policy decisions. To limit ethics to policy
implementations is to make it a matter of personal preference for the
scientific community whose political and financial freedom against
governments and giant corporations is highly questionable. The fact that
the scientists who approve human cloning and genetic alteration believe
in theistic evolution does not change

the course of modern science. The conflict of consciousness to which we
referred above resurfaces here in the form of people whose hearts and
emotions are attached to the mandates of their respective religion but
whose minds are empty of the religious view of the universe.
