


The Epistemic View of Science: For and Against the Method
An important channel through which the contemporary Islamic world,
especially in the last three decades of the 20th century, has come to
terms with modern science is philosophy science as developed in the
West. The impact of the deconstruction of the epistemological hegemony
of 19th century positivism together with the critique of Newtonian
physics and scientific objectivism and realism on the Islamic world has
been stupendous and caused a torrential release of intellectual energy
among students and intellectuals. Needless to say, the influx of ideas
associated with such names as Kuhn, Feyerabend and Popper and their
current students continues almost unabated in spite of the fact that the
post-antirealist thinking on science seems to have come to a serious
stalemate. Being on the receiving end of this debate, many Muslim
students and intellectuals are still experimenting with these ideas with
little effort, as we shall see shortly, to extrapolate their full
implications. Before doing that, however, a few words of clarification
on the scope of contemporary philosophy of science are in order.

The primary concern of the contemporary philosophy of science is to
establish the validity, or lack thereof, of the truth claims of modern
natural sciences. The theory-observation dichotomy, fact-value
distinction, experimentation, objectivity, scientific community, history
and sociology of science, and a host of other problems stand out,*inter
alia* , as the most important issues of the field, which leaves no
aspect of the scientific enterprise untouched. What concerns us here,
however, is the emphasis of the philosophy of science on epistemology to
the point of excluding any ontological or metaphysical arguments. The
majority of contemporary philosophers of science, including such
celebrated vanguards as Kuhn, Popper and Feyerabend, construe science
primarily as an epistemic structure that claims to explain the order of
physical reality within the exclusive framework of scientific methods.
Scientific realism, anti-realism, instrumentalism, empiricism are all,
needles to say, anchored in different notions of knowledge with profound
implications for the natural as well as the human sciences. Given its
exclusive concern with epistemic claims involved, contemporary
philosophy of science can be stated as the epistemology of science. In
this regard, the epistemic view of science is surely a respected member
of modern philosophy for which any concept other than the knowing
subject and its paraphernalia is simply a non-starter for a proper
understanding of the world.

Thinking out the question of being in terms of how it is known, to use a
Heideggerian language, is the leitmotif of modern philosophy, including
its prima facie foes, rationalism and empiricism.[^25] Whether we
consider the knowing subject as a rationalist, empiricist, structuralist
or deconstructionist, the anthropocentric ethos runs through the veins
of how we perceive the world around us, how we interact with it, and how
we position ourselves vis-à-vis the other human beings with whom we
share the intentional as well as the physical space of our life-world.
Here the eternal paradox of all subjectivist epistemologies is brought
into clarity: to put the subject before the world, of which he is a
part, is to claim the square inside

the circle to be larger than the circle. Said differently, to ground the
intelligibility of the world in the discursive constructions of the
knowing subject is to see the world, or rather anything outside the
subject, as essentially devoid of intrinsic meaning and
intelligibility.[^26] The Muslim critique of modern science based on the
premises of modern epistemology has usually lost sight of this crucial
fact as we see in the otherwise commendable literature produced by
Ismail Faruqi and his protégé International Institute of Islamic Thought
(mentioned hereafter as IIIT).

There is no denying the fact that Kuhn's radical anti-realism or
Popper's concept of verisimilitude cannot be interpreted as lending
support to the epistemic hegemony of modern science. On the contrary,
they are meant to destroy it once and for all. The anti-realist
component of their positions, however, reinforces the anthropocentric
imagery: it is the knowing subject who is willing to deny science its
self-proclaimed objectivity and appeal to credibility.[^27] It is this
aspect of contemporary philosophy of science, I believe, that has been
totally mistaken and ignored by its adherents in the Islamic world.
Today we can hardly come across a book or article written in English,
Arabic, Turkish or Bahasa Malaysia that does not have recourse to
Foucault, Kuhn, Feyerabend or Lyotard to denounce the philosophical
underpinnings of modern science.[^28] From the academic papers of Muslim
graduate students to the writings of the so-called 'ijmalis' led by
Ziauddin Sardar, the names of numerous philosophers of science sweep
through the literature with indigenous additions from the Islamic point
of view. To put it mildly, this has led to the overemphasis of
epistemology and methodology among many Muslim thinkers and young
scholars while questions of ontology and metaphysics have been either
left out or taken for granted. The concept of Islamic science, in this
point of view, is centered around a loosely defined epistemology, or
rather set of discrete ideas grouped under Islamic epistemology whose
content is yet to be determined. In many ways, the idea of Islamizing
natural and social sciences has been equated, by and large, with
producing a different structure of knowledge and methodology within what
we might call the epistemologist fallacy of modern philosophy. The
crucial issue has thus remained untouched: to reduce the notion of
Islamic science to considerations of epistemology and methodology, which
are without doubt indispensable in their own right, is to seek out a
space for the Islamic point of view within, and not outside, the
framework of modern philosophy.

Ismail Faruqi's work known under the rubric of Islamization of knowledge
is a good example of how the idea of method or methodology ('manhaj' and
‘manhajiyyah’, the Arabic equivalents of method and methodology being
the most popular words of the proponents of this view) can obscure
deeper philosophical issues involved in the current discussions of
science. Even though Faruqi's project was proposed to Islamize the
existing forms of knowledge imported from the West, his focus was
exclusively on the humanities, leaving scientific knowledge virtually
untouched. This was in tandem with his conviction that the body of
knowledge generated by modern natural sciences is neutral and as such
requires no special attention. Thus, Faruqi's work, and that of IIIT
after his

death, concentrated on the social sciences and education.[^29] This had
two important consequences. First, Faruqi's important work on
Islamization provided his followers with a framework in which knowledge
(*al-‘ilm* ) came to be equated with social disciplines, thus ending up
in a kind of sociologism. The prototype of Faruqi's project is, we may
say, the modern social scientist entrusted with the task of the
traditional*'alim* . Second, the exclusion of modern scientific
knowledge from the scope of Islamization has led to the negligence, to
say the least, of the secularizing effect of modern scientific
worldview.[^30] This leaves the Muslim social scientists, the ideal-type
of the Islamization program, with no clue as to how to deal with the
question of modern scientific knowledge. Furthermore, to take the
philosophical foundations of modern natural sciences for granted is
tantamount to reinforcing the dichotomy between the natural and human
sciences, a dichotomy whose consequences continue to pose serious
challenges to the validity of the forms of knowledge outside the domain
of modern physical sciences.[^31]

A similar position, with some important variations, is to be found in
the works of Ziauddin Sardar and a number of closely associated scholars
known as the “ijmalis” and the “Aligarh School”.[^32] Although the
ijmalis do not accept the appellation of being a 'merely Kuhnian', one
can hardly fail to see the subtext of their discourse based on Kuhn,
Feyerabend and others in their critique of modern Western science.[^33]
Sardar's definition of science shares much of the instrumentalist and
anti-realist spirit of the Kuhnian science. For him, science is 'a basic
problem-solving tool of any civilization. Without it, a civilization
cannot maintain its political and social structure or meet the basic
needs of its people and culture.'[^34] The ijmali's socio-cultural point
of view certainly points to an important component of scientific
activity, viz., the social setting in which the sciences are cultivated
and flourish. It is, however, to be noted that the relegation of
physical sciences, or any scholarly activity for that matter, to social
utility is bound to have serious consequences insofar as the
philosophical legitimacy of sciences is concerned. As we see in the case
of Van Fraassen and Kuhn, the instrumentalist definition of science
entails a strong leaning towards anti-realism, a position whose
compatibility with the concept of Islamic science is yet to be accounted
for.

Yet, there is another paradox involved here. The most common critique of
modern science has been to present it as a culturally conditioned and
historical endeavor with claims to universality and objectivity. Kuhn's
philosophy of paradigm, which has become the most fashionable buzz word
in the Islamic world, Feyerabend's defense of society against science,
or Van Fraassen's scientific instrumentalism are all profusely used to
show the utter historicity and relativity of modern science. Since every
scientific, and, by extension, human activity is embedded in a
historical and cultural setting, we can no longer speak of sciences in
isolation from their socio-historical conditions. This implies that no
account of science, be it Western or Islamic, is possible without the
history and, more importantly, sociology of science, whose task is to
deconstruct the historical formation and genealogy of sciences.
Furthermore, this approach has been applied to humanities as well,

with almost total disregard to its implications for what is proposed in
its place, i.e., Islamic science and methodology.

At this point, philosophy of science becomes identical with sociology of
science, and any appeal to universal validity and objectivity by
physical sciences is rejected on the basis of their utter historicity,
contingency, ideology, cultural bias, and so on. Even though these terms
are used as household terms by many Muslims writing and thinking on
modern science, they rarely appear in their defense of Islamic science,
which is proposed as an alternative to the Western conceptions of
science. If science, as the advocates of this view seem to imply, is
culture-specific with no right to universal applicability, then this has
to be true for all scientific activity whether it takes place in the
11th century Samarqand or the 20th century Sweden. This is in fact what
is so clearly intended and stated by all the major expositors of the
philosophy of science. If it is the modern secular science that is
culturally and historically constructed, then Islamic science, as
understood by this group of scholars, has to explain how and why it is
entitled to universal validity and applicability. It will simply be
short of logical consistency to say that Kuhn's language of paradigms is
an adequate tool to explain the history of Western but not Islamic
science.

What I have called here the epistemic view of science, which has taken
the form of an extremely common tendency rather than a single school of
thought, has certainly raised the consciousness of the Islamic world
about modern science, and contributed to the ongoing discussion of the
possibility of having a scientific study of nature based on an Islamic
ethos. We can, however, hardly fail to see the contradictions in this
point of view especially when it is most vulnerable to the temptations
of modern epistemology. The emphasis put on epistemology to the point of
excluding ontology and metaphysics has grave consequences for any notion
of science, and it is for this reason that we do not see any serious
study of philosophy, metaphysics or cosmology among the followers of
this point of view. Furthermore there is a deliberate resistance to
these disciplines in spite of the fact traditional Islamic philosophy
and metaphysics had functioned as a gateway between scientific knowledge
and religious faith. At any rate, it remains to be seen if the adherents
of the epistemic view of science will be able to overcome the
subjectivist fallacy of modern philosophy, i.e., building an
epistemology without articulating an adequate metaphysics and ontology.


