


The Sacred versus the Secular: The Metaphysics of Science
The last major position on science of which we can give here only a
brief summary is marked off from the other two positions by its emphasis
on metaphysics and the philosophical critique of modern science.
Represented chiefly,*inter alia* , by such thinkers as Rene Guenon,
Seyyed Hossein Nasr, Naquib al-Attas, Osman Bakar, Mahdi Golshani and
Alparslan Acikgenc, the metaphysical view of science considers every
scientific activity operating within a framework of metaphysics whose
principles are derived from the immutable teachings of the Divine
revelation. In contrast to philosophy and sociology of science,
metaphysics of science provides sciences with a sacred concept of nature
and cosmology within which to function.[^35] At this point, the sacred
view of nature taught by religions and ancient traditions takes on a
prime importance in the formation and operation of physical sciences,
and all of the traditional sciences, regardless of the historical and
geographic setting they were cultivated in, were based on such
principles which had enabled them to produce highly advanced sciences
and techniques while maintaining the sacredness of nature and the
cosmos. The traditional natural sciences, Nasr and others argue, derived
not only their work-ethics and methodology but also metaphysical and
ontological*raison d'etre* from the principles of Divine revelation
because they were rooted in a conception of knowledge according to which
the knowledge of the world acquired by man and the sacred knowledge
revealed by God were seen as a single unity. As a result, the
epistemological crisis of the natural and human sciences that we try to
overcome today did not arise for the traditional scientist who did not
have to sacrifice his religious beliefs in order to carry out a
scientific experiment, and vise versa.

The traditional metaphysics envisages reality as a multi-layered
structure with different levels and degrees of meaning. The polarity
between the Principle and Its manifestation, which is translated into
the language of theology as God and His creation, gives rise to a
hierarchic view of the universe because manifestation already implies a
domain of reality lower than its sustaining origin. Moreover, since
reality is what it is due to the Divine nature, it cannot be seen as a
play-thing or the product of a series of fortuitous events. On the
contrary, the cosmos, as the traditional scientists firmly believed, is
teleological throughout, displaying a remarkable order and
purpossiveness. Nature, depicted by modern science as a ceaseless flow
of change and contingency, never fails to restore itself into an abode
of permanence and continuity with the preservation of species and
self-generation.[^36] Seen under this light, nature, which is the
subject matter of physical sciences, cannot be reduced to any one of
these levels. With reductionism out, the traditional metaphysics of
science uses a language built upon such key terms as hierarchy,*telos* ,
interconnectedness, isomorphism, unity and complexity. These qualities
are built into the very structure and methodology of traditional
sciences of nature, which can be taken to be one of the demarcation
lines between the sacred and modern secular views of science.[^37] It is
therefore impossible, the proponents of this view would insist, to
create or resuscitate the traditional Islamic sciences of

nature without first articulating its metaphysical framework. Any
attempt to graft Islamic ethics and epistemology to the metaphysically
blind outlook of modern science is bound to be a failure.

The philosophical underpinnings of Islamic science, as defined by Nasr,
Attas, and others are derived from the metaphysical principles of Islam.
Just as the Islamic revelation determines the social and artistic life
of the Muslim civilization, it also gives direction to its understanding
of the natural environment and its scientific study.[^38] The doctrine
of*tawhid* , the most essential tenet of Islamic religion, affirms the
unity of the Divine Principle, and it is projected into the domain of
natural sciences as the essential unity and interrelatedness of the
natural order. A science can thus be defined as Islamic, Acikgenc
states, to the extent to which it conforms to and reflects the cardinal
principles of the Islamic worldview.[^39] In a similar way, Nasr insists
that 'the aim of all the Islamic sciences -- and more generally
speaking, of all the medieval and ancient cosmological sciences --is to
show the unity and interrelatedness of all that exists, so that, in
contemplating the unity of the cosmos, man may be led to the unity of
the Divine Principle, of which the unity of Nature is the image.'[^40]
Thus the Islamic sciences of nature function in a two-fold way. First,
they look at nature as a single unity with all of its parts
interconnected to each other. Second, they are meant to lead both the
scientist and the layman to the contemplation of Nature as the sacred
artifact of the Divine. For Nasr, the sacred cosmology of the Sufis,
which is grounded in metaphysics and inspiration rather than physical
sciences*per se* , is related to the second function of the sciences of
nature, and maintains its validity even today for it is based on the
symbolic significance of the cosmos. This brings us to the other
important feature of the Islamic sciences of nature, i.e., their
intellectual function.

Nasr uses the word 'intellect' in its traditional sense, viz., as
related to contemplation. The modern connotation of the words intellect
and intellectual as logical analysis or discursive thinking is the
result of the emptying of their metaphysical and mystical content.
Having rejected the usage of the word 'intellect' as abstract analysis
or sentimentality, Nasr seeks to regain its medieval and traditional
usage.

'"Intellect" and "intellectual" are so closely identified today with the
analytical function of the mind that they hardly bear any longer any
relation to the contemplative. The attitude these words imply toward
Nature is the one that Goethe was to deplore as late as the early
nineteenth century -- that attitude that resolves, conquers, and
dominates by force of concepts. It is, in short, essentially abstract,
while contemplative knowledge is at bottom concrete. We shall thus have
to say, by way of establishing the old distinction, that the gnostic's
relation to Nature is 'intellective', which is neither abstract, nor
analytical, nor merely sentimental.'[^41]

Defined as such, the Islamic sciences of nature do not lend themselves
to being a means of gaining power and domination over nature. Their
contemplative aspect, rooted in the Quranic teachings of nature as well
as in traditional cosmologies, ties them to metaphysics on the one hand,
and to art on the other.

By the same token, the function of philosophy cannot be confined to
being a mere interpreter of the data produced by natural sciences. In
sharp contrast to the Kantian notion of philosophy, which has turned
philosophy into a handmaid of Newtonian physics, Nasr assigns to
philosophy an important role in establishing a harmonious relation
between the givens of religion and the demands of scientific
investigation. In the post-Kantian period, philosophy was gradually
reduced to a second-order analysis of the first-order facts of physical
sciences, and this has assigned to philosophical pursuit a completely
different task. In contrast to this new mission, Nasr insists on the
traditional meaning and function of philosophy. On the one hand,
philosophy is related to the life-world in which we live, including the
physical environment, and as such it cannot remain indifferent to a
veritable understanding of the universe and the cosmos. On the other
hand, it is closely related to metaphysics and wisdom, and as such it
cannot be reduced to a branch of physical sciences. In fact, this is how
the relationship between philosophy and science was established in
classical classifications of knowledge, both in the West and the Islamic
world. The scientist and the philosopher were united in one and the same
person as we see in the case of an Aristotle or Ibn Sina, and this
suggests that the scope of philosophical thinking could not be relegated
to quantitative analysis of natural sciences. Thus, in Nasr's concept of
science, philosophy, in addition to metaphysics and aesthetics, plays a
crucial role that cannot be substituted for by any other science.[^42]
Moreover, the sciences of nature always function within a definite
framework of ontology and cosmology, which is articulated primarily and
essentially by philosophy in the traditional sense of the term. This is
why philosophy is an integral part of Nasr's metaphysical concept of
science.

The metaphysical view of traditional civilizations concerning nature and
its scientific study has been lost in modern science whose philosophical
foundations go back to the historical rupture of the Western thought
with its traditional teachings. The rise of modern science, Nasr and
others would insist, was not simply due to some ground-breaking
advancements in scientific methods of measurement and calculation.[^43]
On the contrary, it was the result of a fundamental change in man's
outlook concerning the universe.[^44] This outlook is predicated upon a
number of premises, among which the following five are of particular
significance. The first is the secular view of the universe, which
allows no space for the Divine in the order of nature. The second is the
mechanistic world-picture presented by modern science, which construes
the cosmos as a self-subsistent machine and/or pre-ordained clock. The
third is the epistemological hegemony of rationalism and empiricism over
the current conceptions of nature. The fourth is the Cartesian
bifurcation, based on Descartes' categorical distinction between*res
cogitans* and*res extensa* , which can also be read as the ontological
alienation of the knowing subject from his/her object of knowledge. The
fifth and the final premise of modern scientific worldview, which can be
seen as the end-result of the preceding points, is the exploitation of
the natural environment as a source of global power and domination.[^45]
This is coupled with the hubris of modern science which does

not accept any notion of truth and knowledge other than what is
verifiable within the context of its highly specialized, technical, and
hence restricted means of verification.

The metaphysical view of science, which points to an interesting shift
from the philosophy to the metaphysics of science, takes aim at the
intellectual foundations of modern science and, unlike the other two
views of science, proposes a well-defined philosophy of nature and
cosmology based on the principles of traditional Islamic sciences. Its
critique of modern science is not confined to ethical considerations or
methodological amendments as it claims to restore the religious view of
the universe. In this regard, the metaphysical view of science, as
formulated by Nasr and others, is part of the larger project of
deconstructing the modernist worldview, of which science is considered
to be only an offshoot.

\* \* \* \* \*


