


Endnotes

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1] Among those who were sent to Europe as the reconnoiterer of the
Islamic world was Yirmisekiz Mehmet Celebi (Chalabi). He arrived at
Paris as the Ottoman ambassador in 1720 and became one of the first
Ottomans to give a first-hand report of 'modern' Europe, especially
France. When compared with the accounts of earlier Muslim travelers to
Europe, such as that of Evliya Celebi, his reports and letters show in
qn unequivocal way the psychology of the 18<sup>th</sup> century: a
proud Muslim soul torn between the glory of his history and the
mind-boggling advancement of the 'afranj', the infidels of Europe.
Mehmet Celebi's reports published under the title of Sefaretname became
a small genre of its own to be followed by later Ottoman envoys to
Europe. His Sefaretname has also been translated into French by Julien
Galland as Relation de l'embassade de Mehmet Effendi a la cour de France
en 1721 ecrite par lui meme et traduit par Julien Galland
(Constantinople and Paris, 1757). For a brief account on Mehmet Celebi
in English, see Bernard Lewis, The Muslim Discovery of Europe, (New
York: W. W. Norton & Company, 1982), pp. 114-[^116]:

[^2] See, among others, Bernard Lewis, The Muslim Discovery of Europe,
pp. 221-238; and H. A. R. Gibb and Harold Bowen (eds.), Islamic Society
and the West: A Study of the Impact of Western Civilization on Moslem
Culture in the Near East (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1957), vol.
I, parts I & II.

[^3] G. E. Von Grunebaum, Modern Islam: The Search for Cultural Identity
(Connecticut; Greenwood Press, 1962), pp. 103-[^111]:

[^4] Ataturk’un Soylev ve Demecleri (Ankara, 1952), II, 44, from a
speech given in October 27, 1922; quoted in Von Grunebaum, ibid., p.
[^104]:

[^5] Although the most celebrated responses to Renan belong to J.
Afghani and N. Kemal, a number of other refutations have been written.
The Turkish scholar Ducane Cundioglu lists twelve major refutations, ten
of which are by Muslims, and the list comprises such names as Sayyid
Amir Ali, Rashid Rida, Celal Nuri, Louis Massignon, and Muhammad
Hamidullah. For an excellent survey of the subject, see his 'Ernest
Renan ve 'Reddiyeler' Baglaminda Islam-Bilim Tartismalarina
Bibliyografik Bir Katki', Divan, Vol. 2 (Istanbul, 1996), pp. 1-[^94]:

[^6] The full text of Afhgani's rebuttal 'Refutation of the
Materialists' is translated by Nikki R. Keddie, An Islamic Response to
Imperialism, Political and Religious Writings of Sayyid Jamal al-Din
al-Afghani, (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1983), pp.
130-[^174]:

[^7] Namik Kemal’s Defense has been published in Turkish many times. For
a brief account of his political thought in general and apology in
particular, see Serif Mardin, The Genesis of Young Ottoman Thought: A
Study in the Modernization of Turkish Political Ideas (Syracuse:
Syracuse University Press, 2000; originally published in 1962), pp.
283-[^336]:

[^8] For the radical positivism of Shumayyil and Antun, see Albert
Hourani, Arabic Thought in the Liberal Age: 1798-1939 (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1993), pp. 245-259; Hisham Sharabi, Arab
Intellectuals and the West: The Formative Years 1875-1941 (Washington
DC: The Johns Hopkins Press, 1970). See also Osman Bakar 'Muslim
Intellectual Responses to Modern Science' in his Tawhid and Science:
Essays on the History and Philosophy of Islamic Science (Kuala Lumpur:
Secretariat for Islamic Philosophy and Science, 1991), pp. 205-[^207]:

[^9] Turkey is a case in point. The growing literature on the philosophy
of science in Turkish, with translations from European languages and
indigenous contributions of Turkish scholars, is far beyond the other
Islamic languages both in quality and quantity. Interestingly enough,
the Muslim intellectuals have been more vocal in this debate, carrying
the heritage of the Islamic sciences of nature into the very center of
the current discourse on science. In addition to philosophical
discussions, there is now a serious work done on the history of Islamic
and especially Ottoman science, which was begun some years back under
the direction of Ekmeleddin Ihsanoglu, head of the department of the
history of Ottoman science at the University of Istanbul.

[^10] See the remarks of Abdus Salam, the Nobel laureate and one of the
famous scientists of the 20<sup>th</sup> century, Ideals and Realities:
Selected Essays of Abdus Salam, ed. by C. H. Lai (Singapore: World
Scientific, 1987).

[^11] Osman Amin, one of the prominent figures of Egyptian intellectual
scene of the last century and perhaps the most outspoken vanguard of the
19<sup>th</sup> century Islamic modernism represented by Afghani, Abduh
and Abd al-Raziq, interprets Abduh's vision of modern science as a
veritable attempt to revive the traditional concept of knowledge ('ilm).
He has the following to say: 'Islam has been accused of being hostile to
the development of science and culture. For 'Abduh there is nothing more
false than such hasty or partial judgments. In the search for truth,
Islam prescribes reasons [sic.], condemns blind imitation and blames
those who attach themselves without discernment to the habits and
opinions of their forefathers. How then can Islam, based on the
requirements of human nature and reason, and itself urging its faithful
to seek and reason, to develop their knowledge and to perfect their
understanding -- how can such a faith be incapable of satisfying the
demands of science and culture? … Did not the Prophet of Islam say:
'Seek to learn science even though you have to find it in China.' …
undoubtedly the religion which declared that 'the ink of a scholar is as
precious as the blood of martyrs' cannot be accused of obscurantism in
its essential nature.' Osman Amin, Lights on Contemporary Moslem
Philosophy (The Renaissance Bookshop: Cairo, 1958), pp. 140-141; cf.
also pp. 105-[^106]:

[^12] Afghani's letter to Renan, published in Journal de Debats, May 18,
1883, translated in Kiddie, ibid., p. [^183]:

[^13] Afghani, 'Lecture on Teaching and Learning', in Keddie, ibid., p.
[^107]:

[^14] Perhaps the most notable exception, albeit in a rather negative
sense, was Sayyid Ahmad Khan who had called for the complete rejection
of the traditional notions of nature under the name of 'new theology'
(ilm-i kalam-i jadid). Afhgani was well aware of the perils of this
point of view, and thus did not hesitate to include Ahmad Khan among the
'materialists', whom he called 'neicheri', namely the naturalists. For
Afghani's response, see his 'The Materialists in India', al-'Urwat
al-Wuthqa, August 28, 1884, translated in N. R. Keddie, ibid., pp.
175-[^180]:

[^15] In one of his famous aphorisms, Nursi stresses the importance of
the unity of the heart and reason for the future of humanity. But he
qualifies reason (akil, aql in Arabic) as 'the sciences of modern
civilization' (funun-u medeniye): 'The light of the heart (vicdan,
wijdan in Arabic) are the religious sciences whereas the light of reason
are the modern sciences. The truth emerges out of the blend of the two.
When they are separated, the former causes dogmatism and the latter
deception and suspicion.' Said Nursi, Munazarat (Istanbul: Tenvir
Nesriyat, 1978), p.  [^81]:

[^16] Nursi's works, especially the Sozler (Istanbul: Sinan Matbaasi,
1958), are replete with references to God as the Great or Absolute
Artisan (sani-i mutlak) of the universe. It goes without saying that
Nursi was not alone in approaching the deterministic and orderly
universe of modern science from this peculiar point of view. In fact,
this was a common attitude among the forerunners of what is called the
'scientific method of commenting upon the Qur'an' (al-tafsir al-'ilmi
and/or al-tafsir al-fanni) such as Muhammad Abdu, Muhammad ibn Ahmad
al-Iskandarani, Sayyid Abd al-Rahman al-Kawakibi, and Muhammad Abdullah
Draz. Like Nursi, these figures were passionately engaged in reconciling
the scientific findings of 19<sup>th</sup> century physical sciences
with the cosmological verses of the Qur'an and, in some cases, the
sayings (hadith) of the Prophet of Islam. For these figures and the
concept of scientific commentary, see Ahmad Umar Abu Hijr, al-Tafsir
al-'Ilmi li'l-Qur'an fi'l-Mizan (Beirut, 1991) and Muhammad Husayn
al-Dhahabi, al-Tafsir wa'l-Mufassirun, 2 vols (Beirut, 1976).

[^17] Serif Mardin, Religion and Social Change in Turkey: The Case of
Bediuzzaman Said Nursi (New York: SUNY Press, 1989), p. [^214]: Mardin
also makes interesting remarks concerning Nursi's ambivalent relation to
Sufi cosmology represented especially by Ibn Arabi. Ibid., pp. 203-212.

[^18] Without exception, all of Nursi's followers appeal to the first
view, rejecting any association with positivism. For a defense of this
position, see, among others, Yamine B. Mermer, 'The Hermeneutical
Dimension of Science: A Critical Analysis Based on Said Nursi's Risale-i
Nur', The Muslim World, Special Issue: Said Nursi and the Turkish
Experience, ed. by M. Hakan Yavuz, Vol. LXXXIX, Nos. 3-4 (July-October,
1999), pp. 270-[^296]: Mermer's essay is also interesting for making a
case for occasionalism on the basis of Nursi's views.

[^19] I am grateful to Drs. Ali Mermer and Yamine B. Mermer for drawing
my attention to this incongruity, which should perhaps be emphasized
more than I can afford here. I will be dealing with Nursi's position on
science in full detail in a separate study.

[^20] The ambiguity, for want of a better term, of Nursi's position on
modern science is illustrated by an interesting incident which Nursi
narrates in his Kastamonu Lahikasi (Ankara: Dogus Matbaasi, 1958), p.
[^179]: According to the story, a Naqshibandi darwish, a member of the
Naqshibandiyyah order, has read a section of the Risale-i Nur on the
meaning of 'ism-i Hakem (the Divine name of the Arbiter) dealing with
sun and the solar system, and concluded that 'these works [i.e., the
Risaleler] deal with scientific matters just like the scientists and
cosmographers'. In response to this 'delusion' (vehim), Nursi has the
same treatise read to him in his presence, upon which the darwish admits
his misunderstanding. This incident is narrated by Nursi, we may
presume, as a preemptive act to separate Nursi's 'scientific exegesis'
from the method of modenr physical sciences.

[^21] Sozler (Istanbul:  Sinan Matbaasi, 1958), p. 265, and Isharat
al-i'jaz fi mazanni'l-ijaz (Istanbul, 1994), p. [^311]:

[^22] Sozler, p. [^266]:

[^23] Ibid., pp. 263; see also his Sikke-i Tasdik-i Gaybi (Istanbul:
Sinan Matbaasi, 1958), p. [^76]:

[^24] Sozler, pp. 272-273; Isharat, p. [^310]:

[^25] Heidegger makes his case in two of his famous essays ‘The Question
Concerning Technology’ and ‘The Age of the World Picture’. These essays
have been published in The Question Concerning Technology and Other
Essays, Translated and with an Introduction by William Lowitt, (New
York: Harper Colophon Books, 1977). See also, in the same collection of
essays, his ‘Science and Reflection’, pp. 155-[^182]:

[^26] Charles Taylor puts it in the following way: ‘Is the expression
which makes us human essentially a self-expression, in that we are
mainly responding to our way of feeling/experiencing the world, and
bringing this to expression? Or are we responding to the reality in
which we are set, in which we are included of course, but which is not
reducible to our experience of it?’ See Charles Taylor, Human Agency and
Language: Philosophical Papers, vol. I., (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1985), p. [^238]:

[^27] Heidegger calls this ‘projection’, through which the world of
nature is made the subject-matter of mathematico-physical sciences:
‘What is decisive for its development [viz., the development of
mathematical physics] does not lie in its rather high esteem for the
observation of 'facts', nor in its 'application' of mathematics in
determining the character of normal processes; it lies rather in the way
in which Nature herself is mathematically projected. In this projection,
something constantly present-at-hand (matter) is uncovered beforehand,
and the horizon is opened so that one may be guided by looking at those
constitutive items in it, which are quantitatively determinable (motion,
force, location, and time). Only 'in the light' of a Nature which has
been projected in this fashion can anything like a 'fact' be found and
set up for an experiment regulated and delimited in terms of this
projection. The 'grounding' of 'factual science' was possible only
because the researchers understood that in principle there are no 'bare
facts'’. Being and Time, tr. by J. Macquarrie and E. Robinson, (Oxford:
Basil Blackwell, 1978), pp. 413-[^4]:

[^28] To illustrate the lure of postmodernism in the current debate, one
may refer to Alan Sokal’s now famous hoax and its wholehearted
incorporation by M. Zaki Kirmani, a member of the Aligarh school. Alan
Sokal, a physicist and philosopher of science, published an article in
Social Text 46/47 (Spring-Summer, 1996), pp. 217-52 titled
“Transgressing the Boundaries: Toward a Transformative Hermeneutics of
Quantum Gravity”. In the article, Sokal, using the recent findings and
discussions in quantum physics, made a case for what is labeled as
‘postmodern science’, giving perhaps one of the most incredulous
versions of postmodernist discourse on science. The article was
published by Social Text in all seriousness. After the publication of
the article, however, Sokal shocked the academic world by declaring that
his article was a hoax and that its sole purpose was to expose what goes
under the name of postmodernism. As expected, the Sokal hoax quickly
became a hallmark of intellectual masquerading so rampant in academic
circles today. In the wake of the publication of his article and the
debate that ensued afterwards, Sokal made his overall case in
Intellectual Impostures (London: Profile Books, 1998) authored with Jean
Bricmont. Sokal’s famous article appears at the end of this book.
Apparently not aware of the Sokal event, A. Z. Kirmani quotes the
aforementioned article in earnest to make a case for postmodern science,
which he then relates to Islamic science. For Kirmani’s views, see his
“Islamic Science Debate: Entering the New Millennium”, Hamdard Islamicus
Vol. XXIII, No. 4 (October-December, 2000), pp. 33-[^34]:

[^29] See, Ismail R. al-Faruqi Islamization of Knowledge: General
Principles and Work Plan (Washington DC: International Institute of
Islamic Thought, 1982). This book has been largely revised and expanded
in its 1989 edition by a group of scholars associated with the
International Institute of Islamic Thought.

[^30] Jamal Berzinji, one of the family members of IIIT, mentions the
natural sciences only once (p. 28) in his informative article on
Islamization of knowledge and IIIT’s role in its development. See his
‘History of Islamization of Knowledge and Contributions of the
International Institute of Islamic Thought’ in Muslims and Islamization
in North America: Problems & Prospects, ed. by Amber Haque (Maryland:
Amana Publications, 1999), pp. 13-[^31]:

[^31] For an informative analysis of Faruqi's work on Islamization, see
Leif Stenberg, The Islamization of Science: Four Muslim Positions
Developing an Islamic Modernity (Lund: Lund Studies in History of
Religions, 1996), pp. 153-[^219]:

[^32] For an exposition and defense of the views of these two groups,
see A. Z. Kirmani, ibid., pp. 7-[^36]:

[^33] Ziauddin Sardar, Explorations in Islamic Science, (London: Mansell
Publishing Ltd., 1989), p. [^155]: This emphatic denial itself is quite
telling for our discussion here.

[^34] Z. Sardar, Islamic Futures (London: Mansell Publishing Ltd.,
1985), p. [^157]:

[^35] Nasr uses the word metaphysics as the all-inclusive science of the
Divine Principle, which comprises both ontology and theology: 'If Being
is envisaged as the principle of existence or of all that exists, then
It cannot be identified with the Principle as such because the Principle
is not exhausted by its creating aspect. Being is the first
determination of the Supreme Principle in the direction of
manifestation, and ontology remains only a part of metaphysics and is
incomplete as long as it envisages the Principle only as Being in the
sense defined.' Knowledge and the Sacred (New York: SUNY Press, 1989),
p. [^136]:

[^36] Perhaps the most systematic and comprehensive exposition of this
idea is to be found in Mulla Sadra's concept of nature (tabi'ah) and
substantial movement (al-harakat al-jawhariyyah). See the section on
natural philosophy (‘ilm al-tabi’ah) in his al-Hikmat al-muta’aliyah
fi’l-asfar al-arba’at al-’aqliyyah, ed. by M. Rida al-Muzaffar, (Beirut:
Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi, 1981), vol. 3, part. [^1]: Sadra’s work is
also important for its highly articulated cosmology which is comparable
only to that of Ibn al-‘Arabi.

[^37] For an analysis of such concepts as quality, quantity, unity,
simplicity regularity, etc., from the traditional point of view, see
Rene Guenon, The Reign of Quantity and the Signs of the Times (London,
1953), especially, pp. 19-[^100]:

[^38] S. H. Nasr, Islamic Science: An Illustrated Study (Kent: World of
Islam Festival Publishing Company Ltd, 1976), pp. 3-9; and S. M. Naquib
al-Attas, 'Islam and the Philosophy of Science' in his Prolegomena to
the Metaphysics of Islam: An Exposition of the Fundamental Elements of
the Worldview of Islam (Kuala Lumpur: ISTAC, 1995), and Islam and
Secularism (Kuala Lumpur: Muslim Youth Movement of Malaysia, 1978).

[^39] 'Islamic science is that scientific activity which takes place
ultimately within the Islamic worldview (which can now be identified
also as the Islamic conceptual environment); but as an extension of it
directly within the Islamic scientific conceptual scheme (which can be
identified also as the Islamic context of sciences).' Alparslan
Acikgenc, Islamic Science: Towards a Definition (Kuala Lumpur: ISTAC,
1996), p. [^38]:

[^40] S. H. Nasr, Science and Civilization in Islam (New York: Barnes &
Noble Books, 1992), p. [^22]:

[^41] Ibid., p. [^24]:

[^42] For Nasr's concept of philosophy, see his 'The Meaning and Concept
of Philosophy in Islam' and 'the Qur'an and the Hadith as Source and
Inspiration of Islamic Philosophy' in History of Islamic Philosophy, 2
vols, ed. by S. H. Nasr and O. Leaman (London: Routledge, 1996), pp.
21-[^39]:

[^43] This has been noted by many Western historians of science. See,
for instance,  Edwin Arthur Burtt, The Metaphysical Foundations of
Modern Physical Science (New York: Doubleday Anchor Books, 1932) and
Wolfgang Smith, Cosmos and Transcendence: Breaking Through the Barrier
of Scientistic Belief (Illinois: Sherwood Sugden & Company, 1984). For
the transformation of the concept of nature in the Western tradition,
see R. G. Collingwood, The Idea of Nature (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1972), especially pp. 133-[^177]: For a thorough study of the
ongoing debate on the meaning of the Scientific Revolution, see H.
Floris Cohen, The Scientific Revolution: A Historiographical Inquiry
(Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1994). Cohen’s book has also
a useful section (pp. 384-417) on Islamic science in relation to the
Scientific Revolution.

[^44] Russell has provided one of the most elegant expressions of the
secular outlook of modern physical sciences in his celebrated essay 'A
Free Man's Worship'. See his Mysticism and Logic (New York: Doubleday
Anchor Books, 1957), pp. 44-[^54]: It would not be out of place to quote
him here to underline the sharp contrast between the secular and
traditional conceptions of science: 'Such in outline, but even more
purposeless, more void of meaning, is the world which Science presents
for our belief. Amid such a world, if anywhere, our ideals henceforward
must find a home. That Man is the product of causes which had no
prevision of the end they were achieving; that his origin, his growth,
his hopes and fears, his loves and his beliefs, are but the outcome of
accidental collocations of atoms; that no fire, no heroism, no intensity
of thought and feeling, can preserve an individual life beyond the
grave; that all the labors of the ages, all the devotion, all the
inspiration, all the noonday brightness of human genius, are destined to
extinction in the vast death  of the solar system, and that the whole
temple Man's achievement must inevitably be buried beneath the debris of
a universe in ruins -- all these things, if not quite beyond dispute,
are yet so nearly certain, that no philosophy which rejects them can
hope to stand.' Ibid., p. 45.

[^45] Nasr has given a full account of this process in his Religion and
the Order of Nature (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997), which is a
comprehensive and detailed sequel to his earlier work Man and Nature:
The Spiritual Crisis in Modern Man (Chicago: ABC International, 1999). I
have dealt with Nasr’s conception of science in greater detail in my
'The Sacred versus the Secular: Nasr on Science', The Philosophy of
Seyyed Hossein Nasr, ed. by L. E. Hahn, R. E. Auxier, and L. W. Stone,
(Chicago: Open Court, 2001), pp. 445-[^462]:
