Chapter 7 : 2:26-27
===================

Surely Allâh is not ashamed to set forth any parable - (that of) a gnat
or any thing above that; then as for those who believe, they know that
it is the truth from their Lord, and as for those who disbelieve, they
say: "What is it that Allâh means by this parable?" He causes many to
err by it and many He leads aright by it, but He does not cause to err
by it (any) except the transgressors (26), who break the covenant of
Allâh after its confirmation and cut asunder what Allâh has ordered to
be joined, and make mischief in the land; these it is that are the
losers (27).

**COMMENTARY**

QUR’?N: Surely Allâh is not ashamed. . . : Gnat or mosquito is one of
the smallest animals perceptible by naked eyes. These two verses run
parallel to verses 19 - 21 of ch. 13: Is then he who knows that what has
been sent down to you from your Lord is the truth like unto him who is
blind? Only those pos­sessed of understanding shall bear in mind, those
who fulfil the promise of Allâh and do not break the covenant, and those
who join that which Allâh has bidden to be joined, and fear Allâh and
fear the evil reckoning.

The verse clearly shows that there is a straying, a blind­ness, which
afflicts the man as a result of his evil deeds; it is different from
that initial straying and blindness which the man opts for by his own
free will. Look at the sentence, "but He does not cause to err by it
(any) except the transgressors". They transgressed first, and it was
only then that Allâh made them go astray.

Guidance and misguidance are two comprehensive words; they encompass
every felicity and infelicity that comes from Allâh to His good and
wicked servants respectively. As Allâh describes in the Qur’ân, He makes
His good servants live a happy life, strengthens them with the spirit of
faith, bring them out of the darkness into the light, and gives them a
light by which they walk among the people; He has taken them under His
protection and guardianship, and there is no fear for them, nor shall
they grieve; He is with them, answers them when they call on Him, and
remembers them when they remember Him; and the angels come down to them
with good news of eternal peace.

Diametrically opposed to it is the condition of evil-doers. Allâh
causes them to err, takes them out of the light into the darkness, sets
a seal upon their hearts and hearings, and a cover­ing over their eyes;
He alters their faces turning them on their backs; places chains on
their necks and these reach up to their chins, so they have their heads
raised aloft, and makes a barrier before them and a barrier behind them,
then He covers them over so that they cannot see; He appoints for them
the Satans to become their associates, and they turn them away from the
right path while they think that they are guided aright; those Satans
make their misdeeds to seem good to them and they are their guardians;
Allâh leads them on by steps from whence they perceive not; and yet He
respites them, but His plan is firm; He makes a plan for them and leaves
them alone in their rebellion, blindly wandering on.

These are some examples of the conditions of the two groups. On deeper
consideration, it appears that man, in this world, lives two lives:
there is this life which may be seen and perceived by all, and there is
another life hidden behind this one; that hidden life is either good or
bad - depending on his faith and deeds. Man will become aware of that
hidden life when the veil of secrecy will be removed after death. Then
he will see himself in his true form.

Further, it appears from the Qur’ânic verses that man has had a
spiritual life before the life of this world; and he shall have another
life after this one. In other words, man has been given three lives -
this life in this world is the second one, there was one preceding it
and there will be another following. The con­dition of the third life
shall be determined by that of this second life - which, in its turn, is
governed by the first one.

Many exegetes have explained away the verses about the first life; they
say that it is only a literary style, which presents imaginary pictures
as real facts. And as for the verses concerning the life hereafter, they
too are misrepresented as allegories and metaphors. But both types of
verses are too clear in this meaning to allow such misinterpretations.

We shall explain the verses about the first life under ch. 7. As for
the life hereafter, many verses show that the same good or bad deeds
which man commits in this life, shall be returned to him, as their own
reward or punishment, on the day of requital. Allâh has mentioned this
fact in many verses: . . . and do not make excuses today; you shall be
recompensed only what you did (66:7); then every soul shall be paid back
in full what it has earned, and they shall not be dealt with unjustly.
(2:281); then be on guard against the fire of which men and stones are
fuel (2:24); Then let him summon his council, We too would summon the
tormentors (of the hell) (96:17-18); On the day that every soul shall
find present what it has done of good and what it has done of evil . . .
(3:30); . . . they eat nothing but fire into their bellies . . .
(2:174); . . . surely they only swallow fire into their bellies . . .
(4:10). There are many verses of the same import.

Then there is the verse 50:22, which by itself is enough to convince
one of this principle: Certainly you were heedless, of it, but now We
have removed from you your veil, so your sight today is sharp. The
words, "you were heedless of it", indicate that there was something
present in this world, to which the guilty one has not paid any
attention; "removed from you your veil" means that, but for that veil,
he could have seen that reality even in this worldly life. What the man
would see on the Day of Resurrection was present even in this earthly
life; otherwise, it would not be logical to say that previously you were
inattentive to it, or that it was hidden from your eyes, but now that
the cover has been removed, you may see it clearly.

There is no allegory or metaphor in these verses. Try to explain in
plain Arabic the principle which we have mentioned just now. You will
not find a more explicit way than the one used in these verses. Then,
how can they be explained away as allegories?

The divine talk here points at two realities:-

First: Recompense: What a man will get in hereafter - reward or
punishment, paradise or hell - shall be in recompense of the good or
evil he would have done in this life.

Second: Embodiment of the deeds: Many verses indicate that the good or
evil deeds themselves turn into their own pleasant or unpleasant
recompense. (Or, that the recompense is an insepar­able concomitant of
the deeds themselves.) It is hidden from our eyes in this life, but we
shall see it clearly on the day of reckoning.

These realities are not really two. But we had to explain it in this
way to bring it nearer to the minds. The Qur’ân too says that it uses
similitudes to make people understand.

QUR’?N: but He does not cause to err by it (any) except the
transgressors: "al–Fisq” ( = transgression, sinfulness ). It is the
Qur’ân that, first of all, used this word in its now prevalent meaning.
It is derived from fasaqati 't-tamrah ( = the date broke out of its
outer rind ). That is why it has been further explained by the words,
"who break the covenant of Allâh after its confirmation" - a thing must
be whole before it is broken. Also the transgressors are described at
the end of the verse as the losers - one must be owning a thing before
he can lose it. Allâh further says: Surely the losers are they who have
lost themselves and their people on the resurrection day (42:45). All
these expressions show how appropriate the adjective, "al- fâsiqîn " (=
the transgressors ) is in this context.

You should never think that the adjectives used by Allâh in His book
for His good servants (like "those who are near to Allâh", "the sincere
ones", "the humble ones", "the good ones", "the purified ones" etc.) or
for the evil ones (like "the unjust", "the transgressors", "the losers",
"those who go as­tray", etc.) are cheap epithets, or that they are used
as literary embellishment. Each adjective has its own significance; each
points to a particular stage in man's spiritual journey. Each has its
own characteristics, and gives rise to its especial effects and
consequences. On physical level, every age has its own char­acteristics
and powers, which cannot be found before or after that age; likewise, on
spiritual plane, every attribute has its own special effects.

**AN ESSAY ON COMPULSION AND DELEGATION**

The sentence, "but He does not cause to err by it (any) except the
transgressors", explains how Allâh manages the actions of His servants.
Does He compel them to act in a pre-determined way? Or, has He delegated
to them all powers in this respect? It is better to solve this knotty
problem here and now, by the guidance of the Qur’ân.

Allâh says: Whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth is
Allâh's (2:284); His is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth (57:5);
to Him belongs the kingdom, and to Him is due (all) praise (64:1). These
and other similar verses prove that to Allâh belongs the whole universe;
His ownership is unconditional and unlimited. A man owns a thing, let us
say, a donkey; he may use it and take its advantage to a certain extent
only. For ex­ample, he may ride it or use it as a beast of burden; but
he can­not starve it to death, nor can he burn it alive. Why? Because
his ownership is not absolute; society would condemn him if he were to
commit such atrocities. His ownership allows him certain advantages
only; and not every possible use.

But when we say that Allâh is the Owner of the worlds, we mean
absolute, real and unrestricted ownership. There is no owner except
Allâh; the things own, or control, for themselves neither any harm nor
any profit, neither life, death no resurrec­tion. It is only Allâh who
owns and controls every affair of every creature; He may do with them
whatever He pleases; no one can ask Him why; He cannot be blamed or
questioned for anything He does, because He is the absolute Owner. He
has, of course, allowed some of His creatures to use some other things
to a cer­tain limits; but both the user and the used are His property;
and the user cannot exceed the authorized limit. Allâh, as the absolute
Owner, cannot be questioned about His dispositions; but others have to
give account of how they exercised their authority. Allâh says: who is
he that can intercede with Him but by His permis­sion? (2:255); there is
no intercessor except after His permission (10:3); . . . that if Allâh
please He would certainly guide all the people? (13:31); And if Allâh
please He would certainly make you a single nation, but He causes to err
whom He pleases and guides whom He pleases . . . (16:93); And you do not
please except that Allâh please (76:30); He cannot be questioned
concerning what He does and they shall be questioned (21:23). Allâh
disposes and manages His property in any way He pleases; no one can use
any other thing except with His permission, because He is the real Owner
and Sustainer of every thing.

Now we come to the rules and laws which Allâh ordains for His
creatures. He uses the same method which has been adopted by the human
society - ordaining what is good and praising and rewarding its doers;
forbidding what is bad and condemning and punishing its doers. For
example, He says: If you give alms openly, it is well (2:271), . . .
evil is a bad name after faith (49:11). Obviously, the laws ordained by
Allâh look at the good of man, and aim at perfecting the human society.
Allâh says: . . . answer (the call of) Allâh and His Apostle when he
calls you to that which gives you life (8:24); that is better for you,
if you know (61:11); Surely Allâh enjoins the doing of justice and the
doing of good (to others) and the giving to kindred, and He forbids
indecency and evil and rebellion (16:90); Surely Allâh does not enjoin
indecency (7:28). There are many such verses; and they show that the
principles which the laws are based upon are always the same - be it a
divine commandment or a human legislation. What is good in itself and
ensures the good of the society is allowed, enjoined and prescribed; and
what is evil in itself and endangers the social structure is forbidden;
man is praised and rewarded for doing the former, and blamed and
punished for doing the later. Some of those principles are as
follows:-

People do whatever they do because of its underlying wisdom and good.
Legislation of laws is no exception to this rule; the laws too are made
because of their underlying good and benefit. They reward the
law-abiding citizens and chastise, if they so wish, the law-breakers.
The said recompense must be correlated to the action done - in its
quantity and quality. Also, it is accepted that the enjoinment and
prohibition can be addressed to him only who is not under any duress or
compulsion who has got freedom of will and choice. The above-mentioned
recompense too is related to such actions only which emanate from free
will and choice. Of course, if someone, by his own action, puts himself
in a tight corner, in a difficult position where he has to transgress a
law, he may be justly punished for that trans­gression, and his plea of
helplessness will not be heeded at all.

Allâh uses these same principles in His dealing with His creatures. He
does not compel the man to obey or to disobey the divine commands. Had
there been any compulsion, rewarding the obedient ones with the paradise
and punishing the disobedient ones with the hell would have been
absolutely wrong: the reward would have been an unprincipled venture,
and the punishment an unmitigated oppression and injustice - and all of
it is evil according to reason. Moreover, it would mean favouring one
against the other without any justification, without any cause – and
this too is a demerit according to reason. Furthermore, it would provide
the aggrieved party with a valid argument against Allâh; but Allâh says:
. . . so that people should not have an argument against Allâh after the
(coming of) apostles (4:165); . . . that he who would perish might
perish by clear proof, and he who would live might live by clear proof
(8:42).

The above discourse makes the following points clear:-

First: Divine laws are not based on compulsion. These rules have been
made for the good of man in this life and the hereafter. And they have
been prescribed for him because he has freedom of will, he may obey the
rule if he so wishes, and may disobey if he so chooses. He will be fully
recompensed for what­ever good or bad he does by his free will.

Second: There are things and actions which are not in conformity with
the divine sanctity, yet the Qur’ân attributes them to Allâh, like
misleading, deceiving, scheming against some­one, leaving him wandering
on in his rebellion, letting the Satan overpower the man and become his
associate. All these actions are related to various kinds of misleading
and misguidance. But Allâh is above all defects and demerits, and,
therefore, these words when attributed to Him, should convey a meaning
in keeping with His sacred name. Initial misleading, even in the sense
of making inattentive and forgetful, cannot be ascribed to Allâh. What
the above-mentioned expressions actually mean is this: When someone by
his own free will, opts to go astray, chooses the wrong path and commits
sins, then Allâh leaves him in that straying, and, thus, increases his
error - it is done as a punishment of his wrong choice. Allâh says: He
causes many to err by it and many He leads aright, by it, but He does
not cause to err by it (any) except the transgressors (2:26) . . . .
when they turned aside, Allâh made their hearts turn aside (61:5). Thus
does Allâh cause him to err who is extravagant, a doubter (40:34).

Third: The divine decree does not cover the actions of the man inasmuch
as they are attributed to him - they are done by the doer, although not
created by him. We shall further explain it later.

Fourth: Now that it has been seen that the divine law is not based on
compulsion, it should be clearly understood that it is not based on
delegation of power either. How can a "master" issue an authoritative
command if he has delegated all his powers to the servant. In other
words, this theory of delegation ne­gates the comprehensive ownership of
Allâh vis-à-vis many of His possessions.

**TRADITIONS**

A great number of traditions (narrated from the Imâms of Ahlu 'l-bayt -
a.s.) says: "There is neither compulsion nor delegation (of power), but
(there is) a position between these two (extremes)."

It is reported in ‘Uyûnu ’1-akhbâr, through several chains: When the
Leader of the faithful, ‘Alî ibn Abî Tâlib (a.s.) returned from Siffîn,
an old man (who has participated in that battle) stood up and said: "O
Leader of the faithful! Tell us about this journey of ours, was it by
Allâh's decree and measure?" The Leader of the faithful said: "Yes, O
Shaykh! By Allâh you did not ascend any elevation, nor did you descend
to any valley but by a decree of Allâh and by His measure." The old man,
there­upon said: "I leave to Allâh all my troubles (of this journey), O
Leader of the faithful!" (‘Alî - a.s.) replied: "Have patience, O
Shaykh! Perhaps you take it to mean a firm decree and a com­pulsory
measure! If it were so, then there would be no justifica­tion of reward
or punishment, no sense of command, prohibition or admonition, no
meaning of promise or threat; there would not be any blame on an
evil-doer nor any praise for a good-doer. Nay, the good-doer would have
been rather more deserving of blame than the evil-doer, and the
evil-doer rather more worthy of grace than the good-doer. (Beware!) this
is the belief of the idol-worshippers and the enemies of the Beneficent
God (who are) the Qadariyyah of this ummah and its Majûs. O Shaykh!
Verily Allâh ordained (the sharî‘ah) giving freedom of will (to men) and
prohibited (evil) to keep us on guard; and He gave plentiful (reward) on
meagre (deeds); and He was not disobeyed by being overpowered, nor was
He obeyed by compulsion; and He did not create the heavens and the earth
and what is between them in vain; that is the opinion of those who
disbelieve on account of the fire."

The author says: The topics of the speech of Allâh and His decree and
measure were among the earliest about which the Muslims differed among
themselves. This second dispute may be described as follows:

The eternal divine will govern every thing in the universe. These
things are transient in their quiddity; but when they do exist, they do
so because the will of Allâh decreed their existence - and in this way
their existence becomes essential - otherwise, the divine decree would
be meaningless. Conversely, when a thing does not exist, it is because
Allâh did not decree its existence - and in this way its existence
becomes impossible - otherwise, the divine will would be meaningless. In
short, whatever exists, exists because Allâh has decreed its
existence, - thus turning it into an essential being. This principle
applies everywhere. But the difficulty arises when it comes to such a
human action that issues from our own will and choice. We know that we
can do it if we so desire, and can ignore it if we so wish. Their doing
and not doing is equally possible to us. The balance is tipped in favour
of either side by our own will and choice. Our actions are based on our
choice, and our will brings them into existence. The difficulty that
arises at this point is this: We have earlier seen that nothing comes
into being without the will and decree of Allâh, which turns the thing
into an essential being - if so, then how can any action of ours be
termed as "possible" one? It must exist because the divine will has
decreed it! Moreover, how can our will affect it in any way when it is
governed by the will of Allâh? Also, in this background, it cannot be
said that man had power to do a certain work before he did it. And,
because he did not have that power, Allâh could not give him any order
or command for or against that work. Going a step further, if Allâh gave
him an order and he did not comply, it would mean that Allâh Himself had
not wanted that thing to happen; so it was impossible for it to happen.
Then the question would arise: How could Allâh order him to perform an
impossible task? Conversely, if someone complied with that order, it was
because Allâh Himself wanted it to happen. Then why should the man be
rewarded without any valid reason? By the same reasoning, a sinner
should not be punished, as it would be against justice, a naked
oppression. One may go on enumerating the difficulties arising out of
this subject. A large number of Muslims felt obliged to admit, and
believe in, all these absurdities. They said that:

Man does not have power to do a work before the time comes to do it.
The reason has nothing to do with the merit or demerit of any action.
Whatever Allâh does becomes good; and whatever He forbids becomes
evil.

Accordingly, Allâh may choose an action without any justification; He
may give reward without any cause; He may ordain laws beyond the
capacity of the doer or agent; He may inflict punishment on a
disobedient servant even though the said disobedience and transgression
was not of his doing.

It appears that the old man, who had asked the question, thought that
the belief in the divine will and decree meant that there was no merit
or demerit in any action and that man had no right of any reward (or
punishment). Naturally he was dis­appointed when he heard that the
journey was by the decree of Allâh; that is why he said: "I leave to
Allâh all my troubles." What he meant was this: My journey to Siffîn and
back and my fighting in the way of Allâh had no benefit for me as it was
governed and done by the will of Allâh; my share in all this venture was
only the trouble and the inconvenience which I underwent. Therefore, I
shall leave it to Allâh to balance my account, as it was He Who put me
through all these troubles. The Imâm (‘Alî) replied to him by saying,
"If it were so, there would be no justification of reward or punishment
. . . " The Imâm pointed to the rational principle on which the
legislation is based. And at the end he reasoned that Allâh did not
create the heavens and the earth and what is between them in vain. If
Allâh could will the man's actions in a way as to deprive him of his
freedom of will and choice, it would mean that He could do things
without any purpose and aim; then He could create the whole creation
aimlessly and in vain. This in its turn would render the principle of
resurrection and reward and punishment invalid too.

It is narrated in at-Tawhîd and ‘Uyûnu ’l-akhbâr that ar-Ridâ (a.s.)
was asked about compulsion and delegation, and he said: "Should I not
teach you in this regard a principle by which you shall never differ
(among yourselves), and no one will argue with you on this subject but
that you shall defeat him (by it)?" We said: "(Teach it to us) if you so
please." Thereupon he said: "Verily Allâh is not obeyed through
compulsion, nor is He dis­obeyed by overpowering; and He did not leave
the servants remiss in His kingdom; He (still) owns what He has given
into their possession, and has power on what He has put into their
power. Now, if the servants decided to obey Him, He would not prevent
them from it, nor would he put any obstruction to it; and if they
decided to disobey Him, then if He pleased to bar their way to it He
would do so, and if He did not hinder it and they com­mitted it, then it
was not He Who led them into that (sin)." Then the Imâm said: "Whoever
would accurately delineate the boundaries of this speech would surely
overcome his adversary."

The author says: Why did "al-Mujabbirah" ( = the believers in
compulsion ) say what they said? It was because they pondered on the
divine decree and measure, and it led them to the conclusion that when
Allâh decrees a thing it must happen inescapably. Their deliberation of
this subject was correct, and so was the conclusion arrived at. Where
they fell in error was in correlating that conclusion with reality; they
did not under­stand the difference between a reality and an idea based
on sub­jective approach; they forgot the distinction between
essentiality and possibility.

It is correct to say, on the basis of the divine decree and measure,
that nothing happens in this world unless it turns an essential being;
it is because every thing and every affair comes into being when it is
decreed by Allâh, according to the measure prescribed by Him; and then
it cannot fail to happen, otherwise the decree of Allâh would fail. At
the same time, it should be kept in mind that a transient or possible
thing becomes essential because of its sufficient cause. When looked at
in conjunction with its sufficient cause, it would be called
"essential"; but separated from that cause, it would remain as it was
before - a transient or possible thing. Let us look at an action of man
which he does by his free will and choice. When we look at it in
relation to all things that are necessary to bring it into being -
knowledge, will, proper tools and organs, the material, formal,
efficient and final causes, and all the conditions of time and space -
it will become an essential being; and it is in this context that it
become subject of the eternal divine will. In other words, it becomes an
essential being when all aspects of its sufficient cause are com­plete.
But, looked in relation to each of those aspects separately, it remains
only a transient and possible thing. If it is seen vis-à-vis its
efficient cause only, that is, in relation to the doer only, it will
retain its characteristics of transience and possibility - it will not
become an essential being.

It is now clear to see at which point the believers in "com­pulsion"
have deviated from the right path. They thought that, inasmuch as the
human action was subject to the divine will and decree, man had no power
on it; he was not a free agent; he was rather a helpless tool in divine
hands. But they did not take into consideration the fact that the divine
will takes it into hand only when all aspects of its sufficient cause
are complete, and not before that. The divine will decrees that a
certain action be done by Zayd - not unconditionally, but on the
condition that it is done by Zayd's free will, at a certain time and a
certain place. Therefore, its relation to the divine will itself demands
that it should be an action of a free agent, done by his own free will
and choice.

Doubtlessly, that action will be called an "essential" one if seen in
relation to the divine will; but at the same time and by virtue of the
same divine will, it will be a possible and transient action when
related to the doer, that is, the man. In other words, there are two
wills - the human and the divine; they do not run parallel to each
other; the divine will comes after and above the human will - they are
in a vertical, and not a horizontal position to each other. Therefore,
there is no competition or collision between the two wills. It was a
short-sightedness on part of the believers in compulsion to negate the
human will in order to establish the divine one.

The Mu‘tazilites said that human actions are done by man's free will.
But they went to the other extreme, and fell in an error no less
objectionable than that of al-Mujabbirah. They too said that if human
action was subjected to the divine will man would not have any freedom
of will and choice. And then they took a position diametrically opposed
to that of al-Mujabbirah, and came to the conclusion that the divine
will had no relation what­soever to the human action. Thus they had to
accept another creator - the man himself - for human actions. In this
way, they accepted dualism without knowing what they were doing. Going
further they fell into traps more harmful than the belief of
al-Mujabbirah. As the Imâm has said: "The poor al-Qadariyyah, they
wanted to emphasize the justice of Allâh, so they removed Him from His
power and authority. . . "

A master, showing kindness to one of his slaves, married him to a
slave-girl of his; he bestowed on him a property, gave him a
well-furnished house and provided him with all the necess­ities of life.
Then there came some people there, looked at his property, and began
arguing among themselves. Someone said: "Even though the master has
given this property to his slave and has made him its owner, the slave
has no right in, or authority over, this property at all. Does any slave
own any thing? The slave together with all his belongings belongs to the
master."

Another said: "No. You are wrong. The master has bestowed on this slave
the right of property. Now the slave is its absolute owner, and the
master has lost all his rights, and authority over this property. We may
say that he has abdicated in favour of his slave. "

The former was the opinion of al-Mujabbirah; the later that of the
Mu‘tazilites. But both were wrong. The correct view would have been to
say: The master has got his status of mastership; the slave his position
of servitude and bondage. The master has made the slave owner of his
(i.e., master's) property. The property belongs to the master at the
same time that it belongs to the slave. There are two ownerships - one
over the other. This is what the Imâms of Ahlu ’l-bayt (a. s.) have
taught us to believe, and what the reason supports.

‘Abâyah ibn Rib‘î al-Asadî asked ‘Alî, the Leader of the faithful, the
meaning of "capability". The Leader of the faithful asked a counter
question: "Do you have that capability without God or with God?" When
‘Abâyah remained silent, he told him, "Tell me, O ‘Abâyah!" He said:
"What should I say? O Leader of the faithful!" He said: "You should say
that you have got that capability by (grace of) Allâh, to Whom it
belongs and not to you. If He made you its owner, it would be of His
bounties, and if He took it away from you, it would be a trial from Him;
and He is the Owner of what He gave into your possession, and has power
over what He put under your power. . ." (al-Ihtijâj)

The author says: Its meaning may be understood from the preceding
explanation.

al-Mufîd reports in his Sharhu ’l-‘aqâ’id: It has been nar­rated from
Abû ’l-Hasan, the third, (a.s.) that he was asked whether the actions of
the servants were created by Allâh. He (a.s.) said: "If He were their
creator, He would not have dis­owned their liability. And He (Allâh) has
said: Verily, Allâh is free from liability to the idolators . . . (9:3).
It does not mean that Allâh was not responsible for the creation of the
idolators; what Allâh has disowned any responsibility of, is their idol­
worship and their evils."

The author says: There are two aspects of a deed - its actual
existence, and its relation to its doer. It is only when an action is
seen in relation to its doer that it is called obedience or
disobedience, good or bad, virtue or sin. So far as actual existence is
concerned, there is no difference between marriage and fornication. What
distinguishes one from the other is the command of Allâh - marriage
conforms with the divine law, and fornication goes against that law.
Someone is killed without any reason; another is killed by a lawful
authority in reprisal of a murder. A teacher punishes an orphan in order
to guide him aright; an oppressor hits at the same orphan unjustly. In
all these examples, the actual movements of the actions are identical.
But one group is called sin because it does not conform with the divine
law or goes against the common weal of the society.

Allâh says: Allâh is the Creator of everything. . . (39:62). Every
action is a "thing" inasmuch as it exists. And the Imâm has said:
"Whatsoever may be called a thing is created, except Allâh. . ." Also,
Allâh says: Who made good everything that He has created. . . (32:7). It
may be inferred that everything is good because it is created. Creation
and goodness are insepar­able factors. But at the same time, we see that
Allâh has named some actions as evil. For example, He says: Whoever
brings a good deed, he shall have ten like it, and whoever brings an
evil deed, he shall not be recompensed but only with the like of it . .
. (6 :160). These are obviously the actions done by man; not the factor
of recompense which cannot apply to divine actions. Such a deed is
called sin. It is evil because it lacks some thing; because it is a
nullification of a spiritual virtue or social good. In other words, a
sin is sin because it is a negation , a non-being; otherwise it would
have been good.

Now, let us look at the following verses of the Qur’ân:

No misfortune befalls on the earth nor in your own souls, but it is in
a book before We bring it into existence. . . (57:22); No affliction
comes about but by Allâh’s permission; and who­ever believes in Allâh,
He guides aright his heart . . . (64 :11); And whatever affliction
befalls you, it is on account of what your hands have wrought, and (yet)
He pardons most (of your faults) (42:30); Whatever benefit comes to you,
it is from Allâh, and whatever misfortune befalls you, it is from
yourself (4:79); . . . and if a benefit comes to them, they say: "This
is from Allâh;”- and if a misfortune befalls them they say: "This is
from you." Say: “All is from Allâh;" but what is the matter with these
people that well-nigh they do not understand what is told (them)?
(4:78). On pondering upon these verses, it be­comes clear that these
misfortunes are relative evils. A man is bestowed with the bounties of
Allâh, like security and peace; health and wealth, and so on; then he
loses one or more of these bounties. This misfortune, in relation to
that man, is evil because it has nullified some existing things, that
is, the bounties which he had previously enjoyed. Thus, every misfortune
is created by Allâh, and at that stage it is not an evil. But it is an
evil when seen in relation to the man who loses an existing bounty
because of it.

Likewise, every sin is a negative factor, and as such, it is not to be
attributed to Allâh at all; though it may be attributed to Him from
another angle, inasmuch as it happens by permission of Allâh.

al-Bazanti said: I told ar-Ridâ (a.s.) that some of our fellows believe
in compulsion and some of them advocate the (belief of) capability.
Thereupon he told me: "Write down (as I say): Allâh, Blessed and High is
He, has said: ‘O son of Adam! By My will you have become such that you
wish for yourself what you wish; and by My power you discharged the
duties imposed by Me (on you); and by My bounty, you got power to
disobey Me; I made you hearing, seeing (and) powerful. Whatever benefit
comes to you, it is from Allâh; and whatever misfortune befalls you, it
is from yourself. And it is as it is because I have more right on your
good deeds than you have yourself; and you are more liable to your sins
than Me. And it is because I cannot be questioned concerning what I do
and they shall be questioned. Thus, I have arranged for you everything
that you want. . .' " (Qurbu ’1-asnâd)

This, or nearly the same, tradition is narrated through other chains,
of the Sunnîs as well as of the Shî‘ahs. In short, the deeds that cannot
be attributed to Allâh, are the sins per se. It further explains the
sentence of the preceding tradition: "If he were their creator, He would
not have disowned their liability . . . What Allâh has disowned any
responsibility of, is their idol-worship and their evils. . . "

Abû Ja‘far and Abû ‘Abdillâh (a.s.) said: "Certainly, Allâh is too
Merciful to His creatures to compel them to sin and then to punish them
for it. And Allâh is too powerful for anyone to think that He would will
a thing and it would not happen!" (The narrator) said: "Then they (a.s.)
were asked: ‘Is there a third position between the (positions of)
compulsion and (in­dependent) capability?' They said: ‘Yes, broader than
(the space) between the heaven and the earth."' (at-Tawhîd)

Muhammad ibn ‘Ajlân said: "I asked Abû ‘Abdillâh (a.s.) whether Allâh
has delegated (the authority of) the affair to the servants. He said:
Allâh is too honourable to delegate (the auth­ority) to them.’ I said:
‘Then has He compelled the servants in their deeds?’ He said: Allâh is
too just to compel a servant on a deed and then to punish him for it.’”
(ibid.)

In the same book Mihzam is reported as saying: "Abû ‘Abdillâh (a.s.)
said: "Tell me what is that concerning which our followers (whom you
have left behind) have differed among themselves.’ I said: ‘About the
compulsion and the delegation?’ He said: ‘Then ask me about it.’ I
asked: ‘Has Allâh compelled the servants to (commit) sins?’ He replied:
‘Allâh is too over­powering to do it to them.’ I asked: ‘Then has He
delegated (the authority) to them?’ He replied: ‘Allâh has too much
power over them to do so.’ I asked: ‘Then what is it (i.e., the correct
position)? May Allâh make your affairs right for you!’" (The narrator
says:) "The Imâm turned his hand twice or thrice, then said: ‘If I were
to answer you concerning it, you would not believe.’”

The author says: “Allâh is too overpowering to do it to them”:
Compulsion means that a force majeure subdues the subject in such a way
that his power of action is nullified. "Too overpowering" (or, more
overpowering than that) is the predomi­nant will of Allâh - He has
willed that the action would emanate from the doer by his free will and
choice, and this is what is actually happening in the world. The divine
will has given the man freedom of will; neither the divine will negates
the human will, nor the human will collides with the divine will.

It is reported in at-Tawhîd that as-Sâdiq (a. s.) said: "The Apostle of
Allâh said: ‘Whoever thinks that Allâh enjoins the evil and indecency,
he tells a lie against Allâh; and whoever believes that the good and bad
(do happen) without the will of Allâh, he removes Allâh from His
authority.'"

It is reported that al-Hajjâj ibn Yûsuf wrote to al-Hasan al-Basrî,
‘Amr ibn ‘Ubayd, Wâsil ibn ‘Atâ’ and ‘Amir ash-Sha‘bî, asking them to
describe what they had got (and what has reached them) in respect of
(divine) decree and measure. al-Hasan al-Basrî wrote to him: "The best
thing that has reached me is that which I heard the Leader of the
faithful, ‘Alî ibn Abî Tâlib (a.s.) saying: ‘Do you think that He Who
has forbidden you has (also) acted cunningly against you? Rather, your
lower and higher (parts) have cunningly deceived you, and Allâh is free
from its liability.'" And ‘Amr ibn ‘Ubayd wrote to him: "The best thing
I have heard about the decree and measure is the saying of the Leader of
the faithful, ‘Alî ibn Abî Tâlib (a.s.): ‘If perfidy were in reality
decreed, the perfidious man, if punished, would have been op­pressed.' "
And Wâsil ibn ‘Atâ’ wrote to him: "The best I have heard about the
decree and measure is the saying of the Leader of the faithful, ‘Alî ibn
Abî Tâlib (a.s.) : ‘Do you think that He would guide you to the path and
(then) obstruct you (from moving on)?' " And ash-Sha‘bî wrote to him:
"The best thing I have heard concerning the decree and measure is the
word of the Leader of the faithful, ‘Alî ibn Abî Tâlib (a. s.) :
‘Whatever you have to seek Allâh's pardon for it, it is from you; and
what­ever you thank Allâh for it, it is from Him.' " When their letters
reached al-Hajjâj and he studied them, he said: "Certainly they have
taken it from a clear spring." (at-Târâ’if )

It is narrated in the same book that someone asked Ja‘far ibn Muhammad
as-Sâdiq (a. s.) about the decree and measure, and he replied: "Whatever
you may blame the servant (of Allâh) for it, it is from him; and
whatever you cannot blame the servant (of Allâh) for it, it is the work
of Allâh. Allâh will say to the servant: ‘Why did you disobey? Why did
you transgress? Why did you drink liquor? Why did you fornicate?' This
is, therefore, the work of the servant. But He will not say to him: ‘Why
were you sick? Why were you of short stature? Why did you become white?
Why were you black?(He will not ask it) because it is the work of
Allâh."

‘Alî (as.) was asked about monotheism and justice (of Allâh), and he
said: "Monotheism is that you should not imagine Him; and justice is
that you should not accuse Him." (Nahju ’1-balâghah)

The author says: There are numerous traditions on this subject; but
those quoted above throw light on all the aspects of the topic.

The above-mentioned traditions show various special methods of argument
regarding the subject matter.

a) Some of them argue on the basis of legislation itself - order and
prohibition; punishment and reward etc. - that man has freedom of will,
without any compulsion or delegation of power. See, for example, the
speech of the Leader of the faithful, ‘Alî (as.), replying to the old
man. It is similar to the argument we have inferred from the words of
Allâh.

b) Others bring in evidence the verses of the Qur’ân which cannot be
reconciled with the theory of compulsion or delegation of power. For
example: And Allâh’s is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth
(3:189); and your Lord is not in the least unjust to the servants
(41:46). Also, there is the verse, Say: "Surely Allâh does not enjoin
indecency" (7:28) .

Poser: A deed may be described as unjust or indecent if it is seen in
relation to us. But when it is attributed to Allâh it is not called
unjust or indecent. Therefore, even if all "our" deeds were actually
done by Allâh, it would be perfectly right to say that He is not unjust
and does not enjoin indecency.

Reply: The sentence seen in the context leaves no room for such
misconceptions. The complete verse is as follows: And when they commit
an indecency they say: "We found our fathers doing this and Allâh has
enjoined it on us " Say: "Surely Allâh does not enjoin indecency. Do you
say against Allâh what you do not know?" Look at the sentence, "and
Allâh has enjoined it on us". The pronoun "it" clearly refers to the
indecency committed by them; and it is the same deed which is referred
to in the sentence, "Surely Allâh does not enjoin indecency,". Allâh
does not enjoin what is termed as indecency in context of human
activities; it does not matter whether in other framework it is called
indecency or not.

c) A third type of reasoning is based on the divine attributes. Allâh
has given Himself many good names, and has described Himself with many
sublime attributes, which cannot be squared with compulsion or
delegation of power. Allâh is the Subduer, the Omnipotent, the
Benevolent and the Merciful. These attributes can only be believed in if
one believes that everything depends on Allâh in its existence, and that
its defects and shortcomings can­not be attributed to Him at all. (Refer
to the traditions quoted from at-Tawhîd.)

d) Yet others refer to seeking the pardon of Allâh as well as to the
blame which society directs at the wrong-doer. If sin were not from the
man himself, there would have been no mean­ing in asking for divine
pardon. If all our actions were done by Allâh why should we be blamed
for only some of them and not for the others?

e) Lastly, there are the traditions which explain the words, like
causing to err, sealing the hearts and misleading, when they are
attributed to Allâh:

ar-Ridâ (a.s.) said explaining the words of Allâh, and He (Allâh) left
them in utter darkness - they do not see: "Allâh is not described as
leaving something as His creatures do. But when He knew that they would
not return from disbelief and error, He held back His help and grace
from them and let them alone with their choice." (‘Uyunu ’1-akhbâr)

The same book narrates from the same Imâm in explanation of the words
of Allâh, Allâh has set a seal upon their hearts: "It is setting a seal
on the hearts of the disbelievers as a punishment of their disbelief, as
Allâh has said: . . . nay! Allâh has set a seal upon them owing to their
disbelief, so they shall not believe except a few (4:155)."

as-Sâdiq (a.s.) said concerning the words of Allâh, Surely Allâh is not
ashamed to set forth any parable. . .: "This divine word answers those
who think that Allâh makes (His) servants go astray and then punishes
them for that straying . . . " (Majma‘u ’l-bayân)

The author says: Its meaning may be understood from previous
explanations.

**A PHILOSOPHICAL DISCUSSION**

Every species is related to a particular type of action and reaction.
In fact it is these special characteristics which identify the species
as such. We looked at various kinds of actions and reactions emanating
from various groups. Our reason told us that there should be an
efficient cause, an agent, to bring each kind of these actions and
reactions into being. Therefore, we put every group in a separate
category, identifying it as a species. When we compared human
characteristics, for example, with those of an animal, and delineated
them clearly, we decided that they were two different species, with
different characteristics.

When the actions are seen in relation to their subjects, that is, the
species, they are primarily divided into two categories:

First: The actions emanating from the nature - where the knowledge of
their emanation has no effect at all on their existence. For example,
the growth and nutrition of the vegetables; the movement of the bodies;
our own health or illness. These things are known to us, present in our
own bodies; but our knowing or not knowing them has no effect whatsoever
on their coming into being; they totally depend upon their doer - that
is, nature.

Second: The actions issuing forth from the doer with his knowledge -
where the said knowledge has a bearing on their being, like the
intentional actions of the man and even of some animals. The doer does
such an action after knowing and identifying it; and it is the knowledge
and perception that gives him that insight. The knowledge makes him
realize what would consti­tute his perfection, and helps him in deciding
whether a particular action would lead to that desired perfection. The
knowledge distinguishes the means of perfection from other things; and
this distinction helps the doer in choosing a particular course of
action. And the action comes into being.

The activities based upon ingrained aptitude (like issuing forth of the
required voices, when a man speaks), as well as those emanating from
natural disposition, or from the dictates of nature (like breathing)
and, likewise, those springing from overwhelming grief or fear etc., do
not require contemplation or meditation by the doer. Why? Because there
is not more than one form of knowledge here, and the doer does not have
to delay his activity awaiting a final decision. Therefore, he does it
immediately. But in other cases, where the doer has before his eyes two
or more possible forms of knowledge to choose from, he has to spend at
least a few moments in contemplation and deliberation. For example, Zayd
is hungry, and he gets a bread. Its one aspect is that it may satiate
his hunger; but there may be other aspects too - it may be another man's
property, it may be poisoned, it may have become dirty and so on. Zayd
has to reflect whether the bread is legally, morally and hygienically
fit for consump­tion. When he reaches a conclusion, the actions follows
without any delay.

The first type of activities is called involuntary, like natural
reactions; the second type is called voluntary, or intentional, like
walking or talking.

The intentional actions, emanating from man's knowledge and will, are
again divided into two categories:

First: When the man decides to do - or, not to do - a certain work, he
may do so entirely on his own, without being influenced by any other
fellow. In the example given above, Zayd may decide, on his own, not to
eat the bread because it was someone else's property; or he may eat it
in spite of that snag. This is called a deed done by man's free will.

Second: When the man opts for a certain course of action under the
influence of someone else. A tyrant may force a help­less person to act
according to that tyrant's instruction under duress. The poor fellow in
this condition commits sins and crimes against his own will. This is
called a deed done under compulsion.

Right? But let us look at this second category more closely. We have
said that this kind of deed results from the compeller's compulsion; he
does not allow any freedom to the doer, who has to take the only way
left open by the oppressor. But even then, it is the doer himself who
decides to proceed on that way. It is true that the major factor leading
to this decision was the tyrant's compulsion; but it is equally true
that the decision was taken by the doer himself, even though it was
taken to save himself from the tyrant's oppression. In short, even the
deeds done under compulsion are done by the will of the doer. It follows
that the division of intentional actions into these two categories is
not real, not based on actual facts. The intentional action is the one
which emanates from a knowledge and a will that tips the bal­ance in its
favour. This reality is found in the deed done under compulsion as well
as in the one done by free will. It makes no difference that it was some
other man's force or fear that tipped the balance in one case and the
doer's own thinking that did so in the other. A man sitting near a wall
looks up to find that it was about to fall; overcome by fear he sprints
away from that place. And we say that he did so by his own free will.
Suppose, a tyrant threatens to bull-doze the wall over him if he did not
move away. Overcome by fear, he sprints away from there. And we say that
it was done under compulsion. But the funda­mentals in both cases are
the same. The man is overcome by fear and decides to move away. So, why
should we put them in two different categories.

Objection: There is enough difference between the two actions to
warrant their assignment to two different categories. The deed done by
free will is based on its underlying wisdom (in the eyes of the doer);
the doer deserves praise or blame, and gets reward or punishment, for
it. All these factors are simply absent in the case of a deed done under
compulsion.

Reply: It is true. But these factors are based on subjective approach
of the society. They do not have any existence outside the imagination.
By talking on these subjective approaches we have crossed the limits of
philosophy. Philosophy deals with the things that exist in reality, as
well as with those things' natural characteristics. What all this leads
to is the conclusion that the discussion whether man is free in his
actions is beyond the scope of philosophy.

We may yet bring it back on the track of philosophy from another
direction:

A transient (possible) thing has equal relation with existence and
non-existence. It, therefore, needs a sufficient cause to tip the
balance in favour of existence, so that it may come into being.

The transient thing, when related to its sufficient cause, becomes an
essential being - it becomes impossible for it not to exist. That is why
it is said that a transient does not come into being unless it becomes
an essential being.

A transient, by its definition, must have a sufficient cause for its
existence. A transient existing without its sufficient cause is a
contradiction in terms. And that cause gives it the essentiality, so
long as it exists.

Now look at the universe at a glance. You will find a chain made up of
unnumerable links, all of which would be essential beings. In other
words, not a single existing thing could be called a transient, so long
as it exists.

But this "essential - ness" comes to it only when it is looked at in
relation to its sufficient cause.

The sufficient cause may be a single thing or a compound of various
causes - the material, the formal, the efficient and the final causes,
plus the necessary conditions of time and space as well as other
preliminaries. An effect when related to its sufficient cause must
invariably exist - because the said cause would make it essential. But
when seen with only a part of that cause, or if related to any outside
factor, it would not be essential; it would remain a transient as
before.

If a transient, on being related to only a part of its sufficient cause
(e.g., to its efficient cause only) become essential and come into
being, its sufficient cause would be superfluous; and it would be a
contradiction in term.

It shows that in this natural world two systems are found
simultaneously: one of essentiality and the other of transiency. The
system of essentiality covers the sufficient causes and their effects -
there is no transiency in any part of this world, neither in any person
nor in any action. The system of transiency per­meates the matter and
its potentialities when related to only a part of the sufficient cause.
Take any human action; if it is related to its sufficient cause - man
(the efficient cause), knowledge and will (the final), matter (the
material) and its shape (the formal) plus all conditions of time and
space including removal of every hindrance - it would become essential.
But if it is seen in relation to only its efficient cause, that is, man,
it would remain transient.

Finally, it should be pointed out that the transient things need a
cause for their existence because of their transiency. And this need
would not end until the chain of cause and effect finally reaches a
cause Who is the Essential Being. This observation leads to the
following two conclusions:

First: The need of an effect for its cause does not end on its being
related to its transient cause. The need continues until it reaches the
Final Cause, the Essential Being.

Second: This need emanates from its transient nature. It needs a cause
to bring it into existence with all its character­istics and traits,
including its relationship with its various causes, fulfilling all the
conditions of its existence.

Now we may ponder upon the question of compulsion and delegation of
power, keeping in view the above-mentioned premises:

First: No delegation of power: Man, like all other things and their
actions, depends on the will of Allâh, for his existence. In the same
way, man's action depends on the will of Allâh in its existence.
Therefore, the Mu‘tazilites' view - that human actions have no relation
at all to the divine will - is completely baseless. There was no reason
at all for them to deny the decree and measure of Allâh in respect of
the man's actions.

Second: No compulsion: This relation to the will of Allâh, inasmuch as
it is concerned with existence, keeps all the char­acteristics of the
created thing in view. Every effect emanates from its cause - with all
its characteristics which have any bearing on its existence. A man's
creation is attributed to Allâh, keeping in view all its intermediary
causes and condition - the father, the mother, the time, the place, the
features, the quantity, the quality and a lot of other concomitants.
Likewise, the action of man is attributed to Allâh, keeping in view all
its characteristics and conditions. When a man's action is attributed to
Allâh and His will, it does not cease to be the man's action; it is
still caused by the said man's will. The will of Allâh decrees that the
action be done by the man emanating from the man's own free will and
choice. Therefore, it would be a contradiction in term to say that the
action was no longer done by man's free will because it was related to
the divine will. Allâh Himself has decreed it to be a work of the man by
his free will; how can it be said that the divine will lost its
effectiveness and the action happened without the man's free will? It is
now clear that the view of al -Mujabbirah - that the human action's
relation to the divine will nullifies its relation to the human will -
is absolutely devoid of truth.

The above discourse shows that the said action has a relation to the
human will and a relation to the divine will; neither relation nullifies
the other, because each is connected with the other vertically, not
horizontally.

Third: The human action, when related to its sufficient cause; becomes
essential. But seen in relation to only a part of the sufficient cause,
it remains transient. For example, when the action is related to only
its sufficient cause, that is, man, it does not become essential, but
remains transient as before.

Therefore, what a group of modern materialist philosophers have said -
that the whole system of nature is permeated by compulsion, and there is
no free will at all in the universe - is totally wrong. As we have said,
all effects in relation to their sufficient causes are essential, but,
when related to only a part of the said causes, are transient. And it is
the foundation on which man's life is based. A man teaches and trains
his child and then hopes that his efforts would bear fruit. If there was
no freedom in the world, if everything was essential and had to happen
any­how, then all this teaching and training would be of no earthly use;
there would remain no place for hope in human life.


