Chapter 11 : 2:35-39
====================

And We said: "O Adam! dwell you and your wife in the Garden and eat
(you both) from it (freely) a plenteous (food) wherever you (two) wish
and do not approach (you two) this tree, for then you (two) will be of
the unjust" (35). But the Satan made them both slip from it and drove
them out of what they were in; and We said: "Get down, some of you being
the enemies of others; and there is for you in the earth an abode and a
provision for a time" (36). Then Adam received (some) words from his
Lord, so He returned to him mercifully; surely He is Oft-returning (to
mercy), the Merciful (37) . We said: "Get down you there-from all
together; and if there comes to you a guidance from Me, then whoever
follows My guidance, no fear shall come upon them, nor shall they grieve
(38) . And (as to) those who disbelieve in, and belie, Our signs, they
are the inmates of the fire, in it they shall abide" (39).

**COMMENTARY**

QUR’?N: And We said: "O Adam! dwell you and your wife. . . ": Although
the story of the angels' prostration before Adam has been repeated
several times in the Qur’ân, that of his placement in the Garden has
been given in three places only:

First: The verses given above, from Chapter 2 (the Cow).

Second: In Chapter 7 (the Elevated Places): And (We said):

"O Adam! dwell you and your wife in the Garden; so eat from where you
desire, but do not go near this tree, for then you will be of the
unjust" (19). But the Satan whispered an evil suggestion to them that he
might make manifest to them what was hidden from them of their
nakedness, and he said: "Your Lord has not forbidden you from this tree
except that you may not both become two angels or that you may (not)
become of the im­mortals" (20). And he swore to them both: "Most surely
I am a sincere adviser to you" (21). Then he caused them to fall by
deceit; so when they tasted of the tree, their nakedness became manifest
to them, and they both began to cover themselves with the leaves of the
Garden; and their Lord called out to them: "Did I not forbid you both
from that tree and say to you that the Satan is your open enemy?" (22).
They said: "Our Lord! We have been unjust to ourselves, and if Thou
forgive us not, and have (not) mercy on us, we shall certainly be of the
losers" (23). He said: "Get down, some of you being the enemies of
others, and there is for you in the earth an abode and a provision for a
time" (24). He (also) said: "Therein shall you live, and therein shall
you die, and from it shall you be raised" (25).

Third: In Chapter 20 (Tâ-Hâ): And certainly We had covenanted unto Adam
before, but he forgot; and We did not find in him any determination
(115). And when We said to the angels: "Prostrate before Adam", they did
prostrate, but 1blîs (did it not); he refused (116). So We said: "O
Adam! surely this is an enemy to you and to your wife; therefore let him
not drive you both forth from the Garden so that you should be put to
toil (117); Surely it is (ordained) for you that you shall not be hungry
therein nor bare of clothing (118); and that you shall not be thirsty
therein nor shall you feel the heat of the sun" (119). But the Satan
whispered an evil suggestion to him; he said: "O Adam! shall I guide you
to the tree of immortality and a kingdom which decays not?" (120). Then
they both ate of it, so their nakedness appeared unto them, and they
both began to cover themselves with leaves of the Garden, and Adam
disobeyed his Lord, so he got astray (121). Then his Lord chose him, so
He turned to him and guided (him) (122). He said: "Get down you two
therefrom, all (of you), one of you (is) enemy to another. So if there
comes to you guidance from Me, then whoever follows My guidance, he
shall not go astray nor be unhappy (123). And whoever turns away from My
remembrance, his shall surely be a straitened life, and We will raise
him, on the Day of Resurrection, blind" (124). He shall say: "My Lord!
why hast Thou raised me blind, and I was a seeing one indeed?" (125) He
will say: "Even so: Our signs came to you, but you forgot them; even
thus shall you be forsaken this day" (126). And thus do We recompense
him who is extravagant and does not believe in the signs of his Lord;
and certainly the chastisement of the hereafter is severer and more
lasting" (127).

The context, and particularly the opening words of the story, "Verily I
am going to make in the earth a vicegerent", clearly show that it was
for the earth that Adam was created; it was the original plan that he
should live and die in the earth. Allâh had temporarily placed the
couple in the Garden to test them in order that their nakedness might be
uncovered to them. Also the context in all three places shows that the
order to the angels to prostrate before Adam, and then to Adam to stay
in the Garden is a single, continuous, story. It all shows that Adam (a.
s.) was created specifically for the earth, and the way to send him down
was through the Garden as mentioned in the Qur’ân: It was shown that he
was superior to the angels and, therefore, more qualified for the
vicegerency of Allâh; then they were told to prostrate before him, in
acknowledgement of his superiority; then he was placed in the Garden but
forbidden to go near a particular tree; so that on eating from it they
should become aware of their nakedness and then be sent down to the
earth. It means that the last link in this chain was their becoming
aware of their private parts - it was this factor which irrevocably
showed that they were fit for this earth, ready for this life. "as-Saw
'ah", ( literally means shame, disgrace, private part of the body. In
this story it has been used in the last meaning, as may be seen from the
words, "and they both began to cover them­selves with leaves of the
Garden". That is why we have translated it as "nakedness".

) However, their awareness of their pudenda proved that in addition to
their spiritual qualities, they had also animal instincts and desires
ingrained in them. It naturally made them dependent on nutrition and
growth. Iblîs wanted them to become aware of their nakedness. Adam and
his wife were given earthly, human existence and were at once placed in
the Garden without any delay; they were not given time to perceive and
understand their nakedness or its concomitants; they had not yet
comprehended the life of this earth and its necessities. When they were
sent to the Garden their connection with the spiritual world, including
the angels, was strong; their link with it was not weakened. It should
be noted that Allâh has said, "what was hidden from them"; He has not
said, "what had been hidden from them"; it may be inferred from the
expression used that their nakedness could not remain hidden for ever in
this life; it was hidden for only a short period when they were placed
in the Garden. The uncovering of their nakedness with all its
concomi­tants was a predetermined fact and it depended upon their eating
from that tree. That is why Allâh had told them: "therefore let him not
drive you both forth from the Garden so that you should be put to toil";
thereafter, the Satan "drove them out of what they were in".

It should not be overlooked that even when Allâh pardoned them after
their repentance, He did not return them to the Garden - they were sent
down to the earth to live therein. If their eating of the tree, the
uncovering of their private parts and the life of this world were not a
confirmed divine plan, an irrevocable pre­determined decree, they would
have been returned to their place in the Garden as soon as they were
forgiven their mistake. In short, it was the divine plan that they
should spend sometime in the Garden to get them prepared for the life in
this world; and their removal from the Garden, according to the causal
relation decreed by Allâh, depended on their eating from the tree and
becoming aware of their nakedness, and it happened because they listened
to the whispering of the Satan.

Allâh says: "And certainly We had covenanted unto Adam before, but he
forgot". Which covenant does this verse allude to? Does it refer to the
admonition, "and do not approach (you two) this tree, for then you (two)
will be of the unjust"? Or to the warning, "surely this (i.e., the
Satan) is an enemy to you and to your wife"? Or does it refer to the
general covenant made with all human beings in general and with the
prophets in particular?

The first possibility is out of question altogether. Allâh says: "But
the Satan whispered an evil suggestion to them . . . and he said: ‘Your
Lord has not forbidden you from this tree except that you may not become
two angels or that you may (not) become of the immortals . . .' "
Obviously, when Adam and his wife committed the error and tasted of the
tree they were aware of the prohibition - even the evil suggestion of
the Satan had begun with a reference to it. And Allâh says in this verse
that "We had covenanted unto Adam before, but he forgot; and We did not
find in him any determination." It, therefore, could not refer to that
prohibition, because Adam had not forgotten it at all.

The second suggestion - that the covenant might refer to the warning
against the Satan - is not so wide of mark; still it is not supported by
apparent meaning of the verses. The said warn­ing was given to both Adam
and his wife, while this verse refers to a covenant made especially with
Adam.

It leaves us with the last alternative that the covenant means the
general covenant which was made with the whole mankind and more
particularly with the prophets. This verse (about the covenant with Adam
and his forgetting it) occurs at the beginning of the story in the
chapter of Tâ-Hâ; and the story concludes with the words, "So if there
comes to you guidance from Me, then whoever follows My guidance, he
shall not go astray nor be unhappy. And whoever turns away from My
remembrance, his shall surely be a straitened life, and We will raise
him, on the Day of Resurrection, blind. He shall say: ‘My Lord! why hast
Thou raised me blind, and I was a seeing one indeed?' He will say: ‘Even
so: Our signs came to you, but you forgot them; even thus shall you be
forsaken (literally: forgotten) today."'

These concluding verses perfectly fit that opening one. To turn away
from the remembrance of Allâh is not different from forgetting the
covenant of Allâh. Add to it the use of the same verb (you forgot them)
in the next verse. All these references are perfectly compatible with
the covenant made with the souls of the human beings about the
Mastership of Allâh and their own servitude. That covenant obliged the
man that he should never forget that Allâh is his Lord, the Ruler and
Master of his affairs; nor should he lose sight of the fact that he is a
wholly owned slave of Allâh; that he has no authority whatsoever over
his benefit or harm; nor does he has any control over his life, death or
resurrection; in short he owns neither his person, his characteristics
nor his actions.

The error that stands opposite to this remembrance is for­getfulness -
man forgets his Lord and His All-encompassing Mastership; he becomes
engrossed in his own self, getting bogged down more and more in the mire
of this world's attractions.

Look at this world's life, with all its diversity; and see how it
spreads its tentacles in all directions. Note how it is shared by the
believer and the unbeliever both. And then find out how the two groups
respond to its joy and sorrow. How different is their respective
attitude towards this life's success and failure, happiness and
unhappiness, content and discontent, relief and suffering. These factors
affect the two groups - the believers and the un­believers - in entirely
different ways. The believer has the know­ledge of Allâh and the
unbeliever lacks this knowledge. And it causes all the differences in
their respective behaviour. Every man looks at this world; a world that
is submerged in all types of misfortunes and disasters: a life followed
by death, a health ruined by disease, a prosperity eaten away by
poverty, a comfort des­troyed by discomfort, a gain nullified by loss -
this is, in a nut­shell, the life of this world. The believer knows that
everything and every affair belongs to Allâh; nothing is independent of
God, the Lord. Every thing and every affair emanates from Him; and all
that originates from Him is good and beautiful; nothing but beauty and
splendour, goodness and excellence, can come from Him. And because all
things and all affairs issue forth from his Lord and Master, he thinks
that all is elegant and fine; he dislikes nothing and fears nothing;
everything in his eyes is likeable, except that which his Master tells
him to dislike. He subjugates his likes and dislikes to those of his
Master. In short, all his attention is fixed to the pleasure of his
Master. He knows that everything is the sole property of God; none else
has any share in anything. That being the case, why should he worry how
the Master manages His own property? He does not think that he is
competent to meddle in the affairs of his Lord. This submission to Allâh
creates a perfect tranquillity, a truly happy life, untarnished by
unhappi­ness; a light without darkness, a joy without sorrow, a benefit
without harm, and a riches without want. It all happens because he
believes in Allâh and in His mastership.

On the other hand is the unbeliever who does not know Allâh. By cutting
himself off from the one and only Master, he has to bow his head before
every creature. He believes that every­thing is independent in its
actions - that it has a power of its own to benefit or to harm, to do
good or evil. Consequently, he remains in constant fear of everything;
he is ever apprehensive of every real or imagined danger. He is always
grieving for want has befallen him, longing for the opportunities he has
missed. He feels nostalgia for the prestige or wealth that is gone;
breaks his heart for the children, relatives or friends who have left
him. He is inextricably trapped by the attractions of the world; he
relies on them and has trust in them; and when any thing goes wrong, he
sinks into despair. Then as soon as he makes a virtue of necessity and
is resigned to that misfortunate, a new calamity overwhelms him. In this
way, he is always driven from pillar to post, with a heavy heart and a
gloomy countenance; "thus does Allâh lay uncleanliness on those who do
not believe".

It can be seen, in the light of the above discourse, that forgetting
the covenant and unhappiness of this world's life, both are
interrelated - the later springs from the former. This fact becomes
clearer if we compare the wordings of the verse 20:123-124 with those
used in the verse under discussion. The former says: So if there comes
to you guidance from Me, then whoever follows My guidance, he shall not
go astray nor be un­happy. And whoever turns away from My remembrance,
his shall surely be a straitened life, and We will raise him, on the Day
of Resurrection, blind. And the same idea has been expressed in this
verse in the following words: . . . then whoever follows My guidance, no
fear shall come upon them, nor shall they grieve.

It may be inferred from these verses that the forbidden tree was of
such a nature that if one ate from it he would certainly be entangled in
the troubles and misfortunes of this life - he would spend his life in
this world, heedless of his own place, forgetting his Lord. Probably
Adam (a. s.) wanted to combine the fruit of that tree with the covenant
that he had entered into with his Lord. But he could not succeed; the
fruit had its effect, he forgot the covenant and fell into the troubles
and toils of this world. Then he was saved when he repented before Allâh
and Allâh turned to him with mercy.

QUR’?N: and eat (you two) from it (freely) a plenteous (food)
"ar-Raghad " ( ) literally means happiness, well-being, good life and
affluence arghada 'l -qawmu mawâshiyahum ( ) means, "the people left
their cattle to graze wherever it liked. "Qawmun raghad" () and "nisâ’un
raghad” ( ) means people (or women) having a life of plenty and
opulence.

QUR’?N: and do not approach (you two) this tree; The context shows that
actual prohibition was of eating from it; but they were told not even to
approach it; the prohibition was couched in these terms for emphasis.
What was really forbidden is seen from the verse: so when they tasted of
the tree, their nakedness became manifest to them (7:22), and . . . they
both ate of it, so their nakedness appeared unto them (20:121) .

QUR’?N: for then you (two) will be of the unjust: "az-Zâlimîn " () is
the nomen agentis of az-zulm ( = injustice, to do wrong ). It is not
from az-zulmah (darkness), as has been suggested by someone. Adam and
his wife acknowledged their wrong-doing, and the Qur’ân quotes them as
saying: "Our Lord! we have been unjust to ourselves, and if Thou forgive
us not, and have (not) mercy on us, we shall certainly be of the losers"
(7:23).

This clause has been changed in Chapter 20 to "so that you should be
put to toil"; and the toil has further been explained in these words:
Surely it is (ordained) for you that you shall not be hungry therein
(i.e. in the Garden) nor bare of clothing; and that you shall not be
thirsty therein nor shall you feel the heat of the sun (20:118-119).
Clearly, the injustice and wrong-doing, mentioned in the verse 2:25, was
to bring in its wake the toil of this world - hunger, thirst, nakedness
and other discomforts. The injustice or wrong that they had done was
against their own selves; it was neither a sin (as this term is used in
the sharî‘ah ) nor an injustice against Allâh. It shows that the
prohibition was in the nature of an advice pointing out to them what was
good for their own comfort; it did not have the force of an ordained
law. Adam and his wife did wrong to themselves, because their disregard
to that divine advice caused their removal from the Garden.

When a man commits a sin (i.e. an offence, from the sharî‘ah point of
view), he is given a punishment. Then if he repents and his repentance
is accepted, the punishment is completely waived off, and he is returned
to his previous position as though he had not committed the sin at all.
If Adam and his wife were guilty of such a sin, they should have been
returned to their place in the Garden soon after their repentance was
accepted. But it was not done. It clearly shows that the prohibition did
not have the force of an ordained law; it was only an advice. Even so,
neglecting it had its natural effect on both of them and they had to
come out of the Garden. But this removal from the Garden was not a
punishment for any sin or crime; it was the natural consequence of the
wrong they had done against their own selves. (We shall write again on
this subject, God willing.)

QUR’?N: But the Satan made them both slip from it: The Satan could have
misled them by creating evil thoughts in their hearts, in the same way
as he misleads other human beings. But many verses, in the three
narratives quoted at the beginning of this commentary, show that the
Satan had appeared before Adam and his wife, and had talked to them face
to face:

So We said: "O Adam! surely this is an enemy to you and to your wife"
(20:117). Allâh had pointed out the Satan to Adam, not by any verbal
description but by showing to him the person of the said enemy. (Note
the demonstrative pronoun, "this is".)

(The Satan) said: "O Adam! shall I guide you to the tree of
immortality. . . " (20:120). The speaker, that is, the Satan, must have
talked to Adam face to face.

And he (i.e. the Satan) swore to them both: "Most surely I am a sincere
adviser to you" (7:21). Obviously, he was visible to Adam and his wife
and swore during his talk with them .

. . . and their Lord called out to them: "Did I not forbid you both
from that tree and say to you that the Satan is your open enemy?" (7:22)
It indicates that the Satan was visible to Adam and his wife. If the
Satan had misled them by creating evil thoughts into their minds without
appearing before them, they could have said to Allâh that they were not
aware that that thought was put into their minds by the Satan; that they
mistook it to be their own thought because the Satan had not appeared
before them.

They used to see and recognize the Satan. Likewise, other prophets -
all of them covered by Allâh's protection - used to see and recognize
him if and when he came to them. Many tradi­tions mention such
encounters in the stories of Nûh, Ibrâhîm, Mûsâ, ‘?sâ, Yahyâ, Ayyûb,
Ismâ‘îl and Muhammad (may Allâh bless him and his progeny as well as the
prophets).
The above-quoted verses as well as the verse 7:20 (and he said: "Your
Lord has not forbidden from this tree except that . . .") also show that
the Satan had visited then near that tree in the Garden. He entered the
Garden, talked to them and put evil suggestion before them. He was able
to do so because the Garden was not the Garden of eternal abode. The
Qur’ân also says that Adam, his wife and the Satan all were removed from
the Garden together. (Of course, Allâh had said to the Satan: "Then get
down from this, for it does not befit you to behave proudly therein"
[7:13]. But the pronouns "this" and "therein" may refer to the angels or
to the heaven. It may mean: Get down from the company of the angels; or,
get down from the heaven as it is a place of honour.)

QUR’?N: and We said: "Get down, some of you being the en­emies of
others. . . ": The second person pronouns, used in this verse, are
plural, which denote at least three persons. Clearly, it was addressed
to Adam, his wife and the Satan. The Satan was turned out of the heaven
and/or the company of the angels before (as described above). This verse
combines in itself that previous order too; and manifests the firm
decree of Allâh establishing enmity between Iblîs on one side and Adam
and his wife and their descendants on the other. It also promulgates
another decree that they shall live in the earth, die therein, and be
raised again from it.

It may safely be said that the whole human race (Adam together with his
descendants) is covered by the last mentioned decree: Therein shall you
live, and therein shall you die, and from it shall you be raised (7:25)
. This verse comes at the end of the story (in Chapter 7) which begins
with the following words: And certainly We created you, then We
fashioned you, then We said to the angels: "Prostrate before Adam". . .
(7:11). In both verses plural pronouns have been used; and it is an
indi­cation that the creation and the decree to live and die in the
earth includes more than two, that is, other human beings too besides
Adam and his wife.

The story of Adam may have been used by Allâh to represent the rise,
fall and rise again of the wole mankind. Adam was the first
representatives of humanity, and his life was a symbol, a miniature, of
the human beings life-span in this world.

The angels were told to prostrate before Adam, because he was the
vicegerent of Allâh in the earth. It has been mentioned earlier that
this vicegerency was bestowed on the whole mankind. The angels
prostrated before Adam, as he was the symbol of humanity, the
representative of his race.

Adam and his wife were placed in the Garden and then were sent down
from there because they had eaten of the for­bidden tree. Every man may
see his own face in this mirror. His soul, before coming to this world,
enjoyed the sublime and lofty existence; his abode was spiritually near
to his Lord - a place of joy and happiness, of splendour and light; in
the company of purified companions and spiritual friends, near to Allâh,
the Lord of the worlds. Then he opted for this transient life, and was
at once entangled in the troubles and toils of this world; leaving that
purified existence, he was attracted to this tedious and odious life.

Adam at once repented and prayed for the mercy of Allâh. In the same
way, man may return to Allâh and consequently to the eternal abode of
honour and bliss. But if he took the wrong turning, did not try to
return to Allâh, and, in short, followed his base desires, he would
change the bounty of Allâh into dis­belief and ungratefulness, would
direct himself to the place of disgrace - to the hell; and how evil that
resting place is!

QUR’?N: Then Adam received (some) words from his Lord, so He returned
to him mercifully: "at-Talaqqî“(= to receive) signifies "to learn". It
was this learning of the words that paved the way for the repentance of
Adam.

"at-Tawbah" () literally means to return; generally it is used for
repentance, because when a man repents, he returns to his Lord. This
verb is at times ascribed to Allâh (as in this verse), and signifies
that Allâh returns or restores the servant to His grace and mercy. In
other words, He accepts the plea of the servant and forgives his sins.
At other times it is attributed to the servant; then it signifies the
servant's return to Allâh, that is, his repentance from his sins.

at-Tawbah (repentance) of man is flanked on both sides by two tawbahs
(mercies) of Allâh. Man can never do without the mercy of Allâh. He
needs mercy and help of Allâh to turn away from sins; only then he may
return to Allâh, may repent from his sins; then again the mercy of Allâh
comes forward, and his repentance is accepted. Therefore, an accepted
repentance of man issues forth from the mercy of Allâh, and also ends on
His mercy. The verse 9:118 clearly mentions this fact: then He returned
to them (mercifully) so that they might return (i.e. might repent).

What were the words which Adam received from his Lord? Some people
think that it refers to their invocation reported in Chapter 7: They
said: "Our Lord! We have been unjust to our­selves, and if Thou forgive
us not, and have (not) mercy on us, we shall certainly be of the losers"
(7:23). But this view is not supported by the sequence of the events.
Adam and his wife had addressed that invocation before they were told to
get down from the Garden (7:24); and it was after getting that order
that he "received some words" from Allâh, as is clear from the verse
2:36-37. Therefore, "some words" cannot refer to that previously uttered
invocation.

There may, however, be another explanation: When Allâh announced to the
angels that He was going to make a vicegerent in the earth, they said:
"Wilt Thou place in it such as shall make mischief in it and shed blood,
while we celebrate Thy praise and extol Thy holiness?" Allâh did not say
that their accusation against the wouldbe vicegerent was wrong; His only
answer was that He taught Adam all the names. There must have been
some­thing deep, meaningful and relevant in this teaching of the names;
otherwise, the angels could not be satisfied, their objection could not
be answered. The names taught to Adam must have contained some such
thing that would come to the rescue of man if he sinned, would save him
from disgrace if he erred. Probably, the words received at the time of
repentance were related to the names taught to him in the beginning.

It cannot be denied that Adam (a.s.) did wrong to himself by placing
himself in this world - a crossroads of happiness and unhappiness; had
he been ensnared by it he would have perished; but he chose to return to
his original place of spiritual bliss and was saved; he had to undergo,
in this process, untold miseries and unbearable hardships. In any case,
he put himself in so much trouble that he became "unjust" to himself.
The question arises as to why Allâh selected this hard way to send him
from the Garden to the earth. The fact, however, remains that in this
process he attained to such heights of eternal bliss and spiritual
perfection as would have been impossible to reach without coming down to
the earth - and that too with a stigma of mistake.

The events leading to his removal from the Garden and, later, to the
acceptance of his repentance showed to him his true reality - how
humble, dependent, deficient and servile he was; and at the same time he
came to realize that every difficulty of this world leads to manifold
ease in the next life; every unpleasant­ness here results in enhanced
pleasantness there; every trouble in the obedience to Allâh brings in
its wake the pleasure of Allâh and His unlimited reward; the process
continues until the servant reaches the sublime presence of his Lord.
Adam knew, through his own experience, taste of many of the beautiful
attributes of Allâh: His forgiveness, turning mercifully to the
servants, covering their mistakes, bestowing mercy on them, putting them
in the shadow of His compassion and grace - these are some of the divine
attributes which He has especially reserved for the sinners. Adam could
not know and understand them without passing through the stages which
Allâh had decreed for him.

This, however, was his repentance; it made ordination of a sharî‘ah
essential. It was necessary for Adam and his descendants to know which
path they should take so as to reach their desti­nation, the abode of
bliss and happiness. His repentance brought him to the stage where
promulgation of religion and ordination of the sharî‘ah was
inevitable.

That is why Allâh frequently mentions the repentance before the belief:
Stand fast then (in the right path) as you are com­manded, as also he
who has turned (to Allâh) with you. . . (11:112); And most surely I am
most forgiving to him who repents and believes and does good. . .
(20:82). There are many such verses in the Qur’ân.

QUR’?N: We said: "Get down you therefore all together; and if there
comes to you a guidance from Me, then whoever follows My guidance, no
fear shall come upon them, nor shall they grieve. And (as to) those who
disbelieve in, and belie, Our signs, they are the inmates of the fire,
in it they shall abide".

This is the essence of religion ordained, for the first time, for Adam
(a.s.) and his descendants. Allâh has condensed the whole religion in
these two sentences; nothing has been added, nor can be added to it upto
the Day of Resurrection.

Ponder on this story and particularly the narrative of Chapter 20. You
will see that Allâh had issued two decrees in respect of Adam and his
descendants. When he ate from the tree, it was decreed that he should
get down to the earth and spend his life therein - a life of trouble and
toil. And when he repented, it was ordained that he and his descendants
should be honoured with divine guidance. The first decree initiated the
earthly life for him; the second, issued after his repentance, bestowed
dignity and grace to that life, by providing it with divine guidance.
From then on, man's life is composed of two lives: A material, earthly
life and a spiritual, heavenly one. It may be inferred from repetition
of the order to "get down" in this narrative: "Get down, some of you
being the enemies of others; and there is for you in the earth an abode
and a provision for a time" (2:36). "Get down you therefrom all
together; and if there comes to you a guidance from Me. . ." (2:38).

Repentance of Adam (2:37) occurred between these two orders. The
sequence shows that Adam had repented before their departing from the
Garden, although he had slipped from his earlier position of honour. It
may also be, inferred from the change in the styles of the following
verses: Allâh said to Adam, when placing him in the Garden, "do not go
near this tree" (7:19); but when they ate from it, their Lord called out
to them: "Did I not forbid you both from that tree. . . " (7:22). Note
the demonstrative pronoun, "this", (for a nearer object) in the former
speech, and "that" (for a farther one) in the latter. Also contrast the
verb, "said", (showing proximity) of the former with "called out"
(showing distance) of the latter. All this together supports the
above-given explanation that at the time of the second order Adam was
still in the Garden but not in his earlier honoured place.

"Get down, some of you being the enemies of others; and there is for
you in the earth an abode and a provision for a time" (2:36; 7:24).
"Therein shall you live, and therein shall you die, and from it shall
you be raised" (7:25). The verses indicate that the life on the earth
was very different from that in the Garden. This life is firmly
connected with the earth, full of difficulties and hardships. Man, in
this life, is created from the earth, then after death is returned into
it, and will, on the Day of Resurrection, be raised from it. This life
is different from that of the Garden. It follows that Adam had lived a
heavenly - and not earthly - life in the Garden.

This observation gives us a certainty that the Garden of Adam was in
the heaven, although it was not the Garden of eternal abode from which
one is never turned out.

What is meant by "the heaven"? We shall, God willing explain it
somewhere else.

Now, we come to the mistake of Adam. The explanation given under
various verses throws sufficient light on this subject. But the
importance of the topic justifies its recapitulation in a systematic
way:

The verses obviously say that he had committed a mistake and disobeyed
the divine command: ". . . for then you (two) will be of the unjust";
"and Adam disobeyed his Lord, so he got astray"; and they too
acknowledged their error: "Our Lord! We have been unjust to ourselves,
and if Thou forgive us not, and have (not) mercy on us, we shall
certainly be of the losers." But on meditating on the verses, and
particularly on the admonition not to eat of the tree, we come to a
definite conclusion that the said prohibition was not in the nature of
an authoritative command; it was rather like an advice to guide Adam to
his good and comfort. The following proof irresistibly lead us to this
conclusion:

First: Allâh said in this, as well as in Chapter 7, that eating of the
tree would be an injustice, a wrong-doing (for then you two will be of
the unjust). The same result has been described as "toil" (so that you
should be put to toil); and the "toil" has been explained in the terms
of worldly needs and troubles, because it was ordained "for you that you
shall not be hungry therein (i.e., as long as you remained in the
Garden) nor bare of clothing; and that you shall not be thirsty therein
nor shall you feel the heat of the sun". It seems clear that it was to
protect them from these worldly troubles and toils that they were told
not to go near that tree, The prohibition, therefore, was not more than
an advice; certainly it was not an authoritative command. Going against
an advice does not entail a sin, does not involve rebellion against the
adviser. The injustice, mentioned in this story, therefore, means their
doing wrong against their own selves, putting themselves in this world's
hardship and toil; but it cannot mean the sin committed by a servant
against his master.

Second: When a servant repents, that is, returns to Allâh, his Lord,
and the Lord accepts that repentance, all the effects of the sin are
erased, as though he had not committed any sin at all. If the
prohibition against eating from the tree had the force of an
authoritative command, an ordained law, Adam and his wife should have
been returned to their place in the Garden as soon as their repentance
was accepted. But they were not. It decisively proves that the
prohibition was of advisory nature like telling someone not to put his
hand in a fire; if he does not listen to the advice, his hand would
certainly burn, and the subsequent apology would not unburn it, even if
the apology was accepted. Likewise, Adam and his wife disregarded the
advice, and as a result of eating from the tree, had to go out of the
Garden and live in the earth a life of trial and hardship. Their
repentance could not take them back to the Garden as their coming to the
earth was the natural and inevitable result of that action.

The prohibition, in short, was no a law ordained by the Master - like
the announcement that a man who neglects to pray would enter the Fire;
or the one who disobeys the rules of the sharî‘ah would be punished. If
it were like such a command, the repentance would have rubbed out the
effect of disobedience and they would have been sent back to the Garden
straight away.

Third: We said: "Get down you therefrom all together; and if there
comes to you a guidance from Me, then whoever follows My guidance, no
fear shall come upon them, nor shall they grieve. And (as to) those who
disbelieve in, and belie, Our signs, they are the inmates of the fire,
in it they shall abide." These verses have put in a nutshell all the
detailed laws, rules, and regulations sent by Allâh for the mankind,
through His angels, books and apostles. And it was the first sharî‘ah
which Allâh ordained for the world, the world of Adam and his
descendants. It was ordained after the second order to "get down" - and
the order to "get down" was not a legislative, but a creative, command,
resulting from his eating of the tree.

It means that at the time when Adam partook of the tree, no sharî‘ah
was ordained yet, and no law was promulgated. There­fore, whatever Adam
did was not a transgression against any law of the shâri’ah, nor was
there any sin or crime involved in acting against that advice.

Question: The order to the angels and Iblîs to prostrate before Adam
was an authoritative command, and it was given before the order to Adam
not to go near that tree. Therefore, it is difficult to believe that at
that time there was no obligatory law.

Reply: We are talking about Adam and his descendants, and not about the
angels and Iblîs. It is irrelevant whether the angels and Iblîs were
given a compulsory order before Adam was placed in the Garden.

Question: If the prohibition were of an advisory nature, Allâh would
not have described its disregard in the terms of "injustice",
"disobedience", and "going astray".

Reply: We have already explained that the "injustice" done by Adam and
his wife was against their own selves; it was not a sin against Allâh.

"al-‘Isyân" (= disobedience ) literally means to resist, or to yield
with difficulty. The Arabs say: I broke it and it was broken; I broke it
fa-‘asâ (= ) but it resisted, or yielded to my pressure with difficulty.
Not heeding an order is called al-‘isyân, because one does not yield to
that enjoinment or prohibition. This resistance may occur against an
advice as much as against a compulsory order. The word in itself does
not imply sinning; it all depends on the nature of the order that was
disregarded.

Of course, nowadays we, the Muslims, use this word as synonymous to
sinning. And now it has become a terminology of the sharî‘ah (or of the
Muslims), used for disobedience to an authoritative command. But this
later transformance cannot effect its original or literal meaning for
which it was used in the Qur’ân.

"al-Ghawâyah" ( = to go astray ) literally means inability of a man to
look after his interests; not managing one's affairs properly. This word
by itself does not indicate committing a sin or crime. It is the context
that determines its value. Its em­phasis changes depending on whether
the neglected order was an advice or an authoritative command.

Question: Then why did they repent? Why did they say, "and if Thou
forgive us not, and have (not) mercy on us, we shall certainly be of the
losers?"

Reply: at-Tawbah (repentance) means to turn to. And the word can be
used in various meanings, depending on context.

A servant rebels against his master, and thereafter returns to him and
asks for his forgiveness; the master, if he so wishes, pardons him, and
gives him his previous rank and position.

A doctor tells a patient not to eat certain fruits, lest his illness be
prolonged or the disease be complicated. The patient disregards the
prohibition and, as a result, puts his life in dan­ger. Now he feels
embarrassed and repents before the doctor, asking for his forgiveness,
begging him to prescribe for him a medicine to enable him to regain his
health and vigour. The doctor may tell him that now it will be necessary
for him to undergo a long and difficult treatment, adding that if he
per­severed in the prescribed regimen his health would be much better
than before.

The significance of the other words used in the narrative, like
forgiveness, mercy and loss, may likewise change with the context.

**TRADITIONS**

al-Qummî (‘Alî) narrates, in his at-Tafsîr, from his father (Ibrâhîm
ibn Hâshim) who narrates, from as-Sâdiq (a.s.) (omitting the chain of
intervening narrators, although it was fully described by his Shaykh).
He said: "as-Sâdiq (a. s.) was asked about the Garden of Adam whether it
was a garden of this world or one of the hereafter's. He (a.s.) said:
‘It was a garden of this world, wherein the sun and the moon rose. Had
it been a Garden of the hereafter, he would have not come out of it.' He
(a.s.) further said: ‘Allâh placed him in the Garden and allowed him its
free­dom with exception of the tree. (It was done) because here was a
creature of Allâh who could not survive without (some) enjoin­ment and
prohibition, nor (could it continue) without food, cloth, shelter and
marriage; nor could he know, without divine help, what was beneficial to
him from what was harmful. Then came to him Iblîs and told him:

"If you (two) ate from this tree, which Allâh has forbidden you, you
(two) would become two angels and would abide in the Garden for ever;
and if you (two) did not eat from it, Allâh would turn you out from the
Garden;" and he swore to them that he was a sincere adviser to them; as
Allâh quotes his words: Your Lord has not forbidden you from this tree
except that you may not both become two angels or that you may (not)
become of the immortals. And he swore to them both: "Most surely I am a
sincere adviser to you." Adam believed in his words, and they (i.e. Adam
and his wife) ate from the tree; and they became as Allâh says: their
nakedness became manifest to them; what Allâh had clothed them with of
the (attires of the) Garden dropped away from them, and they both began
to cover themselves with the leaves of the Garden; and their Lord called
out to them: Did I not forbid you both from that tree and say to you
that the Satan is your open enemy? They said, as Allâh quotes them: "Our
Lord! We have been unjust to ourselves; and if Thou forgive us not, and
have (not) mercy on us, we shall certainly be of the losers.

" Thereupon Allâh said to them: "Get down, some of you being the
enemies of others; and there is for you in the earth an abode and a
provision for a time. " ' " He (the Imâm) said: "that (time) is the Day
of Resurrection". He further said: "Then Adam descended on the (hill of)
as-Safâ – and it got this name because Safîyu 'llâh ( = the sincere
friend of Allâh, i.e. Adam ) came down on it; and Hawwâ' (Eve) descended
on the (hill of) al-Marwah - and it was named al-Mar-wah because
al-mar'ah ( ) the woman descended on it. The Adam remained in
prostration for forty days, weeping for the Garden. So Jibrîl (Gabriel)
came to him and said: ‘Did Allâh not create you with His hand, and (did
He not) breath into you from His spirit, and (did He not) made His
angels prostrate before you?' He said: ‘Certainly.' (Then Jibrî1 said:)
‘and He ordered you not to eat from the tree and you disobeyed Him?'
Adam said: ‘Iblîs swore to me falsely.'"

The author says: There are other traditions too from Ahlu '1-bayt (a.
s.) to the effect that the Garden of Adam was of this world; although
some of them are from the same Ibrâhîm ibn Hâshim.

The phrase, "a garden of this world", has been used in contrast to the
Garden of everlasting abode. It indicates a state between this world and
the hereafter. Adam's garden was not the Garden of everlasting abode,
but neither was it a garden like is the state, place and time that of
ours al-Barzakh ( ) between one's death and the Day of Resurrection. The
said Garden may be called a Garden of al-Barzakh, and it may well have
been situated in this world. The sentences, "Adam descended on the (hill
of) as-Safâ", and "Hawwâ' descended on the (hill of) al-Marwah",
indicate that, before it, they were somewhere above this world. The
interpretation of "a time" with the "Day of Resurrection" is also
revealing. Man remains in al-Barzakh after his death, and at the same
time he remains in the earth. Many Qur’ânic verses use these expressions
interchangeably.

For example: He will say: "How many years did you tarry in the earth?"
They will say: "We tarried a day or part of a day", but ask those who
keep account. He will say: "You did tarry but a little - had you but
known (it)" (23:112-114). And at the time when the Hour shall come, the
guilty shall swear (that) they did not tarry but an hour; thus they used
to utter lies. And those who are given knowledge and faith will say:
"Certainly you tarried according to the decree of Allâh till the Day of
Resurrection, but you did not know" (30:55-56).

Apart from that, many traditions of Ahlu ‘l-bayt (a.s.) show that the
Garden of Adam was in the heaven, and that he and his wife descended
from the heaven. For the one who is familiar with the language of
traditions, it is not difficult to believe that the said Garden was in
the heaven and that they had descended from the heaven to the earth,
even if they were created in the earth itself and live therein all
along. These expressions are not any different from those which say that
the Garden is in the heaven, and yet say that the grave is an orchard
from the orchards of the Garden or a pit from the pits of the Fire. Many
similar expressions are found in the traditions. Any lingering doubt
will be removed when we shall write about the heaven, God willing. There
is no mention in the correct and reliable traditions as to how Iblîs
found his way to Adam and his wife, or as to what means he adopted for
this purpose. Some traditions mention the serpent and peacock as the two
helpers of Iblîs in his endeavour to mislead Adam and his wife; but they
are extremely unreliable. Obviously, such traditions were interpolated
under the influence of Judaism. This story has been taken from the Jews,
and to make this point clear, we are quoting it from the Bible (King
James version). The story is given in the book of Genesis:

"And the Lord God formed man of the dust of ground, and breathed into
his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living soul. And the
Lord God planted a garden eastward in Eden; and there he put the man
whom he had formed. And out of the ground made the Lord God to grow
every tree that is pleasant to the sight, and good for food; the tree of
life also in the midst of the garden, and the tree of knowledge of good
and evil. And a river went out of Eden to water the garden; and from
thence it was parted, and became into four heads. The name of the first
is Pison: that is it which compasseth the whole land of Havilah, where
there is gold; And the gold of that land is good: there is bdellium and
the onyx stone. And the name of the second river is Gihon: the same is
it that compasseth the whole land of Ethiopia. And the name of the third
river is Hiddekel: that is it which goeth towards the east of Assyria.
And the fourth river is Euphrates. And the Lord God took the man, and
put him into the garden of Eden to dress it and to keep it. And the Lord
God commanded the man, saying, Of every tree of the garden thou mayest
freely eat:

But of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat
of it: for in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die.
And the Lord God said, It is not good that the man should be alone; I
will make him an help meet for him. And out of the ground the Lord God
formed every beast of the field and every fowl of the air; and brought
them unto Adam to see what he would call them: and whatsoever Adam
called every living creature, that was the name thereof. And Adam gave
names to all cattle, and to the fowl of the air, and to every beast of
the field; but for Adam there was not found an help meet for him. And
the Lord Gad caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam, and he slept: and he
took one of his ribs, and closed up the flesh instead thereof; And the
rib, which the Lord God had taken from man, made he a woman, and brought
her unto the man. And Adam said, This is now bone of my bones and flesh
of my flesh: she shall be called Woman, because she was taken out of
Man. Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall
cleave unto his wife: and they shall be one flesh. And they were both
naked, the man and his wife, and were not ashamed. Now the serpent was
more subtil than any beast of the field which the Lord God has made. And
he said unto the woman, Yea, hath God said, Ye shall not eat of every
tree of the garden? And the woman said unto the serpent, We may eat of
the fruit of the trees of the garden:

But of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the garden, God
hath said, Ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye
die. And the serpent said unto the woman, Ye shall not surely die: For
God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be
opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil. And when the
woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it was pleasant to
the eyes, and a tree to be desired to make one wise, she took of the
fruit thereof, and did eat, and gave also unto her husband with her; and
he did eat. And the eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that
they were naked; and they sewed fig leaves together, and made themselves
aprons. And they heard the voice of the Lord God walking in the garden
in the cool of the day: and Adam and his wife hid themselves from the
presence of the Lord God amongst the trees of the garden. And the Lord
God called unto Adam, and said unto him, Where art thou? And he said, I
heard thy voice in the garden, and I was afraid, because I was naked;
and I hid myself. And he said, Who told thee that thou wast naked?

Hast thou eaten of the tree, whereof I com­manded thee that thou
shouldest not eat? And the man said, The woman whom thou gavest to be
with me, she gave me of the tree, and I did eat. And the Lord God said
unto the woman, What is this that thou hast done? And the woman said,
The serpent beguiled me, and I did eat. And the Lord God said unto the
serpent, Because thou hast done this, thou art cursed above all cattle,
and above every beast of the field; -upon thy belly shalt thou go, and
dust shalt thou eat all the days of the life; And I will put enmity
between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed; it shall
bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heel. Unto the woman he said,
I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy conception; in sorrow thou
shalt bring forth children; and thy desire shall be to thy husband, and
he shall rule over thee. And unto Adam he said, Because thou hast
hearkened unto the voice of thy wife, and hast eaten of the tree, of
which I commanded thee, saying, Thou shalt not eat of it:

cursed is the ground for thy sake; in sorrow shalt thou eat of it all
the days of thy life; Thorns also and thistles shall it, bring forth to
thee; and thou shalt eat the herb of the field; In the sweat of thy face
shalt thou eat bread, till thou return unto the ground; for out it wast
thou taken: for dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return. And Adam
called his wife's name Eve; because she was the mother of all living.
Unto Adam also and to his wife did the Lord God said, Behold, the man is
become as one of us, to know good and evil: and now, lest he put forth
his hand, and take also of the tree of life, and eat, and live for ever:
Therefore the Lord God sent him forth from the garden of Eden, to till
the ground from whence he was taken. So he drove out the man; and he
placed at the east of the garden of Eden Cherubims, and a flaming sword
which turned every way, to keep the way of the tree of life." (Genesis,
ch.2: vs. 7 to ch.3: vs. 24)

Compare the narrative of the Qur’ân with that of the Bible, then ponder
on various traditions narrated in the Shi'âh or Sunnî books; you will
come to know many revealing differences. But we are not going into it
because it is beyond the scope of this book.

Question: How could Iblîs enter the Garden and mislead Adam therein?
The question arises because:

i) the Garden is a place of cleanliness and purity, wherein there shall
be nothing vain nor any sin (52:23);

ii) The garden is in the heaven, and Iblîs was already turned out
therefrom when he refused to prostrate before Adam. Then get out of it,
for surely you are driven away (15:34). Then get down from this, for it
does not befit you to behave proudly therein (7:13).

Reply: (i) The Qur’ân disallows vain and sinful acts in the Garden of
eternal abode (in which the believers shall be placed after
resurrection) and the Garden of al-Barzakh wherein they are placed after
death. But it is silent about the Garden of Adam, in which he was placed
together with his wife before man was sent to this world and given any
authoritative law. Rather, it may be said that it shows not only
possibility of disobedience therein, but also its occurrence. Proof:
This very disobedience of Adam and his wife.

Moreover, vanity and sin are relative terms; and they do not occur
until man comes into this world, and is given some authoritative laws to
follow.

(ii) The argument may be replied as follows:

a. It cannot be definitely said that the clauses, "get down of it" and
"get down from this" were meant to turn Iblîs out of the heaven, because
"the heaven" has not been mentioned in preceding sentences. The order,
therefore, could mean, ‘get out of the ranks of the angels', or ‘get
down from the honour and dignity given to thee'.

b. May be, the order to get down or to get out meant only that he could
not live or stay in the heaven with the angels. If so, then it was not a
prohibition against occasionally going or ascend­ing thereto. This
interpretation is supported by the verses which describe the Satans'
occasional goings upto the heaven to eaves­drop the conversations of the
angels.[^3] Also, it has been narrated that before the time of ‘?sâ
(a.s.), the Satans were going upto the seventh heaven; when he was born
they were barred from the fourth heaven and above; then after the birth
of the Prophet they were barred from all the heavens.

c. There is no mention in the Book of Allâh that Iblîs had entered the
Garden. Therefore, the question does not arise at all. It has, of
course, been narrated in the traditions; but they are not al-mutawâtir;
and possibly the narrators have de­scribed the story in their own words,
and not exactly as the Imâm said.

Utmost that may be put as evidence that Iblîs had entered the Garden is
the verse: and he (i.e. the Satan) said: "Your Lord has not forbidden
you from this tree except that you may not become two angels. . . "
(7:19), as he had used the pronoun, "this", ("this tree") which denotes
nearness. But if it is taken to mean nearness in place, it would give
the same meaning in Allâh's command, . . . do not go near this tree
(7:18). Surely it, cannot be said that the pronoun indicates that Allâh
was in that place near the tree.1

‘Abdu 's-Salâm al-Harawî2 said: "I said to ar-Ridâ (a.s.): ‘O son of
the Messenger of Allâh! tell me about the tree from which Adam and
Hawwâ’ ate, what was it? Because people do have different views about
it; some have narrated that it was a wheat-plant, and others have
reported that it was the tree of envy.' He said: ‘All this is true.' I
said: ‘Then what do these explanations, with their differences, mean?'
He said: ‘O son of as-Salt! verily the tree of the Garden bears (fruits
of) many kinds; and it was a wheat-plant and (yet) it bore grapes; and
it was not like a tree of this world. And when Allâh raised the status
of Adam by making the angels prostrate before him and by placing him in
the Garden, he said: "Has Allâh created any man superior than me?"

And Allâh knew what had came into his mind; so He called out to him:
"Raise your head, O Adam! and look at the pil­lar of the Throne." So, he
looked at the pillar of the Throne and found written on it: "There is no
god except Allâh; Muhammad is the Messenger of Allâh; ‘Alî ibn Abî Tâlib
is the Leader of the faithful, and his wife, Fâtimah is the Chief of the
women of the worlds, and al-Hasan and al-Husayn are the Chiefs of the
youths of the people of the Garden." Adam said: "O my Lord! who are
they?" He, Mighty and Great is He said: "O Adam! they are (from) your
off-springs; and they are better than you and all My creation; and if it
were not (for) them, I would have not created you, nor the Garden, nor
the fire, nor the heaven, nor the earth. So be careful not to look at
them with envious eyes; otherwise, I will turn you out of My nearness."
But he looked at them with envious eyes and entertained the hope of
(attaining to) their rank. So, the Satan got the better of him, until he
ate from the forbidden tree; and got the better of Hawwâ’, and she
looked at Fâtimah with envious eyes until she too, like Adam, ate from
the tree. Thereupon, Allâh turned them out of His Garden, and got them
down from His nearness to the earth.'" (‘Uyûnu 'l-akhbâr)

The author says: This matter has been described in many traditions,
some more detailed than this; others, more concise. In this tradition,
the Imâm has confirmed that the tree was the wheat-plant, and also that
it was the tree of envy. The former implies that the tree was not worthy
of attention of the people of the Garden; the later indicates that it
was too lofty to come within the grasp of Adam and his wife (as a
tradition says that it was the tree of the knowledge of Muhammad and his
progeny).

Apparently, the two interpretations are totally different from each
other, and the tradition seems a problematic one. But if you ponder on
the covenant referred to earlier, you will see that both meanings are
complementary, and not mutually exclusive. Adam (a.s.) wanted to combine
the pleasures of the Garden - a place of nearness to Allâh, where it was
necessary to always keep the covenant before one's eyes, and not to let
one's attention divert to anyone or anything else - with the forbidden
tree - which would bring all the world's troubles in its wake; but he
failed in his endeavour, was sent down to the earth because he had been
heedless of the said covenant and of its demands. It was reserved for
the Prophet to combine these two seemingly apposite factors; it was he
who, for the first time, harmonized this world with the next,
synchronized the matter with the spirit, and brought into being a whole
man.

However, Allâh again guided Adam aright, chose him for His vicegerency,
and as a result of his repentance, raised him above the worldly desires
and made him remember again the forgotten covenant.

"But he looked at them with envious eyes and entertained the hope of
(attaining to) their rank": The second clause explains the first; Adam
wanted that he too should attain to that status; it was not that he was
envious (i.e., had any ill will) against them. Envy is a vice, while
aspiring to raise one's status is not.

Now let us look at the following two traditions:

1. ath-Thumâlî narrates from Abû Ja’ far (a. s.) that he said: "Allâh
made a covenant with Adam that he should not go near the tree. But when
the time came when, according to the know­ledge of Allâh, he was to eat
of it, he forgot (the covenant) and ate from it. And that is (the
meaning of) the words of Allâh: And certainly We had covenanted unto
Adam before, but he forgot; and We did not find in him any
determination." (Kamâlu 'd-dîn)

2. al-‘Ayyâshî narrated in his at-Tafsîr from one of the two (i.e., the
fifth or the sixth) Imâms, that he was asked as to why Allâh punished
Adam for his forgetfulness. He said: "He had not forgotten; and how
could he forget when he had remembered it (very well) and (even) Iblîs
had told him: Your Lord has not forbidden you from this tree except that
you may not both become two angels or that you may (not) become of the
immortals."

The way to harmonize these seemingly conflicting traditions is clear if
one applies to them the foregoing explanation.

Abû 's-Salt al-Harawî said: "al-Ma'mûn gathered for ‘Alî ibn Mûsâ
ar-Ridâ (a.s.) people of various sects from among the Muslims, the Jews,
the Christians, the Magians, the Sabaeans and all other religions.
Nobody stood (for religious discussion with the Imâm) but that he was
forced to accept his (Imâm's) arguments and was put to silence. Then
stood before him ‘Alî ibn Muhammad ibn al-Jahm and said to him: ‘Do you
believe in sinlessness of the prophets? O son of the Messenger of
Allâh!' He said: ‘Yes.’ He (‘Alî ibn Muhammad ibn al-Jahm) said:

‘Then what would you do with the words of Allâh: and Adam disobeyed his
Lord, so he got astray?. . .’ Then said our master, ar-Ridâ (a. s.):
‘Woe unto you! O ‘Alî! ! Have fear of Allâh (in your heart) and do not
ascribe indecencies to the prophets of Allâh, and do not interpret by
your own opinion the Book of Allâh (Mighty and Great is He!) Verily
Allâh (Mighty and Great is He!) says: . . . but none knows its
interpretation except Allâh and those who are firmly rooted in knowledge
(3:7). As for the words of Allâh, and Adam disobeyed his Lord, so he got
astray, (the fact is that) Allâh (Mighty and Great is He!) had created
Adam (to be) His proof in His earth and (to be) His vicegerent in His
towns; He had not created him for the Garden; and the disobedience was
(done) by Adam in the Garden, and not in the earth; (and it came to
pass) so that the measures of the decree of Allâh (Mighty and Great is
He) might be fulfilled. So when he was sent down to the earth and was
made (Allâh's) proof and vicegerent, he was protected (i.e. became
sinless), as Allâh says: Surely Allâh chose Adam and Nûh and the
descendants of Ibrâhîm and the descendants of ‘Imrân above all the
worlds."' (3:33) (al-Amâlî, as-Sadûq)

The author says: The sentence, "and the disobedience was . . . in the
Garden", points to what we have already mentioned that there was no
religious law ordained in the Garden; and that Adam (a.s.) even before
his creation, was destined to live in the earth; and, therefore, the
disobedience was of an advice, and not of an ordained law. In this
context, there appears no reason why anyone should try (as someone has
done) to explain away this tradition in a round-about way.

‘Alî ibn Muhammad ibn al-Jahm said: "I was present in the court of
al-Ma'mûn; and ‘Alî ibn Mûsâ was there with him. And al-Ma'mûn said to
him: ‘O son of the Messenger of Allâh! Is it not your belief that the
prophets are sinless?' He said: ‘Yes.' (al-Ma'mûn) said: ‘Then what is
the meaning of the words of Allâh, the High: and Adam disobeyed his
Lord, so he got astray?' (The Imâm) said: ‘Verily Allâh said to Adam:
dwell you and your wife in the Garden and eat (you both) freely wherever
you (two) wish and do not approach (you two) this tree, (pointing to a
tree) for then you (two) will be of the unjust. Allâh did not say to
him: Do not eat from this tree nor from another tree of its kind. And
they did not eat from it; they ate from another (similar) tree because
the Satan whispered evil suggestion to them and said: "Your Lord has not
forbidden you from this (i.e. the other simi­lar) tree; He has only
forbidden you from approaching that one; and He has not forbidden you
from that three except that you may not both become two angels or that
you may not become of the immortals." And he swore to them both: "Most
surely I am a sincere adviser to you." And Adam and Hawwâ’ had not seen
before that anyone swearing falsely in the name of Allâh; thus he caused
them to fall by deceit and they ate from that (tree) because they
believed in his oath in the name of Allâh. And it all happened before
Adam was made a prophet, and it was not a big sin leading 'one to the
fire; it was only a forgiven minor (sin) that is permissible to the
prophets before they begin receiving revelation. But when Allâh chose
him and made him prophet he became sinless, not committing any minor or
major sin. Allâh (Mighty and Great is He!) has said: Surely Allâh chose
Adam and Nûh and the descendants of Ibrâhîm and the descendants of
‘Imrân above all the worlds. . .' " (‘Uyûnu '1-akhbâr)

The author says: as-Sadûq (may Allâh have mercy on him!) after
narrating the tradition in full, has commented as follows:

"Strange that ‘Alî ibn Muhammad ibn al-Jahm, in spite of his open
hostility towards, and enmity and hatred of, Ahlu '1-bayt (a.s.) ,
should narrate this tradition."

This comment only looks at the belief of the sinlessness of the
prophets which this tradition purportedly proves; but as-Sadûq (may
Allâh have mercy on him!) did not look deep into its implications. The
reported reply is not in accord with the well-known belief of the Imâms
of Ahlu '1-bayt, that all the prophets were fully protected from all
major and minor sins before as well as after getting the prophethood.

Moreover, the reply presumes that the verse does not mean what it
apparently says. According to this tradition, the verse, "Your Lord has
not forbidden you from this tree except that you may not both become two
angels . . . ", should be read as follows: "Your Lord has not forbidden
you from this (i.e. the other similar) tree; He has only forbidden you
from approaching that one; and He has not forbidden you from that tree
except that you may not both become two angels . . ." Such deletions are
against the norms of eloquence. The quoted speech of the Satan clearly
shows that he was instigating them to eat from the very tree that was
forbidden, holding out to them the hope of becoming angels or immortals:
"Your Lord has not forbidden you from this tree except that you may not
both become two angels or that you may (not) become of the immortals."
"O Adam! shall I guide you to the tree of immortality and a kingdom
which decays not?" The narrator, that is, ‘Alî ibn Muhammad ibn al-Jahm,
had himself been given the correct and complete answer in the court of
al-Ma'mûn, as the preceding tradition shows; therefore, there is
something wrong in this narration of his, although some parts may be
somehow interpreted correctly.

as-Sadûq has narrated (through his chain) from al-Bâqir (a. s.) ,
through his forefathers, from ‘Alî (a.s.) that the Messenger of Allâh
(s.a.w.a.) said: "Adam and Hawwâ’ stayed in the Garden, (till they were
sent out of it) for seven hours according to the (counting of the) days
of the world, until Allâh sent them down on the same day."

‘Abdullâh ibn Sinân said: "Abû ‘Abdillâh (a.s.) was asked - and I was
present there: ‘How long did Adam and his wife stay in the Garden until
their mistake removed them from it?' He said: ‘Verily Allâh breathed His
spirit into Adam after the mid­day on Friday; then created his wife from
his lowest rib; then He made His angels prostrate before him and placed
him in His Garden the same day. And by God! he did not stay therein but
six hours of the same day until he disobeyed Allâh. Thereupon, Allâh
removed them both from it after the sunset, and they were put into the
courtyard of the Garden till the morning; then their nakedness became
manifest to them; and their Lord called out to them: "Did 1 not forbid
you both from that tree?" Adam felt ashamed and bowed (his head) and
said: "Our Lord! We have been unjust to ourselves and we confess our
sins; therefore, forgive us (our sins)." Allâh said to them: "Get down
you both from My heavens to the earth; because no sinner shall remain in
My nearness - neither in My Garden nor in My heavens. " ' " (at-Tafsîr,
al-‘Ayyâshî)

The author says: The tradition gives a new detail, that Adam and Hawwâ’
were removed first from the Garden to its courtyard and then from the
courtyard to the earth. There are some indi­cations in the Qur’ân to
support this information:

First: They were twice told to "get down" (vide vs. 2:36 and 2:38). It
was a creative, and not a legislative, order, and a creative order takes
effect the instant it is given.

If the first order told them to get down to the earth, there was no
question of their not getting down to the earth at once; and, therefore,
the second order would be superfluous. But in the light of this
tradition the two commands would be perfectly in order.

Second: As mentioned in the commentary, this idea may be inferred from
the changed verbs and pronouns of the verses. Allâh describes in these
words his talk with Adam when he was being placed in the Garden: And We
said: "O Adam! dwell you and your wife in the Garden . . . and do not
approach (you two) this tree. . . " But after they had eaten from the
tree, their Lord called out to them: "Did I not forbid you both from
that tree?" The verb, "We said" of the former has been changed to
"called out to them" in the latter; as the demonstrative pronoun, "this
tree" (showing nearness) was replaced by "that tree" (showing distance).
These changes show that Adam had been removed, by the time of the second
address, from his original place of nearness in the Garden to a distant
place - which the tradition describes as the courtyard.

But this tradition says that Hawwâ’ was created from the lowest rib of
Adam; it is a Biblical story which has been totally rejected by the
Imâms of Ahlu 'l-bayt, (as will be seen from the traditions which will
be quoted under the verses of the creation of Adam). This tradition,
therefore, is unacceptable unless this expression is taken to mean that
Hawwâ’ was created from the clay left over from the creation of Adam and
which was lying near his lowest rib.

Whether he stayed in the Garden for six hours (as this tradi­tion says)
or seven (as the former says) is not very important, because such things
are mere approximation.

It is reported from the fifth or the sixth Imâm (peace be on them both)
that he said about the verse, then Adam received (some) words from his
Lord, that (the words were as follows): "There is no god except Thee;
Glory be to Thee, O Allâh! and praise! I have committed evil and been
unjust to myself; therefore, forgive me (my sin) and Thou art the best
of the forgivers. There is no god except Thee; Glory be to Thee, O
Allâh! and praise! I have done wrong and been unjust to myself;
therefore, have mercy on me, and Thou art the best of the forgivers.
There is no god ex­cept Thee; Glory to Thee, O Allâh! and praise! I have
committed evil and been unjust to myself; therefore, have mercy on me,
and Thou art the best of those who have mercy. There is no god except
Thee; Glory be to Thee, O Allâh! and praise! I have done wrong and been
unjust to myself; therefore, forgive me (my sin) and turn to me (with
mercy); surely Thou, Thou alone, art oft­returning (with mercy), the
Merciful." (al-Kâfî)

The author says: This theme has been narrated also by as­-Sadûq,
al-‘Ayyâshî, al-Qummî and others; nearly the same thing has been
narrated through the Sunnî chains; and it may possibly be inferred from
the apparent meaning, of the verses.

al-Kulaynî has written in al-Kâfî : "And another tradition says in
respect of this verse: (Adam) had asked from (Allâh) by the right of
Muhammad and ‘Alî and Fâtimah and al-Hasan and al-Husayn."

The author says: This explanation too has been narrated by as-Sadûq,
al-‘Ayyâshî, al-Qummî and others. A nearly simi­lar tradition has been
narrated through the Sunnî chains. it is reported in ad-Durru 'l-manthûr
that the Prophet said: "When Adam committed the sin that he committed,
he raised his head towards the heaven and said: ‘I beseach Thee, by the
right of Muhammad, to forgive me.' Allâh revealed to him (i.e., asked
him through revelation): ‘And who is Muhammad?' He said: ‘Blessed is Thy
name! When Thou created me, I raised my head towards Thy Throne and saw
written therein: There is no god except Allâh; Muhammad is the Messenger
of Allâh. Thus I knew that no one could be more honoured in Thy presence
than him whose name Thou hadst placed with Thy name.' Thereupon, Allâh
revealed to him: ‘O Adam! Verily he is the last of the prophets, from
thy descendants; and if it were not for him, I would have not created
thee.' "

The author says: Although these traditions seem not to be in accord
with the apparent meaning of the verse, on deeper consideration this
explanation does not look so far-fetched. The sentence, "Then Adam
received (some) words from his Lord", shows that he was taught those
words by the Lord, and that he had got that knowledge before his
repentance. Also, it is known that Allâh had taught him all the names.
Allâh told the angels that He was going to make in the earth a
vicegerent; they said: "Wilt Thou place in it such as shall make
mischief in it and shed blood, while we celebrate Thy praise and extol
Thy holiness? He said: "Surely I know what you do not know" . And He
taught Adam the names, all of them. There must have been something in
those names to wipe out every injustice, to erase every sin and to cure
every spiritual and moral disease; otherwise, the objection of the
angels could not be answered - Allâh did not say a single word to refute
the angels' assertion; all He did was to teach Adam all the names.

It means that those names could cure all the ills of humanity; the
angels understood it and surrendered to the know­ledge and wisdom of
Allâh. We have earlier explained that those names were sublime
creations, hidden from the heavens and the earth; they were
intermediaries to convey the grace and bounties of Allâh to His
creation; and no creature would be able to attain to its perfection
without their assistance. At this stage, we may refer to some traditions
which say that Adam saw the figures of Muhammad and his Ahlu 'l-bayt,
and also their light at the time he was taught the names; and the ones
which mention that he saw them when Allâh took out his offspring from
his back; and the others which describe his seeing them in the Garden.
However, Allâh has not identified those words, and has used it as a
common noun, "(some) words"; nevertheless, the Qur’ân has clearly used
the expression, "word ", for an individual being, as for example, in the
verse 3:45: . . . Allâh gives you good news of a word from Him whose
name is the Messiah, ‘?sâ son of Maryam . . .

Some exegetes have written that the "words", mentioned in this verse,
refer to the plea of Adam and his wife reported in Chapter 7: They said:
"Our Lord! We have been unjust to our­selves, and if Thou forgive us
not, and have (not) mercy on us, we shall certainly be of the losers.
"

But the sequence of events does not support this view. The repentance
of Adam, according to the narrative of Chapter 2, had occurred after his
coming to the earth. The verse (2:37) describing the repentance comes
after the verse (2:36) that mentions his descent to the earth.1 But they
had uttered that plea while they were still in the Garden, before coming
down to the earth. The plea is given in verse 7:23; and the order to
"get down" comes after that in verse 7:24. Apparently, this plea was in
response to their admonition by Allâh: "Did I not forbid you both from
that tree . . . ?"; they wanted to declare their servitude and to
surrender themselves to Allâh; acknowledging that all the auth­ority was
in the hands of Allâh and He might do what He pleased; He was their
Lord, and they had put themselves in danger of loss by being unjust to
themselves.

as-Sâdiq (a.s.) said: "Verily, Mûsâ asked his Lord to let him meet
Adam; and he was joined with him (i.e., Adam). Mûsâ said to him: ‘O
father! Did Allâh not create you with His hand, and breathe into you of
His spirit; and make the angels prostrate before you, and order you not
to eat of the tree? Then why did you disobey Him?' (Adam) said: ‘O Mûsâ!
How long before my creation did you find my mistake (mentioned) in the
Torah?' He said: ‘Thirty thousand years before.' (Adam) said: ‘That is
it."' as-Sâdiq (a.s.) said: "Thus refuted Adam the argument of Mûsâ."
(at-Tafsîr, al-Qummî)

The author says: as-Suyûtî has narrated in ad-Durru 'l-­manthûr
approximately similar traditions, through various chains, from the
Prophet.

al-Bâqîr (a.s.) said: "By God, Allâh had surely created Adam for the
world, and He gave him place in the Garden, in order that he might
disobey Him and thus He might return him to that for which He had
created him." (‘llalu 'sh-sharâ' i‘)

The author says: A tradition of the same theme, narrated by al-‘Ayyâshî
from as-Sâdiq (a.s.), concerning an angel friend of Adam, has been
quoted earlier.

A Syrian asked ‘Alî (a.s.) as to which valley in the earth was the most
honoured. He (a.s.) said: "The valley called Sarândîb wherein Adam
descended from the heaven." (al-Ihtijâj)

The author says: In contrast to it, there are numerous tra­ditions
showing that he had descended at Mecca (and some of them have been
quoted above). May be, he first came down to Sarândîb and then got down
to .Mecca.

It has been reported by at-Tabâranî, Abu 'sh-Shaykh (in his al-‘Azamah)
and Ibn Marduwayh, from Abû Dharr, that he said: "I said: ‘O Messenger
of Allâh! What do you say, was Adam a prophet?' He said: ‘Yes. He was a
prophet (and) an apostle; Allâh talked to him before; He had told him:
"O Adam! dwell you and your wife in the Garden." ' "

The author says: The Sunnîs have narrated almost similar traditions
through various chains.


