Chapter 12 : 2:40-44
====================

O children of Israel! Remember My bounties which I be­stowed on you,
and be faithful to (your) covenant with Me, I will fulfil (My) covenant
with you; and of Me, Me alone, should you be afraid (40). And believe in
what I have sent down verifying that which is with you, and be not the
first to deny it, neither take a mean price in exchange for My signs;
and Me, Me alone, should you fear (41). And do not mix up the truth with
the falsehood, nor hide the truth while you know (it) (42). And keep up
prayer and pay the zakdt and bow down with those who bow down (43).
What! do you enjoin men to be good and forget your own selves while you
read the Book? Have you then no sense? (44)

**GENERAL COMMENT**

Now begins the rebuking of the Jews that continues for more than a
hundred verses. Allâh reminds them of the bounties bestowed, of the
honours given; contrasting it with their ingrati­tude and disobedience;
showing how at every juncture they paid the favours of Allâh with
disregard of their covenant, open rebel­lion against divine commands and
even with polytheism. The series reminds them of twelve events of their
history - like res­cuing them from Pharaoh and his people by parting the
river, drowning of Pharaoh and his army, the appointed rendezvous at the
mount Sinâ’i, the Jews' starting calf-worship in Mûsâ's absence, and
Mûsâ's order to them to kill themselves, their de­mand from Mûsâ to show
their Lord to them face to face, their death by lightning and then their
arising from dead etc. - all of which shows how they were chosen to
receive the especial favours of Allâh. But their ingratitude runs
parallel to it. They repeatedly broke the covenants made with Allâh,
committed capital sins, hideous crimes and shameful deeds; more
despic­able. was their spiritual poverty and moral bankruptcy - in open
defiance to their book and total disregard to the reason. It was all
because their hearts were hardened, their souls lost and their
endeavours worthless.

**COMMENTARY**

QUR’?N: . . . and be faithful to (your) covenant with Me: ( = covenant
) literally means guarding and "al-‘Ahd"

maintenance. By association it has come to mean covenant, oath,
testament, will, encounter, house, etc.

QUR’?N: . . . and of Me, . . . should you be afraid: "ar-Rah-bah" ( =
fear ) is opposite of ar-raghbah (= desire ).

QUR’?N: . . . and be not the first to deny it: That is, first among the
people of the book, or first among your own people. This first­ness is
not all-inclusive, because the disbelievers of Mecca had rejected the
Message before the Jews.


