Chapter 13 : 2:45-46
====================

And seek assistance through patience and prayer; and most surely it is
a hard thing, except for the humble ones (45), who know that they shall
meet their Lord and that they shall return to Him (46).

**COMMENTARY**

QUR’AN: And seek assistance through patience and prayer: Man seeks
assistance in such affairs and tasks as he cannot manage alone, and in
hardships and difficulties which he cannot overcome himself. In reality
there is no helper except Allâh. Man can, therefore, manage all his
affairs and overcome all his difficulties by courage and steadfastness
(i.e. by patience) and by looking towards Allâh (i.e. by prayer). These
two factors are the best way to get assistance: patience makes even the
great misfortunes look trivial, and putting all his confidence in Allâh
awakens the spirit of faith; and thus man comes to realize that the
cause which he is relying upon can never fail to produce the desired
effect.

QUR’?N: and most surely it is a hard thing except for the humble ones:
The pronoun, it, refers to the "prayer". It is difficult to relate it to
"seeking the assistance", because it will then cover patience too, and
the word "the humble ones" will not look appropriate - humbleness does
not fit very much with patience.

The word used here for humbleness is "khushû’” ( ); "khudu’” ( ) too
has the same meaning but with one difference: while the latter shows
itself in the limbs of the body, the former refers to the inner
feeling.

QUR’?N: who know that they shall meet their Lord . . .: The word used
in this verse for "knowing" is "yazunnûn" ();

it literally means "they think". But the context, that is, the belief
in the hereafter, demands a firm conviction that would leave no room for
any doubt or supposition. Allâh says: and they are sure of the hereafter
(2:4). Or, may be, Allâh, by using this word, makes us realize that even
an elementary idea of the hereafter is sufficient to create in a man
humility and humbleness before his Lord. Many a knowledge comes to man
in stages: (1) first he becomes aware of an idea; (2) then he has some
doubts about its correctness; (3) then he becomes inclined to accept it;
(4) then gradually the possibility of his accepting the opposite view
vanishes completely and he becomes firmly convinced of the truth of that
idea - and this firm conviction is called knowledge. If such a knowledge
is concerned with some frightening affair, then his worry and disquiet
will begin as soon as he reaches the third stage when he is only
inclined to accept it - is only "thinking" that probably it may be true.
This Qur’ânic expres­sion, in other words, says that man, for showing
humbleness before Allâh, needs only to be aware of the idea that there
is a Lord Whom he may return to after his death. In this context only a
strong supposition should be enough to make him desist from disobeying
his Lord; it would not be necessary, for this purpose, to reach the
stage of firm knowledge. From this point of view, the verse looks almost
similar to the verse: . . . there­fore, whoever hopes to meet his Lord,
he should do good deeds, and not join any one in the worship of his Lord
(18:110).

The above discourse is based on the assumption that the words, "they
shall meet their Lord . . .", refer to the Day of Resurrection. But if
they are interpreted in, another way (as we shall describe in Chapter
7), there should be no difficulty at all in its explanation.

**TRADITIONS**

as-Sâdiq (a. s.) said: "Whenever ‘Alî (a.s.) faced a difficulty, he
used to stand up for the prayer and then recite this verse: and seek
assistance through patience and prayer." (al-Kâfî)

The same Imâm said about this verse: "The patience means fasting." Also
he said: "When a man is confronted by a hard misfortune, he should fast.
Surely Allâh says: and seek assistance through patience, that is, fast."
(ibid.)

The author says: al-‘Ayyâshî too has narrated the theme of these two
traditions in his at-Tafsîr. Interpretation of "patience" as fast is
based on the "flow" of the Qur’ân.

Abu 'l-Hasan (a.s.) said about this verse: "The patience means fast;
when a man is visited by a hardship or misfortune, he should fast;
surely Allâh says: And seek assistance through patience and prayer; and
most surely it is a hard thing except for the humble ones. And the
humble one is he who shows humility in his prayer, turning all his
attention to it; and it means the Messenger of Allâh (s.a.w.a.) and the
Leader of the faithful (a.s.)." (al-‘Ayyâshî)

The author says: The Imâm has inferred from this verse the desirability
of fasting and praying when one is facing any hardship or turmoil; and
likewise, the desirability of seeking the divine help through the medium
of the Prophet and ‘Alî (a.s.) at that time. In this way, the tradition
interprets the fast and the prayer as the Prophet and ‘Alî (a.s.).

‘Alî (a.s.) said about the verse, who know that they shall meet their
Lord . . . : Allâh says that they are sure that they would be
resurrected. And the supposition az-zann ( ) means certainty. (ibid.)

The author says: as-Sadûq also has narrated this tradition.

al-Bâqîr (a.s.) said that this verse was revealed about ‘Alî, ‘Uthmân
ibn Maz'ûn, ‘Ammâr ibn Yâsir and (some of) their friends. (al-Manâqib,
Ibn Shahrâshûb)


