Chapter 15 : 2:49-61
====================

And when We delivered you from Pharaoh's people, who subjected you to
severe torment, killing your sons and sparing your women, and in this
there was a great trial from your Lord (49). And when We parted the sea
for you, so We saved you and drowned the followers of Pharaoh while you
watched by (50). And when We appointed (a time of) forty nights with
Mûsâ, then you took the calf (for a god) after him and you were unjust
(51) ; then We pardoned you after that so that you might give thanks
(52). And when We gave Mûsâ the book and the distinction that you might
walk aright (53). And when Mûsâ said to his people: "O my peo­ple! you
have surely been unjust to yourselves by taking the calf (for a god),
therefore turn to your Creator (penitently) and kill your people, that
is best for you with your Creator; so He turned to you (mercifully), for
surely He is the Oft­returning (with mercy), the Merciful" (54). And
when you said: "O Mûsâ! we will not believe in you until we see Allâh
manifestly, " so the punishment overtook you while you looked on (55);
then We raised you up after your death that you may give thanks (56) .
And We made the clouds to give shade over you and We sent to you manna
and quails: Eat of good things that We have given you; and they did not
do Us any harm, but they did harm their own selves (57). And when We
said: "Enter this city, then eat from it a plen­teous (food) wherever
you wish, and enter the gate making obeisance, and say, forgiveness, We
will forgive you your wrongs and give more to those who do good (to
others) (58). But those who were unjust changed it for a saying other
than that which had been spoken to them, so We sent up­on those who were
unjust a pestilence from heaven, be­cause they transgressed (59). And
when Mûsâ prayed for drink for his people, We said: "Strike the rock
with your staff. " So there gushed from it twelve springs; each tribe
knew its drinking place: "Eat and drink of the provisions of Allâh and
do not act corruptly in the land, making mis­chief" (60). And when you
said: "O Mûsâ! we cannot bear with one food, therefore pray to your Lord
on our behalf to bring forth for us out of what the earth grows, of its
herbs and its cucumbers and its garlic and its lentils and its onions.
He said: "Will you exchange that which is better for that which is
worse? Enter a city, so you will have what you ask for. " And abasement
and humiliation were brought down upon them and they returned with
Allâh's wrath; this was so because they disbelieved in the signs of
Allâh and killed the prophets unjustly; this was so because they
disobeyed and exceeded the limits (61).

**COMMENTARY**

QUR’?N: and sparing your women: They left your women alive in order
that they (i.e. the women) might serve them. "al-Istihyâ "' () means to
wish someone to remain alive. The word may also mean: They behaved
indecently with the women until they (i.e. the women) lost their
modesty.

"Yasûmûnakum" () translated here as "they subjected you to", literally
means, they imposed upon you.

QUR’?N : And when We parted the sea for you: al-Farq () is opposite of
al-jam' (); the words mean to separate and to gather, respectively. The
same is the case of al-fasl () vis-a-vis "al-wasl" (). To separate the
sea means to part its water. "Bikum" (), translated here as "for you",
may also mean, "soon on your entering the sea".

QUR’?N : And when We appointed (a time of) forty days with Mûsâ: The
same event has been described in Chapter 7 in these words: And We
appointed with Mûsâ a time of thirty nights and completed them with ten
(more), so the appointed time of his Lord was complete, forty nights (7
:142) . This verse mentions the total duration of the two promises
together, as a tradition says.

QUR’?N : therefore turn to your Creator (penitently): al-Bâri’ () is
one of the beautiful names of Allâh, as Allâh says: He is Allâh, the
Creator, the Maker, the Fashioner; His are the most beautiful names. . .
(59:24). This name has been used three times in the Qur’ân: twice in the
verse under discussion and once in Chapter 59, quoted just above.
Perhaps Allâh used this name here because it was most suitable in the
context of the event described. While it is nearer in meaning to
al-Khâliq ( = the Creator) and al-Mûjid ( = the Inventor), it is derived
from bara'a, yabra'u, bar'an ( = he separated, he separates, to
separate). Allâh thus separates His creation from in­existence, or He
separates man from the earth. This name in this context conveys the
following idea: No doubt it is very hard to repent by killing your own
people. But Allâh, Who now orders you to destroy yourselves by killing,
is the same God who had created you. He was pleased to create you when
it was good for you; and now He has decreed that you should kill your
own people, and this order too is good for you. How can He decide
anything for you except that which is good, and He is your Maker and
Creator. The phrase, "your Creator", points to a special relation which
they have with Him, and it emphasizes the fact that the given command is
not for revenge; it is based on divine love, in order to purify them.

QUR’?N: that is best for you with your Creator: This and the preceding
verses (that enumerate their transgressions and sins) are addressed to
the whole Jewish nation, although the sins were committed by only some
groups of them and not by all. Obviously it is because they were very
much united as a nation; if one did a thing, others were pleased with
it. It was because of this feeling of their national unity that one
group's action is attributed to the whole nation. Otherwise, not all the
Israelites had killed the prophets, nor had all of them indulged in the
calf-worship, or committed other sins mentioned herein. It proves that
the order, "kill your people", actually meant, kill some of your people,
i.e., the calf-worshippers. It may also be inferred from the words, "you
have surely been unjust to yourselves by taking the calf for worship",
and the words, "that is best for you with your Creator" (which
apparently is the final part of the speech of Mûsâ).

The words, "so He turned to you (mercifully)", prove that their
repentance was accepted. Tradition says that their repent­ance was
accepted and sin forgiven when only a few of them had been killed. This
forgiveness before the order was fully complied with shows that the
command was given as a trial. The case is somewhat similar to the dream
of Ibrâhîm (a.s.) and his being told to sacrifice Ismâ’î1; before he
could reach the ultimate stage, he was told, O Ibrâhîm! You have indeed
made the vision come true (37 :104 -105) . Likewise, Mûsâ (a.s.) told
his people "turn to your Creator (penitently) and kill your people, that
is best for you with your Creator", and Allâh confirmed the order, yet
He took the killing of some as equal to the execution of all, and
informed them that their repentance was accepted, "so He turned to you
(mercifully)".

QUR’?N: a pestilence from heaven: "ar-Rijz" ( = punishment) .

QUR’?N: do not act corruptly: "Lâ ta'thaw" () is derived from al-\`ayth
and al-\`athy () it means the biggest chaos and mischief.

QUR’?N: and its cucumbers and its garlic: "al-Khiyar" () is cucumber;
"al-fum" () is garlic or wheat.

QUR’?N: and they returned with Allâh's wrath: "Bâ'û" ( = they
returned).

QUR’?N: this was so because they disbelieved: It gives the rea­son of
preceding statement; and the next sentence, "this was so because they
disobeyed and exceeded the limits" is the reason of that reason. Their
disobedience and perennial excesses caused them to reject the signs of
Allâh and kill the prophets. Allâh says in another verse: Then evil was
the end of those who did evil, because they rejected the signs of Allâh
and used to mock them (30:10). How was the disbelief caused by
disobedience? One of the coming traditions explains it.

**TRADITIONS**

Abû Ja'far (a.s.) said about the words of Allâh: and when We appointed
(a time of) forty nights with Mûsâ: "It was thirty nights in the
(divine) knowledge and measure, then some­thing else happened (to show
that it was not the final decree) and Allâh added ten more; and in this
way the appointed time of his Lord, the first and the last, was
completed forty days." (al-\`Ayyâshî )

The author says: This tradition supports what we have mentioned earlier
that the forty was the total of the two ap­pointed times.

\`Alî (a.s.) said about the words of Allâh: and when Mûsâ said to his
people: "0 my people! you have surely been unjust to yourselves. . . ":
"They asked Mûsâ: \`How should we repent?' He said: \`Some of you should
kill the others.' Thereupon, they took the knives and everyone started
killing (the others), even his brother, father and son, without caring,
by God! whom he killed. (It continued) till seventy thousand of them
were killed. Then Allâh revealed to Mûsâ: \`Tell them to stay their
hands;' and he who was killed was forgiven and he who remained, his
repentance was accepted. " (ad-Durru 'l-manthûr)

The Imâm said: "Mûsâ (a.s.) went to the appointed place and time, and
then came back to his people; and they had started worshipping the calf;
then he told them: ‘0 my people! you have surely been unjust to
yourselves by taking the calf (for worship), therefore turn to your
Creator (penitently) and kill your people, that is best for you with
your Creator.' They asked him: \`How should we kill our people?' Mûsâ
said to them: \`Tomorrow every­one of you should come to Baytu
'1-Maqdis[^4] with a knife or a piece of iron or a sword; when I ascend
the pulpit of the Children of Israel you should all keep your faces
hidden, so that nobody should recognize the other at his side; then you
should kill each other.' Thus seventy thousand of those who had
worshipped the calf assembled in Baytu '1-Maqdis. When Musa finished
praying with them and ascended the pulpit, they started killing each
other. (This continued) until Jibrîl came down and said: \`Now tell
them, O Mûsâ! to stop killing (each other), because Allâh has ac­cepted
their repentance.' And (by that time) ten thousand of them had been
killed. And Allâh revealed: that is best for you with your Creator; so
He turned to you (mercifully), for surely His is Oft­returning (with
mercy), the Merciful. "(at-Tafsîr, al-Qummi)

The author says: According to this tradition, the sentence, "that is
best for you with your Creator", was said by Mûsâ (a.s.) and was also
used in the divine speech. In this way, Allâh con­firmed the word of
Mûsâ (a.s.), and made it clear that what had actually happened - the
execution of ten thousand calf-worship­pers - was all that was intended
from the very beginning; and that the order of Musa was carried out in
full, and not partially. According to what appears from the wording of
Mûsâ (a.s.) , it was best for them if all of them were killed; but only
some of them got killed, not all. By repeating the same words, Allâh
made it clear that what Mûsâ (a.s.) had meant from the words, "the best
for you", was not the execution of all.

The same at-Tafsîr says about the words of Allâh: and We made the
clouds to give shade over you: "When Mûsâ crossed the sea with the
Israelites, they landed at a desert. They said: ‘O Mûsâ! you have really
destroyed and killed us, by bringing us from an inhabited land to a
desert where there is , either any shadow or tree nor even water.' At
daytime a cloud appeared over them to protect them from the sun; and at
right, manna came down to them, settling on leaves, trees and stones,
and they ate it; and at dinner time roasted birds fell on their
dinner­-spread, and when they finished eating and drinking, the birds
(became alive and) flew away. And Mûsâ had a stone which he used to
place in the midst of the station (of the caravan), striking it with his
walking-stick and, lo! twelve springs gushed from it, as Allâh
described, every spring going to the station of a particular tribe - and
they were twelve tribes." (ibid.)

Abu l-Hasan al-Mâdî (a.s.) said about the words of Allâh: and they did
not do Us any harm but they did harm their own selves: "Surely Allâh is
too powerful and too unassailable to be harmed or to ascribe any harm to
Himself. But He has joined us to Himself and took any injustice done to
us as an injustice done to Him, and treated our love as His love; then
He revealed it in a (verse of the) Qur’ân to His Prophet, and said: and
they did not do Us any harm, but they did harm their own selves. The
narrator says: "I said, \`This is the revelation?' He said, \`Yes."'
(al- Kâfi )

The author says: Nearly the same thing has been narrated from al-Baqir
(a.s.).

". . . too unassailable to be harmed ": It is the explanation of the
Qur’ânic expression, "they did not do Us any harm"; the next sentence,
"or to ascribe any harm to Himself", rejects also the opposite
proposition. Allâh can neither be harmed nor does He do any injustice
Himself. Why did the narrator ask the ques­tion, "This is the
revelation?" Obviously, for a negative sentence to be plausible there
should be a real or hypothetic possibility of a positive connection
between the subject and its predicate. We do not say, "This wall does
not see". Why? Because wall has no possible connection with seeing. Now,
Allâh can have no possible connection at all with injustice or
oppression. Therefore, the sentence, "they did not do Us any harm",
would seem a super­fluous and implausible assertion, because there was
no need for saying that Allâh could not be harmed nor did He harm
anyone - unless it was meant to convey some fine point to the listeners.
And that point is this: Great persons often speak on behalf of their
servants and dependants; likewise, Allâh in this verse is speak­ing on
behalf of Muhammad and his progeny (peace be on them all), joining them
to Himself in this declaration.

as-Sâdiq (a.s.) recited the verse: this was so because they disbelieved
in the signs of Allâh and killed the prophets unjustly; this was so
because they disobeyed and exceeded the limits, and then said: "By God,
they did not hit them with their hands, nor did they kill them with
their swords; but they heard their talks and announced it (to their
enemies); so the prophets were caught on that charge and killed; this
was the killing, the exceeding the limit and the disobedience."
(al-\`Ayyâshî)

The author says: A similar tradition from the same Imâm is found in
al-Kâfi. Apparently, the Imam inferred it from the words, "this was so
because they disobeyed . . ." Needless to say that murder, and
especially of the prophets, and rejection of the signs of Allâh cannot
be termed as mere disobedience. It should be the other way round. But if
we take the disobedience to mean disclosing the secrets then it would be
perfectly right to say that they killed the prophets, because they
(disobeyed them and) did not keep their secrets and thus delivered them
into the hands of their enemies who killed them.


