Chapter 16 : 2:62
=================

Surely those who believe, and those who are Jews, and the Christians,
and the Sabaeans, whoever believes in Allâh and the Last Day and does
good, they shall have their reward from their Lord, and there is no fear
for them, nor shall they grieve (62).

**COMMENTARY**

The verse first mentions the believers, and then says, "who­ever
believes in Allâh . . ." The context shows that the latter phrase refers
to the real belief, the true imân, and that the word, "those who
believe", (mentioned at first) refers to those who call themselves
believers. The verse says that Allâh gives no im­portance to names, like
the believers, the Jews, the Christians or the Sabaeans. One cannot get
a reward from Allâh, nor can he be saved from punishment, merely by
giving oneself good titles, as they, for example, claim that: no one
will enter the Garden except he who was a Jew or a Christian (2:111).
The only criterion, the only standard, of honour and happiness is the
real belief in Allâh and the Day of Resurrection, accompanied by good
deeds. It should be noted that Allâh did not say, ‘who­ever of them
believes'; otherwise it would have accorded some recognition to these
titles, and would have implied that there was, after all, some benefit
in acquiring these names.

This theme has been repeatedly expounded in the Qur’ân. The honour and
felicity depend entirely on true and sincere servitude; no name, no
adjective, can do any good unless it is backed by correct belief and
good deeds. This rule is applicable to all human beings, right from the
prophets to the lowest rank. Look how Allâh praises His prophets with
all beautiful and excel­lent attributes, and then says: and if they had
set up others (with Him) certainly what they did would have become
ineffectual for them (6:88). Also, He describes the high status and
great prestige of the Holy Prophet and his companions, and then ends it
with these words: Allâh has promised those among them who believe and do
good, forgiveness and a great reward (48:29). Ponder on the significance
of the phrase "among them".

Then we find that Allâh had given a man some of His signs but he went
astray: and if We had pleased, We would certainly have exalted him
thereby, but he clung to the earth and followed his low desire . . . (7
:176) .

There are many verses clearly showing that the honour and respect with
Allâh depends on reality, not on appearance.

**TRADITIONS**

Salmân al-Fârisi said: "I asked the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) about the people
of that religion which I followed (prior to Islam), and I described
their (way of) prayer and worship. Then it was revealed: Surely those
who believe, and those who are Jews. . . " (ad-Durru 'l-manthûr)

The author says: Various other traditions with different chains of
narrators, say that this verse was revealed about the people of
Salman.

Ibn Faddal said: "I asked ar-Rida (a.s.) why "an-Nasârâ" ( = the
Christians) were given that name. He said: 'Because they were from a
village called an-Nâsirah ( = Nazarath) in Syria.[^5] Maryam and \`Isa
settled there after they returned from Egypt.' " (Ma\`âni '1-akhbâr)

The author says: We shall comment on this tradition when writing on the
stories of \`Isa (a.s.) in Chapter 3 (The House of \`Imrân) , God
willing.

The same tradition says that "al-Yahûd" ( = the Jews) got this name
because they are descended from Yahûda, son of Ya'qûb. (ibid.)

The Imâm said: "The Sabaeans are a people, neither Zoroas­trian nor
Jews, neither Christians nor Muslims; they worship the stars and
planets. (at-Tafsir, al-Qummi)

The author says: It is idol-worship of a special type; they worshipped
only the idols of the stars, while others worshipped whatever idol
caught their fancy.

**A HISTORICAL DISCUSSION**

Abû Rayhân at-Bîrûnî writes in his book al- ‘âthâru 'l-­bâqiyah:

"The earliest known among them (i.e., the claimants of prophethood was
Yudhasaf.[^6] He appeared in India at the end of the first year of the
reign of Tahmurth; and he brought the Persian script. He called to the
Sabaean religion, and a great many people followed him. The Bishdadian
kings and some of the Kayanis who resided in Balkh held the sun, the
moon, the stars and the planets together with other elements in high
esteem and believed that these luminaries were very sacred. It continued
until Zoroas­ter appeared at the end of the thirtieth year of
Peshtasav's reign. The remnants of those Sabaeans are now in Harrân,
from which they have got their new name, Harrâniyyah. Also it is said
that this nomenclature refers to Harân, son of Târukh (Terah) and
brother of Ibrâhîm (a.s.), as he allegedly was one of their religious
leaders and its staunchest follower.

"Ibn Sancala, the Christian, has written a book against Sabaeans. In
that book he has attributed many ridiculous things to this Harân. For
example, he describes the Sabaeans' belief about Ibrâhîm (a.s.) in these
words: “Ibrâhîm (a.s.) was removed from their community because a white
spot had appeared on his foreskin, and the Sabaeans believed that a
person having a white spot was unclean, and avoided mixing with such
person. To remove that defect, Ibrâhîm cut his. foreskin, i.e.
circumcised himself. Then he entered one of the temples; and lo! an idol
called out to him: "O Ibrâhîm! you went away from us with one defect and
came back with two; get out and do not ever come back to us." Ibrâhîm
was enraged; he smashed the idols; and went out. After some time, he
felt remorse for what he had done, and decided to sacrifice his son on
the altar of Jupiter, as it was their custom to kill their children to
please the deities. When Jupiter was convinced of the sincerity of his
repentance, it sent a lamb to him to slaughter in place of his son.”

" ‘Abdu '1-Masîh ibn Ishâq al-Kindî wrote a book in reply of a book by
‘Abdullah ibn Ismâ'îl al-Hâshimî. In that book \`Abdu '1-Masîh writes
about the Sabaeans:

"’It is generally believed that they indulge in human sacrifice,
although nowadays they cannot do so openly. But so far as our own
information goes, they are monotheists who believe that God is free from
every defect and evil, they describe God in negative, not positive,
terms; for example, they say: Allâh can­not be defined or seen, He is
not unjust or oppressive. According to them, the beautiful divine names
may be used for God, but only in an allegorical sense, because no divine
attribute can truly describe the reality. They believe that the
management of all affairs is done and controlled by the sky and the
heavenly bodies; the sky and those bodies are living things having the
characteristics of speech, hearing and sight. They revere the light and
the lumin­aries. One of their legacies is the dome above the niche in
the Umayyid mosque of Damascus; it was their prayer house, and at that
time even the Greeks and the Romans followed the same religion. Then it
came under Jewish control and they turned it into a synagogue. Later,
the Christians took it over and converted it into a church. Then came
the Muslims, and they changed it into a mosque.

The Sabaeans had their numerous places of wor­ships, and their idols
were named after various names of the sun, and shaped with fixed
patterns, as has been described by Abu Ma'shar al-Balkhi in his book,
The Houses of Worship. For ex­ample, there was the temple of Ba'lbak
which housed the idol of the sun; of Qirân, which was related to the
moon and built in the moon's shape, like a shawl worn over head and
shoulders. And there is a village nearby, Salamsîn by name; it is a
corruption of its original name, (Sanam Sîn = the idol of the moon).
Likewise, another village is called Tara'ûz, that is, the gate of venus.
They do also claim that the Ka'bah and its idols be­longed to them, and
that the Meccan idol-worshippers were of the Sabaean religion. According
to them the idols, Lat and \`Uzza, re­presented Saturn and Venus. They
have many prophets in their hierarchy, most of them being the Greek
philosophers, for ex­ample, Hermes of Egypt, Agadhimun, Walles,
Pythagoras and Babaswar (maternal grandfather of Plato) and many others
like them. Some of them do not eat fish - lest it be spume; nor poultry,
because it is always hot. Also, they do not use garlic, because it
creates headache and burns the blood and semen (which is the source of
continuity of the human race); and they avoid beans, because it dulls
the intelligence and also because it had first sprouted in a human
skull. They observe three compulsory prayers: at sunrise (eight rak
\`at) ; at noon (five rak \`at) ; and at the third hour of the night.

"’They prostrate three times in each rak \`ah. Also, they observe two
optional prayers - at the second and ninth hours of the day.

" \`They pray with taharah and wudu '; they take bath after janâbah;
but they do not circumcise their children because they have not been
told to do so. Most of their laws concerning marital and penal codes are
like the sharî \`ah of Islam; while the rules about touching a dead body
are similar to Torah's. They offer sacrifices to the stars, their idols
and the temples; the sacrificial animals are killed by the priests and
witch-doctors, who read in it the future of the man who offers the
sacrifice and answer to his questions.

" 'Hermes is sometimes called ldris, who is mentioned in Torah as
Akhnukh. Some of them say that Yudhasaf was Hermes.

" ‘Some others have said that the present-day Varraniyyah are not the
real Sabaeans; rather these are mentioned in the books as heathens and
idolators. The Sabaeans were those Israelites who stayed behind at
Babylon when their majority returned to Jeruselem in the reigns of Cyrus
and Artaxerxes. They were favourably disposed to Zoroastrian beliefs, as
well as to the religion of Nebuchadnezzar. What resulted from this
exercise was a mixture of Judaism and Zoroastrianism - like the
Samaritans of Syria. Most of them are found in Wasit and the rural areas
of Iraq around Ja'far and Jâmidah; they trace their genealogy to Enosh,
son of Seth. They criticize and oppose the Harraniyyah and their
religion. With exception of a few things, there is no similarity between
the two religions: The Sabaeans face towards the North Pole in their
prayers, while the Harraniyyah face to­wards the South Pole.

" ‘Some people of the book have said that Methuselah had a son (other
than Lamech), named Sâbî, whom the Sabaeans have descended from. The
people, before the sharî\`ah spread and before Yudhasaf appeared on the
scene, followed Samanian beliefs; they lived in the eastern part of the
world and worshipped idols. Their remnants are found in India, China and
Taghazghaz, and the people of Khurasan call them Shamnan. Their relics,
places of worship and idols are seen in eastern Khurasan adjoining
India. They believe in eternity of the universe and transmigration of
soul. According to them, the sky is falling down in an endless vacuum,
and that is why it is moving round and round.’

"According to some writers, a group of them rejects the theory of
eternity of the universe and says that it came into being one million
year ago."

The author says: All the above description has been taken from the book
of al-Biruni. The opinion, attributed to some writers, that Sabaeans'
religion was a mixture of Judaism and Zoroastrianism flavoured with some
elements of Harraniyyah's beliefs, seems better suited in this context;
after all, the verse obviously enumerates the groups which followed a
divinely ­inspired religion.


