Chapter 17 : 2:63-74
====================

And when We took a promise from you and lifted the moun­tain over you
": "Take hold of what We have given you with firmness and bear in mind
what is in it, so that you may guard (against evil)" (63). Then you
turned back after that; so were it not for the grace of Allâh and His
mercy on you, you would certainly have been among the losers (64) . And
certainly you have known those among you who exceeded the limits of the
Sabbath, so We said to them: "Be apes, despised and hated" (65) . So We
made them an example to those who witnessed it and those who came after
it, and an admonition to those who guard (against evil) (66). And when
Musâ said to his people: "Surely Allâh commands you that you should
sacrifice a cow"; they said: "Do you ridicule us?" He said: "I seek the
protection of Allâh from being one of the ignorants" (67). They said:
"Call on your Lord for our sake to make it plain to us what she is".
Musâ said: "He says, Surely she is a cow neither advanced in age nor too
young, of middle age between that (and this); do there­fore what you are
commanded "(68). They said: "Call on your Lord for our sake to make it
plain to us what her colour is." Musâ said: "He says, Surely she is a
yellow cow; her colour is intensely yellow, giving delight to the
beholders" (69). They said: "Call on your Lord for our sake to make it
plain to us what she is, for surely to us the cows are all alike, and if
Allâh please we shall surely be guided aright" (70).

Musâ said: "He says, Surely she is a cow not made submissive that she
should plough the land, nor does she irrigate the tilth, sound, without
a blemish in her." The said: \`Now you have brought the truth;" so they
sacrificed her, though they had not the mind to do (it) (71). And when
you killed a man, then you disagreed with respect to that, and Allâh was
to bring forth that which you were going to hide (72). So, We said:
"Strike the (dead body) with part of the (sacrificed cow)", thus Allâh
brings the dead to life, and He shows you His signs so that you may
understand (73) .

Then your hearts hardened after that, so that they were like rocks,
rather worse in hardness; and surely there are some rocks from which
streams burst forth, and surely there are some of them which split
asunder so water issues out of them, and surely there are some of them
which fall down for fear of Allâh, and Allâh is not at all heedless of
what you do (74) .

**COMMENTARY**

QUR’?N : And lifted the mountain over you: "at-Tur" ( ) is mountain;
that is why has been substituted by "al-jabal" ( = mountain) in verse:
And when We wrested away the mountain over them as if it were a covering
overhead (7:171). "an-Natq" ( = to wrest away; to pull out). The verse
at first mentions taking of a promise; and ends with the command to take
hold of what they were given and to bear in mind what was in it; in
between it refers to the lifting of the mountain over them, without
saying why it was lifted. But the context clearly shows that it was done
to frighten them without putting them under compulsion, in order that
they might obey what they were told - if Allâh had wished to compel
them, there was no need to take any promise before.

Objection: If we were to take the sentence, "and lifted the mountain
over you", in its literal meaning, it would be a miracu­lous sign that
would have forced the Israelites to obey the given command under duress
and coercion; but Allâh says: There is no compulsion in the religion
(2:256); . . . will you then force men till they become believers?
(10:99) .

Reply: The objection is baseless. The sentence shows only that they
were threatened and frightened. Just lifting the moun­tain over their
head was not enough to coerce and force them to believe and obey.
Otherwise, most of the miracles shown by Musa (a.s.) could be termed as
"compulsion"! The said questioner has tried to explain away this
sentence in this way: "The Israelites were at the foot of the mountain;
it was shaken violently and during that convulsion its summit loomed
over them, until they thought that it was going to fall over them. It is
this natural phenomenon that has been described as pulling out the
mountain and lifting it over them."

Such misinterpretations emanate from rejection of the principle of
"miracle" altogether. We have already written in detail on this subject.
If we were to explain away the verses of miracle in this way, no speech
would remain safe from distor­tion; and no sentence could be taken to
mean what it says; as a result, all the norms of eloquence and
literature would lose their value.

QUR’?N: so that you may guard (against evil): "La'alla" () is a
particle meaning "perhaps", "may be"; it denotes hope - the speaker may
be hoping for something, or the person spoken who gives rise to the
hope, or the situation justifies the hope although the speaker or the
listener does not feel optimistic himself. In any case, it implies some
uncertainty about the final outcome. When this particle is used in a
divine speech, it indicates hopefulness either with reference to the
listener, or in context of the situation; but it can never refer to the
speaker, that is, Allâh, because He can never be uncertain of any
result. It has clearly been explained by ar-Râghib in his al-Mufradât.
There­fore, whenever this word is used in the Qur’ân, it is translated
as "so that . . . ", "in order that . . ."

QUR’?N: Be apes despised: "Khâsi’în" ( = despised, humiliated).

QUR’?N: So We made them an example: “an-Nakâl" () means exemplary
punishment meted out to one in order that others may desist from such
transgression.

QUR’?N: And when Musâ said to his people: "Surely Allâh com­mands you
that you should sacrifice a cow. . . ": This is the story of the cow of
the Israelites, and it is these verses which have given this chapter its
name, the Cow.

The Qur’ân has used a dramatic style for this story. It opens with the
middle of the story (verses 67 to 71) , followed by its beginning (verse
72) and ending with its conclusion (verse 73). Another thing to note is
the changes of the pronouns - upto verse 66, the Israelites were
directly addressed in second person; but verses 67 to 71 are addressed
to the Prophet mentioning the Israelites in third person; then it
reverts again to the original second person (verses 72 - 73).

However, let us follow the narrative in the light of the Qur’ân. Allâh
addresses the Prophet referring to the Israelites in third person: "And
when Musâ said to his people: \`Surely Allâh commands you that you
should sacrifice a cow'; they said . . ." Obviously the order given to
sacrifice a cow with subsequent description of its various
characteristics and qualities, contained in these five verses (67 -71) ,
is like a parenthetic statement which clarifies the meaning of the next
two verses (72 -73), addressed to the Israelites: "And when you killed a
man, then you disagreed with respect to that, and Allâh was to bring
forth that which you were going to hide. So We said: \`Strike the (dead
body) with part of the (sacrificed cow),' thus Allâh brings the dead to
life, and He shows you His signs that you may understand. "

The five verses (67 -71) also show how ill-mannered the Israelites
were; how offensive their behaviour was towards their prophet. See how
off-handedly they accused their prophet of speaking idle words, how
arrogantly they made demand after demand of the Lord to make His command
clear and plain, as though there was any ambiguity in the divine command
or the prophetic utterance. Add to it their insulting mode of referring
to God: Musâ had told them, "Surely Allâh commands you . . ."; but they
repeatedly used the words, "Call on your Lord for our sake . . .", as
though He was not their Lord. Then again they went on repeating the
demand to be told "what she is", "what her colour is"; and when all was
explained to them, they arrogantly claimed, "surely to us the cows are
all alike". It should be noted that they did not say that that
particular cow seemed indistinct to them; they instead claimed that all
the cows were alike in their eyes - implying that the cows per se were
the same, and if a certain individual cow had some special quality, this
much description was not enough for identification purpose; they did not
realize that it was not the cow, but the divine will, which produced the
desired result. They were given a simple command to sacrifice "a cow ",
that is, any cow; they should have acted on that general unrestricted
command, but they went on asking for more and more particulars; this was
in itself a height of arrogance.

Then, look at their rudeness in asking their prophet, "Do you ridicule
us?" It cast an aspersion on the prophet that he was, God forbid, an
ignorant person who talked aimlessly. That is why he vehemently defended
himself saying, "I seek the protection of Allâh from being one of the
ignorants". Even then, they had the temerity to say at the end of the
story, "Now you have brought the truth", implying that the previous
explanations were not "the truth", that the preceding divine speech and
prophetic messages were, God forbid, untruths!

This story is not mentioned in the current Torah. There­fore, it was
better not to address it to the Israelites. This may be another reason
of changing the mode of address - the story was initially addressed to
the Prophet, and after establishing the base, the pronouns were again
changed to the original second person directly addressing the
Israelites. Nevertheless, the Torah contains an order that implies that
some such events must have taken place:

"If one be found slain in the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee
to possess it, lying in the field, and it be not known who hath slain
him: Then thy elders and thy judges shall come forth, and they shall
measure unto the cities which are round about him that is slain: And it
shall be, that the city which is next unto the slain man, even the
elders of that city shall take an heifer, which hath not been wrought
with, and which hath not drawn the yoke: And the elders of that city
shall bring down the heifer unto a rough valley, which is neither eared
nor sown, and shall strike off the heifer's neck there in the valley:
And the priests the sons of Levi shall come near; for them the Lord the
God hath chosen to minister unto him, and to bless in the name of the
Lord; and by their word shall every controversy and every stroke be
tried. And all the elders of that city, that are next unto the slain
man, shall wash their hands over the heifer that is beheaded in the
valley- And they shall answer and say: Our hands have not shed this
blood, neither have our eyes seen it. Be merciful, O Lord, unto thy
people Israel, whom thou hast redeemed, and lay not innocent blood unto
thy people of Israel's charge. And the blood shall be forgiven them."
(Deut., 21:1 - 8)

It must now be clear that the story as given here is not intended as a
simple narrative. The main theme is taken up in verse 72 (And when you
killed a man . . . ), but before that, a part of the story is narrated
to the Prophet in some detail in verses 67 - 71 for obvious reasons.

Let us now recapitulate what has been explained above, The verses 67-71
(And when Musâ said to his people: "Surely Allâh commands you . . . ) ,
addressed to the Prophet, is a pro­logue to the forthcoming episode
(verses 72 - 73), although the listeners do not know it yet. As the
audience does not know why the Israelites were told to sacrifice a cow,
its curiosity is aroused and the suspense continues until the relation
between the sacrifice of the cow and detection of the murderer is
revealed. It was this apparent irrelevance of the former to the latter
that prompted the Israelities to accuse Musâ (a.s.) of ridiculing them,
of joking with them. This accusation showed that they were completely
devoid of discipline, were very arrogant and disobedient. They were not
inclined to obey any command without knowing its why and wherefore. They
were not ready to believe in that which they could not see - belief in
the unseen was against their grain. They were the people who had said to
Musâ (a.s.): "0 Musâ! we will not believe in you until we see Allâh
mani­festly" (2:55).

Their trouble was that they wanted total independence in every affair,
no matter whether it was within their domain or not. They erroneously
thought that the unseen could be brought down to the level of the seen.
Consequently, they wanted to adopt a deity which they could see by their
naked eyes: They said: "0 Musâ! make for us a god as they have (their)
gods.," He said: "Surely you are a people acting ignorantly" (7:138).

No wonder that they did not understand the sublime status of their
prophet Musâ (a.s.) and thought that he, like themselves, followed his
own desires and joked with, and ridiculed, the people. They accused him
of joking and acting like ignorant ones. And Musâ (a.s.) had to refute
this charge: "I seek the protection of Allâh from being one of the
ignorants". Why did Musâ (a.s.) seek the protection of Allâh? Why did
not he say straight away that he was not an ignorant person? It was
because MusA (a.s.) preferred to rely on the divine protection which
cannot fail, rather than on his own virtues.

The Israelites believed that one should not accept anything without
proof. This principle is correct, of course. But they were mistaken in
believing that man must know the reason of every order in full detail;
that a command of general nature was not enough. That is why they went
on asking for more and more detail about the cow they were told to
slaughter. They thought that the cow, by its nature, could not bring a
dead body to life; if somewhere there was a particular cow possessing
this unheard of quality, it should be pin-pointed with accurate and
detailed description. It was this trend of thought which prompted them
to say: "Call on your Lord for our sake to make it plain to us what she
is". They unnecessarily put themselves into a corner; and Allâh, on this
uncalled for demand, gave them a few particu­lars; "Musâ said: \`He
says, Surely she is a cow neither advanced in age (i.e. not passed the
calf-bearing age) nor too young (i.e. not virgin, nor one that has not
given birth to a calf yet) of middle age between that (and this)." "al-
‘Awan " () means a female in middle of child-bearing age. Then their
Lord took mercy on them and admonished them not to indulge in too much
questioning, and to be content with that which they were told: "do
therefore what you are commanded ". But they did not listen to the
divine advice and said: " \`Call on your Lord for our sake to make it
plain to us what her colour is.

' Musâ said: \`He says, Surely she is a yellow cow, her colour is
intensely yellow, giving delight to the beholders.' " This much
explanation should have been enough for them, as by then the cow's age
and colour had been described to them. But no, it was not enough for the
Israelites who unhesitatingly repeated their first question,
shame­lessly accusing Musâ - and God too - of not giving them clear
description as yet: "They said: \`Call on your Lord for our sake to make
it plain to us what she is, for surely to us the cows are all alike, and
if Allâh please we shall surely be guided aright.

' " So, Allâh further particularized her nature and characteristics,
saying: "Surely she is a cow not made submissive that she should plough
land, nor does she irrigate the tilth"; and then He put a further
restriction about her colour, "sound, without a blemish in her." Now
that they were given all the details and could not think of any more
questions, they said: "Now you have brought the truth." The sentence
shows that they had to accept the command because they could not think
of any more excuses to avoid it - but even then they put the blame of
their previous disobedience on Musâ - and by implication on Allâh: that
they had not complied with the order before because Musâ (a.s.) and
Allâh had not explained it correctly. All this is implied in the last
clause, "so they sacrificed her, though they had not the mind to do
(it)."

OUR'AN : And when you killed a man . . . : It is the beginning of the
main story. "at-Tadâru' " ( = translated here as "disagreed") is derived
form ad-dar' ( = repulse) and literally means to push one another. A man
was killed and every group was disowning its responsibility, putting the
blame on others. But Allâh was to disclose what they wanted to hide.

QUR’?N: So We said: "Strike the (dead body) with part of the
(sacrificed cow)": The Arabic text contains two pronouns -the first
(masculine) refers to the dead body and the second (feminine) to the
cow. The translation omits the pronouns re­placing them with the nouns
they stand for.

Someone has denied the actuality of this story, suggesting that the
verses simply describe the promulgation of a law (as given in the Deut.,
21:1- 8, quoted above). According to him, raising someone from the dead
(mentioned in these verses) merely means finding out the identity of the
killer - as Allâh says: And there is life for you in (the law of)
retaliation (2:179). In short, he claims that there was no miracle
involved, nor was there any dead body brought back to life. But the
context of the story leaves no room for such misinterpretation -
especially if we look at the words, "So We said: \`Strike the (dead
body) with part of the (sacrificed cow)', thus Allâh brings the dead to
life."

QUR’?N: Then your hearts hardened after that, so that they were like
rocks, rather worse in hardness: "al-Qaswah " ( = sternness) in heart is
like "hardness" in rock. "Aw" ( = or) is used here in the meaning of bal
( = rather). The next sentences show why their hearts were worse than
rocks in hardness: "and surely there are some rocks from which streams
burst forth". The sentence offers a contrast between rocks and water.
Rocks are used as examples of hardness, while water is proverbially used
to denote softness. Even then, there are some rocks - with all their
hardness - from which streams of water - with all its softness - burst
forth; "and surely there are some of them which split asunder so water
issues out of them ": The hard rocks send forth the soft waters; but the
Israelites' hearts were so hard as never to allow any truth to issue out
of them.

QUR’?N: and surely there are some of them which fall down for fear of
Allâh: We see how the rocks and stones fall down - big rocks on the
summits of mountains crack up, and then an ordi­nary earthquake is
enough to dislodge them causing an avalanche. Also, the cracks fill up
with ice and snow during winter, then the warmth of spring melts the ice
sending the streams down the valleys. This phenomenon is related to its
natural causes, yet Allâh says that the rocks fall down from fear of
Allâh. Why? Because all the natural causes ultimately return to the
First Cause, that is, Allâh. Rocks, when they fall down because of the
natural causes, are in fact obeying the divine decree which put them
under the influence of those secondary causes. It may, therefore, be
said that they understand the command of their Lord - an under­standing
that is created nature. They obey the decree of Allâh inasmuch as they
are thus moulded by Him. Allâh says: and there is not a single thing but
glorifies Him with His praise, but you do not understand their
glorification (17:44); all are obedient to Him (2 :116) . Fear too is
based on perception, as are the glorifying and the obeying. It may
therefore be said that the rocks fall down for fear of Allâh. This
sentence is of the same genre as the following ones: And the thunder
declares His glory with His praise, and the angels too for awe of Him
(13:13); And whoever is in the heavens and the earth makes obeisance to
Allâh only, willingly and unwillingly, and their shadows too at morn and
eve (13:15 ). Here the sound of thunder has been counted as the
declaration of divine glory and the shadow is said to prostrate for
Allâh. There are many verses of the same style and all are based on the
same analysis as mentioned above.

However, the sentence, "and surely there are some of them which fall
down for fear of Allâh", further shows how the Jews' hearts were worse
than rocks in hardness: The rocks are afraid of Allâh and do fall down
for His fear, but there is no fear of Allâh in the Jews' hearts, they
are not afraid of divine wrath.

**TRADITIONS**

as -Sadiq (a.s.) was asked about the words of Allâh: Take hold of what
We have given you with firmness, whether it meant the strength of the
bodies or the firm resolution of the heart. He (a. s.) said: "Both
together" (al -Mahdsin) .

The author says: This tradition has also been narrated by al-\`Ayyâshî
in his at-Tafsîr.

al-Halabi narrates in explanation of the words of Allâh; and bear in
mind what is in it, that he said: "Bear in mind what is in it and also
bear in mind the chastisement that is laid down for its negligence."
(al-\`Ayyâshî)

The author says: It has been inferred from the position of this
clause - it follows the threat implied in lifting the moun­tain over
them.

Abu Hurayrah said that the Messenger of Allâh (s.a.w.a.) said: "If the
children of Israel had not said: and if Allâh please we shall surely be
guided aright, they would have never been given (respite). And had they
(in the beginning) taken any cow and slaughtered her; it would have been
enough for them; but they went on pressing (for more and more
particulars), so Allâh made it harder (and harder) for them." (ad-Durru
'1-manthûr)

Ibn Faddal said: "I heard Abu '1-Hasan (a.s.) saying: \`Surely Allâh
ordered the children of Israel to slaughter a cow - and what they needed
was its tail. (But they asked for more and more de­tails) so Allâh made
it harder (and harder) for them.' " (at-Tafsîr, al-Qummi )

al-Bazantî said: "I heard ar-Ridâ (a.s.) saying: \`A man from the
children of Israel killed one of his relatives, then he took the body
and put it in the path (leading) to the best of the Israelities' clans.
Thereafter he came demanding (the revenge of) his blood. Musâ (a.s.) was
informed that such and such a clan had killed such and such a man, and
he was asked to tell them who the killer was. Musâ said: "Bring me a
cow." They said: "Do you ridicule us?" He said: "I seek the protection
of Allâh from being one of the ignorants. " And had they taken any cow,
it would have been enough for them, but they pressed (for more
particulars); therefore Allâh made it harder for them. They said:"Call
on your Lord for our sake to make it plain to us what she is" : Musâ
said: "He says, Surely she is a cow neither advanced in age nor too
young, of middle age between that (and this)". Even then, if they had
taken any cow (fitting this description) it would have been enough. But
they pressed for more, so Allâh made it harder for them. They said:
"Call on your Lord for our sake to make it plain to us what her colour
is" . Musâ said: "He says, Surely she is a yellow cow; her colour is
intensely yellow, giving delight to the beholders". Even then if they
had taken any such cow, it would have been enough for them. But they
persisted (in asking for more details) and Allâh made it even harder for
them. They said: "Call on your Lord for our sake to make it plain to us
what she is, for surely to us the cows are all alike, and if Allâh
please we shall surely be guided aright". He said: "He says, Surely she
is a cow not made submissive that she should plough the land, nor does
she irrigate the tilth, sound, without a blemish in her.

" They said: \`Now you have brought the truth". They began their search
and found such a cow with an Israelite youth. He said: "I shall not sell
it but for a hide full of gold." Thereupon they came to Musâ and
informed him. He told them to buy it. So they bought and brought it. And
Musâ ordered it to be slaughtered. Then he ordered them to strike the
dead body with its tail. As soon as they did so, the murdered man rose
from the dead, and said: "O messenger of Allâh! Surely it is my cousin
who had killed me, and not the man against whom he has lodged his
claim." In this way, they knew who the killer was. Thereafter, a
companion of the messenger of Allâh, Musâ, said to him: "There is a
story behind this cow". He asked: "And what is it?" He said: "(That)
Israelite youth was very devoted to his father. And he purchased some
goods, and came to his father (who was asleep) and keys were under his
head. And he did not like to awaken his father, and cancelled the deal.
When his father woke up, he told him about it. The father said to him:
\`Well done! Take this cow; it is a recompense for what you have lost.'
" The messenger of Allâh, Musâ, said to him: "Look at the faithfulness
and good deed, where does it take its people to?"' "

The author says: The traditions perfectly fit the description which we
inferred from the verses.

A PHILOSOPHICAL DISCOURSE ABOUT
MAKING THE DEAD BODIES ALIVE AND
ABOUT METAMORPHOSIS

This chapter describes several miraculous signs in the stories of the
Israelites and the others - for example, parting the sea and drowning
the followers of Pharaoh (And when We parted the sea for you, so We
saved you and drowned the followers of Pharaoh . . .); giving death to
the Israelites by thunder-bolt and then raising them again from dead
(And when you said: "0 Musâ! we will not believe in you. . . "); making
the clouds to give shade over them and sending for them manna and quails
(And We made the clouds to give shade over you . . . ) ; making the
streams to gush out from the rock (And when Musâ prayed for drink. . .);
lifting the mountain over them (. . . and lifted the mountains over you
. . .); transforming some of them into apes (. . . so We said to them:
"Be apes. . . ") and bringing a dead body back to life by hitting it
with a part of a slaughtered cow (So We said: "Strike the [dead body]
with part of the [sacrificed cow . . . ]" ) . Among the non-Israelites,
there are many stories of dead men and / or animals brought back to
life - for example, a large group that had fled their homes for fear of
death (Did you not see those who went forth from their homes. . .) ; a
chosen servant of Allâh who passed by a ruined town (Or like him who
passed by a town and it had fallen down upon its roofs. . . ) and the
birds which were raised from dead through the agency of Ibrâhim (And
when lbrâhim said: "My Lord! show me how Thou givest life to the dead .
. .). Altogether, there are twelve miracles, most of them occurring
among the Israelites. The Qur’ân has narrated them; and we have already
shown that miracles do occur, and super-natural events do take place. We
have also shown that such happenings are not in conflict with the system
of the cause and effect. It was clearly proved that it is not justified
to interpret the verses of miracle in such a way as to deny their
apparent meanings. Of course, the miracle is not related to an
inherently impossible proposition, like dividing three in two equal
wholes, or birth of a child that would be his own father. But if
something is possible in itself and the Qur’ân says that it did happen,
one should not try to explain it away as an allegory or a metaphor.

However, some miracles, like raising someone from dead and
transformation, that is, metamorphosis, require a somewhat detailed
study because they are sometimes criticized from phil­osophical point of
view.

Objection: It is an accepted fact that if an existent thing, a being,
having a potentiality of perfection, converts it into actuality, then it
is impossible for it to retrace its steps and turn that actuality back
into the same potentiality. Likewise, a more perfect being does not
change, in its forward march, to a less perfect one.

When a man dies, his soul is released from the fetters of matter; he
becomes an immaterial "idea" or a spiritual being. Both these stages are
above the matter; the existence in these planes is much more stronger
than that in the material sphere.

Therefore, it is impossible for a soul - once death has separ­ated it
from the body - to re-establish its connection with that material body.
Otherwise, it would mean that a thing, having converted its potentiality
into actuality, again retrogressed to the same potentiality - and as we
have explained above it is not possible.

Also, man is on a higher level of existence than that of the animals.
Therefore, it would be impossible for a man to change, by metamorphosis,
into an animal.

Reply: Accepted that once a potentiality is turned into reality it
cannot be regressed to the self-same potentiality. But raising someone
from dead in this world, as well as metamor­phosis, is outside the
domain of this law.

Perception and reason show that a vegetable substance, when consumed by
an animal, proceeds to its ultimate perfection, that is, animality, and
takes the animal form. This form in itself is an incorporeal and
immaterial thing. Having reached this stage, the vegetable has turned
its potentiality into actuality. Now it cannot turn back to vegetable
kingdom.

The animality is the fountain-head of the animal's conscious actions
and perceptions. When it performs a deed an impression is outlined on
its psyche. When it indulges in the same activity over and over again,
that impression gets deeper and deeper until it becomes an ineradicable
trait. This new trait may become the building block of an animal species
with pronounced character­istics; for example, the fox with its cunning,
the pig with its lascivious lust, the panther with its predatory
stalking. If, on the other hand, it fails to acquire any
characteristics, the psyche remains at its original level of simple
animality. It is like the case of a vegetable which fails to reach the
threshold of animality and remains at the original level of
vegetable-kingdom.

Likewise, an animal, becoming a part of a human being, progresses
forward on the path of humanity. A human being has the capacity of
perceiving his self in absolute incorporeal terms. When it thus changes
its potentiality to this actuality, it is im­possible for it to go back
to the self-same potentiality. The humanity too, by repeatedly doing a
certain type of deed, acquires especial traits and characteristics - and
it creates various kinds of human beings with their particular
properties in the same way as happens in animal kingdom.

Now, let us suppose that a dead man was returned to life in this world,
and his soul re-established its relation to the matter, that is, the
body. Obviously, it would not affect the incorporeality of the soul - it
was incorporeal in the first life, remained so after that connection was
severed, and would remain in this second life too. Body is the tool by
which the soul carries on its material and intellectual activities, just
as an artisan makes articles with the help of his tools and equipments.
When the man died, the soul lost that tool; when he was revived the soul
regained the possession and control of that tool. Now, it may use that
tool to acquire new talents, to attain to a higher level of perfection
than before. It cannot, by any stretch of imagination, be said to be a
retrogression or a retreat from perfection to imperfection, nor is it a
change from reality to potentiality.

Objection: The scenario given above entails perpetual compulsion, which
is obviously a false and void proposition. An incorporeal and immaterial
soul, separated by death from the body, does not have any more
potentials of acquiring further perfection through re-establishment of
its relation to the body. Remember that only a negligible number of
people are claimed to have risen from the dead. And the multitude of
human beings remain unrevived. If it were in their nature to acquire new
per­fections through re-establishing their link with their bodies
and -yet they were denied that opportunity, they would be perpetually
deprived of what their nature demanded. And this perpetual deprivation
is nothing but perpetual compulsion.

Reply: There is no compulsion involved here at all. The soul has
already progressed from its potentiality to the actual­ity. It reached a
certain level and died. Now, at present it does not have any more
potentiality. It will continue to possess the actuality it has already
acquired. Let us suppose that there is a man who did some good and some
bad deeds, and then died. Had he remained alive he could have added to
his deeds and acquired a somewhat different spiritual form, either
lovelier or uglier than before. Likewise, if he is returned to life, he
may acquire better or worse traits than before. But if he is not
revived, then he already owns his actuality, and will accordingly be
re­warded or punished in al-Barzakh, until he acquires a spiritual form
according to his earned qualities. Even then, if he is returned to this
world, he would get new potentiality for spiritual perfec­tion, and may
acquire another spiritual form by using the material tool, for example,
his body. But, if he is not returned, there is neither any potentiality
nor any question of compulsion, perpetual or otherwise.

We should not forget that mere deprivation of a possible perfection is
not a compulsion. Otherwise, every happening in this world could be
called a perpetual compulsion. Every event, every development here
affects each and every thing of the uni­verse, directly or indirectly.
There is a never-ending struggle and conflict going on in the universe;
and it affects the whole system - including the ability of a man to
fully attain to his perfection. That effect may be beneficial or
harmful. But nobody claims that because he was prevented, by the
circumstances beyond his con­trol, from obtaining a possible benefit, he
was under perpetual compulsion.

If a talent for a certain perfection is ingrained in someone's nature
and then he is prevented from achieving it, either by some factors in
his own nature or some external forces bent on nul­lifying that talent,
then only it may be called a perpetual com­pulsion - because in this
case, putting that talent or potentiality in that species be a vain
thing, an aimless venture.

Now we come to metamorphosis. If a man's figure is trans­formed to that
of a pig or an ape, it is just an external change. He is still a man in
the form of an animal; not that his humanity was erased and replaced by
the nature of pig or ape. We have already described that when one
repeatedly carries on an activity, its impression is etched on one's
psyche. When a man repeatedly indulges in debauchery, his psyche turns
into that of a pig; and it is not impossible for that figure to appear
in his facial features in this world too - as it would certainly appear
in the next world. Such a man is still a man, albeit a transformed one;
not that he has lost his humanity.

By the way, we sometimes read, in the newspapers and maga­zines,
reports of academic conferences in Europe and America that tend to prove
that it is possible to revive a man after his death, and that a man's
facial figures may change to something else. Of course, we do not base
over belief on such news and reports; nevertheless, we expect our
adversaries not to forget today what they had read yesterday.

Poser: Then there is no difficulty in believing in trans­migration of
the souls.

Reply: There is a world of difference between metamor­phosis and
transmigration of the souls. In metamorphosis the same body changes its
figure to look like something else; while the believers in
transmigration of the souls say that a soul, after attaining its
perfection and leaving the body, establishes a new connection with a new
body. Obviously, it is an impossible pro­position. A question may be
asked whether or not the new body was already connected to a soul of its
own. If it already belonged to another soul, it would entail domination
of one body by two souls, which is impossible - two persons cannot have
one body, nor can one body be governed by two personalities. If, on the
other hand, the body did not have a soul already, it would mean that an
accomplished and developed soul was burdened by an unaccomplished and
undeveloped body. It would certainly be a regression from actuality to
potentiality - just like returning a wise old man to his infancy! And
this too is impossible.
