Chapter 18 : 2:75-82
====================

Do you then hope that they would believe in you? While a party from
among them indeed used to hear the word of Allâh, then altered it after
they had understood it, and they know (this) (75). And when they meet
those who believe they say: "We believe"; and when they are alone one
with another they say: "Do you talk to them of what Allâh has disclosed
to you that they may argue with you by this before your Lord? Do you not
then understand?" (76). What! Do they not know that Allâh knows what
they conceal and what they proclaim? (77). And there are among them
illit­erates who know not the Book but only lies, and they do but
conjecture (78). Woe, then, to those who write the book with their hands
and then say: "This is from Allâh ", so that they may sell it for a
small price; therefore woe to them for what their hands have written and
woe to them for what they earn (thereby) (79). And they say: "Fire shall
not touch us but for a few days. " Say: "Have you taken a promise from
Allâh, then Allâh will never fail to keep His promise, or do you speak
against Allâh what you do not know?" (80). Yea! whoever earns evil and
his sins beset him on every side, these are the inmates of the Fire; in
it they shall abide (81). And (as for) those who believe and do good
deeds, these are the dwellers of the garden; in it they shall abide
(82)

**COMMENTARY**

The context shows that the unbelievers, and especially those of Medina,
thought that the Jews were the likeliest people to help and support the
Apostle of Allâh at his advent. The pagan tribes of Aws and Khazraj
lived with the Jews of Medina, and they knew that the latter followed a
divine religion and a revealed book. Thus it was not too much to expect
them to believe in the latest in the series of divine religions and
books.

This was the basis of their hope that the Jews would accept the Apostle
of Allâh as the true prophet, and would strengthen the cause of
religion, and actively participate in the propagation of truth. But no
sooner did the Prophet migrate to Medina than the Jews showed their
latent hostility. The hope was shattered and the expectation turned to
disappointment. That is why Allâh addresses the believers, saying: "Do
you then hope that they would believe in you?" Concealment of truth and
alteration of divine words was their deep-rooted life-pattern. Why
wonder if they go back on what they used to say before the advent of
Islam?

QUR'A,N: Do you then hope . . . and they know this: The speech is now
addressed to the Prophet and the believers, referring to the Jews in
third person. This same style was used in the preceding story of the
Cow, because the Jews had omitted the event from the Torah. These verses
continue that mode of address because it exposes their habit of altering
and manipulating the divine book.

QUR’?N : And when they meet those who believe . . . and what they
proclaim: The two conditional clauses, "when they meet those who
believe" and "when they are alone one with another" are not in
opposition to each other - as were the clauses in the verse: And when
they meet those who believe, they say: "We believe"; and when they are
alone with their Satans, they say: "Surely we are with you, we were only
mocking (2 :14) . Here the two clauses simply describe two instances of
the Jews' trans­gressions and ignorance:

First: They indulge in hypocrisy, showing that they have accepted
Islam, and trying in this way to protect themselves from trouble,
ridicule and even death.

Second: They want to deceive Allâh, forgetting that He is the Knower of
the seen and the unseen, Aware of what they conceal and what they
proclaim.

We may infer from the verses that the Jewish laity in Medina sometimes
talked openly with the believers, telling them of some of the
foretellings about the Prophet or giving them some information that
proved the truth of Islam and its Prophet. But their leaders used to
admonish them for it, telling them that it was a thing revealed to them,
it should not be disclosed to the believers, lest they argued with the
Jews before the Lord - as though if the believers did not argue with
them before God, He would not know of it! Such thinking implies that
Allâh knew only the apparent, not the hidden and concealed things or
thoughts. Allâh refuted this foolish idea and said: "What! Do they not
know that Allâh knows what they conceal and what they proclaim?" It is
our, and not God's, knowledge which is limited to the seen and does not
comprehend the unseen, because our perception depends on the senses
which in their turn depend on body organs - equipped with nervous
instruments, surrounded by space and time, influenced by a hundred other
material causes.

This talk also throws light on the materialistic outlook of the
Israelites. They were so steeped in that belief that they applied the
human limitations to God too. They thought that God was present and
active inside the matter and prevailed over it. But that presence and
that control and management were based on the same principles as a
material cause brings out and controls a material effect. Such a belief
was not a specialty of the Jews; it was and is held even by those
followers of Islam who believe in fundamentality of matter. For these
people, God's life, know­ledge, power, choice, will, decree, order and
management have the same meanings as do their own life, knowledge etc.
It is a disease for which there is no cure. And the signs and warnings
can avail nothing to a people who do not understand. Such views have
made Islam a laughing-stock in the eyes of those who have no access to
the true faith and correct Islamic knowledge. Those detractors say: The
Muslims ascribe to their Prophet the saying, "Allâh created Adam in His
likeness"; and these followers of the Prophet have created a god in the
likeness of Adam. One group of the Muslims ascribes to its Lord all the
qualities of the matter. Another group does not understand anything of
God's beautiful attributes; consequently it reduces all divine
attributes to negatives. It says that the names and adjectives, which
are used for both God and His creatures, have quite different mean­ings
in both cases. When we say, "God is Existent, Knowing, Powerful and
Alive", the words denote some divine qualities totally incomprehensible
to us, completely different from the meanings they have when they are
applied to a human being. Therefore, it is necessary to reduce these
words to their negatives. What the above sentence, for example, means is
this: "God is not non-existent, not unaware, not powerless and not
lifeless." Such explanation implies that they believe in that which they
do not understand, worship that which they are uncertain about and
invite others to believe in that which neither they nor anyone else
knows anything about.

The word of truth is enough to dispel such falsehoods. The people have
been admonished by the true religion to hold fast to the essence of
reality and steer clear between the above-men­tioned two extremes. They
should know that Allâh is not like His creatures, nor is He a set of
negative propositions. The true religion directs common people to
believe that Allâh is a thing, unlike other things; that He has
knowledge, unlike our knowledge; power, unlike our power; and will, not
produced by contempla­tion; that He talks, not with a mouth; and hears,
not with ears. As for the people of higher understanding, they must
ponder on His signs and acquire deep knowledge of His religion. He has
said: Say: \`Are those who know and those who do not know alike?" Only
those possessed of understanding shall bear in mind (39:9). The people
of higher understanding are not equal to a common man in their knowledge
of truth and religion; likewise, the two are not alike in their
respective responsibilities. This, therefore, is the teaching of
religion for both groups respectively; it is there for them to follow,
would they do so?

QUR’?N : And there are among them illiterates who know not the Book but
only lies and they do but conjecture; "al- Ummiyy” ( = one who does not
read or write) is related to "al-umm" ( = mother). It is as though the
excessive love of the mother prevented her from entrusting her child to
a teacher to teach and train him; consequently he could learn only from
his mother. "al-Amâiniyy" () is plural of "al-umniyyah" ( = lie). The
verse says that some of the Jews were literates who did read and write
the book - but making alterations in it; and the rest were illiterates
who knew nothing of the book except the lies of the former group.

QUR’?N: Woe, then, to those who write the book with their hands . . . :
"al-Wayl" ( = woe, disaster,, severe punishment, adversity, affliction)
; "al -ishtirâ' " ( = to sell).

QUR’?N : therefore, woe to them for what their hands have written . . .
: The pronouns may refer either to all Jews or only to the interpolators
among them. If the former view is taken then the woe and condemnation
would cover the illiterates too.

QUR’?N : Yea! whoever earns evil and his sins beset him on every side.
. . "al-Khatî'ah" ( = translated here as "sins") actually refers to the
psychical condition resulting from evil-doing. That is why the verse
speaks first of his evil-doing and then of the effects of the sins
besetting him on every side. When he is beset by his sins on every side,
there should remain no opening for the guidance to reach him; he,
therefore, will go to Hell and abide there forever.

Had there been an iota of faith in his heart, or some good traits like
justice in his character, it would have been possible for the rays of
guidance to penetrate to him. The overwhelming besetting of sins on
every side, therefore, is possible in case of polytheism, as Allâh says:
Surely Allâh does not forgive that any­thing should be associated with
Him, and forgives what is besides that to whomsoever He pleases (4:48 );
and also in case of dis­belief and denial of the divine signs, Allâh
says: And (as to) those who disbelieve in and belie Our signs, they are
the inmates of the Fire, in it they shall abide (2:39). In short, the
earning of evil and being beset by sins on all sides is a broad
expression covering all that would make one to abide in the Hell
forever.

The two verses under discussion are almost similar to the verse: Surely
those who believe, and those who are Jews, and the Christians, and the
Sabaeans, whoever believes in Allâh and the Last Day and does good, they
shall have their reward . . . (2:62 ).

Both show that the basis of salvation and eternal happiness is the true
belief and good deeds. The only difference between the two sets of the
verses is that the verse 2:62 shows that mere taking to oneself
nomenclatures like the Muslim, the Jew etc. is of no use; while the
verses under discussion show that mere claiming of salvation is of no
worth at all.

**TRADITIONS**

al-Baqir (a.s.) said about the words of Allâh, And when they meet those
who believe . . . : " Some of the Jews (who were not inimical to the
Muslims and were not a party to the Jewish con­spiracy against them), on
meeting the Muslims, used to narrate what the Torah contained of the
description of Muhammad (s.a.w.a.); so their elders forbade them to do
so and said: \`Do not in­form them of what the Torah contains of the
attributes of Muham­mad (s.a.w.a.), lest they argue with you by that
before your Lord.' Thereupon, this verse was revealed." (Majma
\`u'l-bayân )

It is narrated from the fifth or the sixth Imam that he said about the
words of Allâh, Yea! whoever earns evil . . .. "If they deny the wilâyah
( = friendship, overlordship) of the Leader of the faithful, then they
are the inmates of the Fire, in it they shall abide." (al- Kâfi)

The author says: ash-Shaykh at-Tûsî has narrated in his al-Amâlî a
tradition of nearly the same theme. The two traditions are based on the
principle of the "flow" of the Qur’ân and fit the verse on one of its
best example. Allâh has counted the love of, and submission to, the
Prophet's family-members as a good deed, as He says: Say: "I do not ask
of you any recompense for it except the love for (my) near relatives;
and whoever earns good, We give him more of good therein (42:23) . Also,
the tradition may be taken as another explanation of the verse, as we
shall describe in the Chapter 6 (The Table) that "the good" means
complying with the demands of the belief of monotheism. If so, then the
tradition particularly mentions \`Alî (a.s.) because he was the first of
this ummah to open this door.


