Chapter 19 : 2:83-88
====================

And when We made a covenant with the Children of Israel: "You shall not
worship (any) but Allâh and (you shall do) good to (your) parents, and
to the near of kin and to the orphans and the needy, and speak to men
good (words) and keep up prayer and pay the zakât. " Then you turned
back except a few of you and (now too) you turn aside (83 ). And when We
made a covenant with you: "You shall not shed your blood and you shall
not turn your people out of your cities;" then you gave a promise while
you witnessed (84). Yet you it is who slay your people and turn a party
from among you out of their homes, backing each other up against them
unlawfully and exceeding the limits; and if they should come to you as
captives, you would ransom them - while their very turning out was
unlawful for you. Do you then believe in a part of the Book and
disbelieve in the other? What then is the reward of such among you as do
this but disgrace in the life of this world, and on the Day of
Resur­rection they shall be sent back to the most grievous
chastise­ment, and Allâh is not at all heedless of what you do (85).
These are they who have bought the life of this world for the hereafter,
so their chastisement shall not be lightened nor shall they be helped
(86). And most certainly We gave Musâ the Book and We sent apostles
after him one after another; and We gave \`Isâ, the son of Maryam, clear
evidence and strengthened him with the holy spirit. What! whenever then
an apostle came to you with that which your souls did not desire, you
were insolent, so you called some (of them) liars and some you slew
(87). And they say: "Our hearts are covered." Nay, Allâh has cursed them
on account of their unbelief- so little it is that they believe (88).

**COMMENTARY**

QUR’?N: And when We made a covenant with the Children of Israel: "You
shall not worship (any) but Allâh. . . ": To begin with, the verse
refers to the Children of Israel in third person, and then ends by
addressing them in second person, "Then you turned back . . . " The
first sentence mentions making a covenant with them - which must
naturally be in words - then describes that covenant; this in its turn
begins with a declarative sentence, "You shall not worship (any) but
Allâh", and ends up with some imperative ones, "and speak to men good
words . . ." When the stories of the Israelites began, they were
addressed in second person, because the verses contained a lot of
admonition and reprimand; it continued to the story of the Cow when,
because of demands of eloquence, it was changed to third person.
Conse­quently, this verse too began with third person, but when time
came to quote the verbal covenant, the style reverted to the second
person.

"You shall not worship (any) but Allâh": It is a prohibition in the
form of an information. This style shows the utmost im­portance attached
to the ban by the speaker - it is as though the speaker has no doubt
whatsoever that the order shall be complied with, and that, in this
case, the servants will not dare to go near idolatory.

The same style is continued in the next clause, "and (you shall do)
good to (your) parents, and to the near of kin and to the orphans and
the needy."

The change over to second person, although resorted to for the purpose
of quoting the covenant, has put the speech back to the original style
and has linked the last clauses of the covenant to the fresh admonitary
ones: "and keep up prayer and pay the zakât. Then you turned back . .
."

QUR’?N: and (you shall do) good to (your) parents. . .: As translated
here, it is a declarative sentence with the sense of im­perative. It may
also be translated as an imperative sentence: "and (do) good . . ." The
verse gives in descending order of importance, the list of those whom
one should do good to. The parents are the root of man's existence, and
nearest of all to him. Then come the near of kin. Going outside the
circle of relatives, the orphans are most deserving of kindness and
beneficence, because in their small age they are deprived of their
father - their guardian, protector and bread-earner. Other needy persons
come after them.

"and to the orphans": "al-Yatîm" ( = orphan) is he whose father has
died. The word is not used for him who has lost his mother. Also, it is
said that a human child is called "orphan" if his father dies, but in
animals, the adjective is used for one whose mother dies.

"and the needy": "al-Masâkîn" () is plural of al-miskîn ( = needy,
impoverished, destitue, lowly).

"and speak to men good (words)": "Husnan" (= beauty, excellence) is an
infinitive verb, used for adjective (beautiful, excellent, good) to give
emphasis. Some reciters have recited it hasanan ( = beautiful,
excellent, good). However, the sentence enjoins them to speak nicely to
the people; it is an in­direct way of ordering them to maintain good
social relations to behave with people nicely, gently and
good-manneredly - no matter whether the opposite party is a believer or
an unbeliever. It cannot be said to be abrogated by the verse of
fighting, because the two verses are not contradictory to each other;
the place and time of social contact is other than the place and time of
fighting. For example, using hard words when admonishing a child to
correct his behaviour is not contrary to maintaining good social
relation.

QUR’?N: "You shall not shed your blood. . . ": This too is a
prohibitory order, in the form of an information - the same style which
was used in, "You shall not worship (any) but Allâh". “as-safk” ( = to
shed blood).

OUR'AN: backing each other up against them: "at-Tazâhur" ( = to help
each other). az-Zahîr (= helper); it is derived from az-zahr (= back) as
though the helper strengthens the back of the helped one.

QUR’?N : while their very turning away was unlawful for you: Its
literal translation will be, \`while it was unlawful for you their very
turning out.' The pronoun "it" is not related here to any previously
mentioned noun etc., it is a pronoun used to begin a sentence. In the
verse, Say: "He, Allâh is one" (112:1), the pronoun "He" has the same
grammatical significance.

QUR’?N : Do you believe in a part of the Book . . . : Why should you
follow the rule of paying ransom for them and disobey the prohibition of
turning them out? Are not both rules in the same book? Do you believe in
a part of the Book and disbelieve in the other?

QUR’?N: And We sent apostles after him one after another: "at -Taqfiyah
" ( = to send someone after someone else).

QUR’?N: and We gave Isâ son of Maryam, clear evidence: This subject
will be dealt with in Chapter 3, (The Family of \`Imran).

QUR’?N : And they say: "Our hearts are covered": al-Ghulf " () is
plural of al-aghlaf (). It is derived from ghilâf ( = cover). They say:
Our hearts are protected under various covers and veils - your call
cannot reach our hearts. The sentence has the same import as the verse:
And they say: "Our hearts are under coverings from that to which you
call us (41:5).

**TRADITIONS**

Abu Ja'far (a.s.) said about the words of Allâh, and speak to men good
(words): "Speak to men the best of that which you would like to be said
about yourself." (al-Kâfi)

as-Sadiq (a.s.) said about this verse: "Speak to men, and do not speak
but good until you know what it is.

"al-Bâqir (a.s.) said: "Speak to men the best, of that which you would
like to be said about yourself; for certainly Allâh, Mighty and Great is
He, dislikes an abuser, curler, speaker of evil against the believers,
indecent, shameless (and) begger, and He loves the modest,
mild-tempered, chaste (and) moderate." (Ma\`âni 'l-akhbâr)

The author says: A tradition, similar to the first one, has been
narrated in al-Kâfî from as-Sâdiq (a.s.) with another chain of
narrators; and similarly in al-\`Ayyâshî.

Another tradition, like the second one has been written from the same
Imam in al-Kâfî; and one like the third is narrated from al-Bâqir (a.s.)
in al -\`Ayyâshî. Apparently these meanings of the "good word" have been
inferred from general usage.

as-Sâdiq (a.s) said: "Verily Allâh sent Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) with five
swords: So (there is) a sword against a dhimmî ( = free non-Muslim
subject of an Islamic country). Allâh said: and speak to men good
(words); it was revealed about the dhimmîs, then it was abrogated by
another verse, Fight those who do not believe in Allâh. . . (9:29)
(al-\`Ayyâshî)

The author says: In this tradition the Imam has taken the "speech" to
mean behaviour. We say: Do not speak to him but good; what we mean is:
Do not deal with him but in a good and decent manner. This meaning will
apply only if we take the word, "abrogated" in its terminological sense.
But it may also be taken in its literal sense (as we shall explain under
the verse: Whatever signs We abrogate or cause to be forgotten . .
.2:106); and in that case this verse will not be in conflict with that
of the fighting. It should be pointed out that such uses of words in
their literal meanings (as against their terminological ones) are not
infrequent in the traditions of the Imams.


