Chapter 20 : 2:89-93
====================

And when there came to them a Book from Allâh verifying that which they
have, and aforetime they used to pray for victory against those who
disbelieved, but when there came to them that which they did recognize,
they disbelieved in him; so Allâh's curse is on the unbelievers (89).
Evil is that for which they sold their souls - that they should deny
what Allâh has revealed, out of envy that Allâh should send down of His
grace on whomsoever of His servants He pleases; so they returned with
wrath upon wrath, and there is a dis­graceful punishment for the
unbelievers (90). And when it is said to them, "Believe in what Allâh
has revealed, " they say: "We believe in that which was revealed to us;"
and they deny what is besides that, while it is the truth verifying that
which they have. Say: "Why then did you kill Allâh's prophets before if
you were indeed believers?" (91) . And most certainly Musâ came to you
with clear evi­dence, then you took the calf (for a god) in his absence
and you were unjust (92). And (remember) when We made a covenant with
you and raised the mountain over you: "Take hold of what We have given
you with firmness and listen (to Our words)". They said: "We hear and
disobey. " And they were made to imbibe (the love of) the calf into
their hearts on account of their unbelief. Say: "Evil is that which your
belief bids you if you are believers" (93).

**COMMENTARY**

QUR’?N: And when there came to them a Book: The context shows that "a
Book" refers to the Qur’ân.

QUR’?N : and aforetime they used to pray for victory against those who
disbelieved: It appears that whenever the pagans of Arabia clashed with
the Jews, the latter prayed for victory by the right of the Prophet, and
by his prophethood and emigration; and that this was their usual custom
before the advent of the Prophet, so much so that even the pagans knew
it of them. It all is implied in the word, "they used to".

QUR’?N: but when there came to them that which they did recognize: They
knew that Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) was the awaited Prophet, because all the
attributes and particulars mentioned in their books fitted on him
perfectly. And yet they denied his truth.

QUR’?N: Evil is that for which they sold their souls. . .: "Baghyan " (
= out of envy) is in accusative case, explaining the reason why they
disbelieved in Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) even after recognizing him. What they
did was "out of envy", "that Allâh should send down of His grace on
whomsoever of His servants He pleases" was the object of their envy. "so
they re­turned with wrath upon wrath", that is, they returned doubly
enraged. It may also mean that they invited double wrath of Allâh upon
themselves - the first because they disbelieved in Torah and the second
because they disbelieved in the Qur’ân.

The verse says that they were partisans of the Prophet long before he
was born; they prayed to Allâh for victory by his name and his Book.
When the Prophet was sent and the Qur’ân was revealed, they very well
recognized that he was the Prophet in whose name they used to pray for
victory, and whose coming they awaited. But they were overwhelmed by
envy and arrogance. No sooner did the Prophet begin his call then they
denied his truth, and forgot all that they used to tell about the
awaited prophet. It was not surprising as they had earlier disbelieved
in Torah too. Thus they committed disbelief after disbelief, and invited
the wrath of Allâh upon themselves, not once but twice.

QUR’?N: and they deny what is besides that: That is, they claim that
they do not believe in any book other than Torah; but the fact is that
they do not believe even in Torah.

QUR’?N: Say: "Why then did you kill Allâh's prophets. . . ": The
conjunctive, "then", serves to relate this question to their claim, "We
believe in that which was revealed to us". If this claim of yours is
correct then why did you kill the prophets of Allâh? And why did you
disbelieve in Musâ by taking the calf for a god? And why did you say,
"We hear and disobey", when We took a promise from you and lifted the
mountain over you?

QUR’?N : and they were made to imbibe (the love of) the calf into their
hearts: "al-Ishrâb" ( = to make to imbibe, to make to drink). Instead of
saying \`the love of the calf', the verse says, "to imbibe the calf",
for emphasis, as though they had drunk the calf itself into their
hearts. The sentence thus contains two metaphors - "the calf" for the
love of the calf, and imbibing into hearts for loving.

QUR’?N : Say: "Evil is that which your belief bids you. . . ": It is a
derisive expression ridiculing them for their killings of the prophets,
their disbelief in Musâ and their arrogance in committing sin after sin
and then claiming that they were the true believers. The verse
tauntingly asks them: Is this what your belief bids you?

**TRADITIONS**

as-Sâdiq (a.s.) explained the verse, and when there came to them a Book
from Allâh verifying that which they have. . ., in this way: "The Jews
found in their books that Muhammad (s.a.w.a.), the Messenger of Allâh,
would migrate and settle between \`Ayr and Uhud. So, they went out
looking for that place. They passed by a mountain called Hadâd[^8]; and
they said: \`Hadâd -and Uhud are the same'. So they dispersed nearby;
some of them settled at Taymâ', and some others at Fadak and yet others
at Khaybar. Those at Taymâ' once desired (to see) some of their brethren
(at another place). A Bedouin from (the tribe of) Qays passed by them
and they hired (his camels).

He told them: \`I shall take you from between \`Ayr and Uhud.' They
told him: \`When you pass between the two, tell us.' When they reached
the land of Medina, he said: \`That is \`Ayr and this is Uhud.' They
descended from his camels and said to him: \`We have now found (the
place of) our desire; now we do not need your camels, you may go
wherever you wish.' Then they wrote to their brethren at Fadak and
Khaybar: \`We have found the place, come therefore to us.' They wrote in
reply: \`Now we have settled in this place, and have acquired
properties; and we are so near to you. Therefore, when it will happen
(i.e., when the Prophet will come to Medina), we shall rush to you.'
Those Jews acquired properties in the land of Medina. When their wealth
increased, its news came to the ears of Tubba’[^9] and he attacked them.
They fortified themselves and he laid siege to them. (And they used to
take pity on the weekly soldiers of Tubba\` and throw dates and barley
to them at night. This came to the notice of Tubba\` and he softened
towards them.[^10] He assured them of their safety and they came down to
him. He told them: \`I do like this place of yours and I am inclined to
settle down here.' They said: \`It is not for you. It is the migration
place of a prophet; and no one may settle down here until that happens.'
Thereupon he said: \`Then I am leaving among you some of the members of
my clan, so that when it happens they shall help and assist him.' Thus
he left behind the two tribes you see today, the Aws and the Khazraj.
When these two (tribes) increased in number, they used to grab the
properties of the Jews. At that time, the Jews used to warn them: \`Oh!
when Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) is sent (by Allâh) we shall certainly turn you
out from our town and prop­erties.' But when Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) was
sent as Prophet, it was the Helpers (the Aws and the Khazraj) who
believed in him and the very Jews denied him! This is the meaning of the
words of Allâh, and aforetime they used to pray for victory against
those who disbelieved. . . " (al-\`Ayyâshî )

Ibn Ishâq, Ibn Jarîr, Ibn al-Mundhir, Ibn Abî Hâtim and Abû Na'aym (in
his Dalâ'ilu 'n-nubuwwah) have narrated from Ibn \`Abbâs that he said:
"The Jews used to pray for victory against the Aws and the Khazraj by
the right of the Messenger of Allâh, before he was sent as prophet.
However, when Allâh raised him from the Arabs, the same Jews disbelieved
in him and denied what they used to say about him. Mu'âdh ibn Jabal,
Bishr ibn Barâ' ibn Ma'rûr and Dâwûd ibn Salamah told them: \`O Jews!
Fear Allâh and accept Islam; because it was you who used to pray for
victory against us by the right of Muhammad, while we were polytheists,
and you used to tell us that he would (soon) be sent, describing to us
his attributes.' Salâm ibn Mushkîm, one of the tribe of Banû an Nadîr,
said to them: \`He has not brought to us anything we know; and he is not
the prophet we were telling you about.' Then Allâh sent down (the
verse): \`And when there came to them a Book from Allâh . . . ' "
(ad-Durru '1-manthûr)

Abu Nu'aym has narrated in his Dalâ'ilu 'n-Nubuwwah from the chains of
\`Atâ' and ad-Dahhâk, from Ibn \`Abbâs that he said: "The Jews of Banû
Qurayzah and Banû an-Nadîr, before Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) was sent as
prophet, used to pray to Allâh for victory, invoking Him against the
disbelievers and saying: \`O Allâh! We seek Thy help, by the right of
the untaught prophet, to let us triumph over them.' And they were given
victory. But when there came to them that which they did recognize
(i.e., Muhammad - s.a.w.a.) , and actually they had no doubt whatsoever
about him, they disbelieved in, and denied him. (ad-Durru 'l-manthûr )

The author says: Similar traditions have been narrated by various other
chains also.

A commentator, after pointing to the last mentioned tradi­tions and
others like them, says: "These traditions - weak as their narrators are
and incompatible as they are with the narrated traditions - are
anomalous in their meaning too, because they maintain that the prayer
for victory was made \`by the person of the Prophet' or, as some
traditions say, \`by the right of the Prophet'; and such a prayer is
against the sharî\`ah; and no one has any right on Allâh. How could
prayer be offered with the help of such a non-existent right?

Reply: This objection results from not understanding the meaning of
"right" and oath. Oath is used to join and bind a proposition, order,
request or exclamation to an honourable and sublime thing - if that
proposition etc. is wrong, the honour and sublimity of the thing bound
to it, is tarnished and damaged. When you say, "By my life, Zayd is
standing", you have bound the honour of your life to the truth of your
statement; if that statement be wrong, your life would loose its honour.
When you say, "By my life, I shall do this work", or "I entreat you, by
my life, to do this work", you have, in the same way, put the honour of
your life at stake for that work; if you did not do it, or if the second
party did not heed to your entreaty, your life would loose its honour,
its dignity. Two things emerge from this explanation:

First: Oath is the strongest method of emphasizing a talk, as the
scholars of literature have confirmed.

Second: The thing by which one swears, must be more honourable and more
important than the proposition etc. which it is related to; because a
proposition cannot be emphasized with the help of a less important
thing. Allâh has sworn, in His Book, by His own name and attributes. For
example, So, by your Lord, We would most certainly question them all (15
:92). Also, He quotes others swearing by His name and attributes: By
Allâh, our Lord . . . (6:23) ; Then by Thy Might I will surely make them
live an evil life (38:82) . But He has also sworn by His Prophet, His
angels and His books, as well as by His creatures like the heaven, the
earth, the sun, the moon, the stars, the night, the day, the mountains,
the rivers, the towns, the man, the tree, the fig and the olive. It
could not be possible unless these things had a real dignity of their
own bestowed on them by Allâh; every such thing must have an attribute
reflecting one of the divine attributes, or an activity related to the
divine sublimity and every dignity and honour emanates from Him.

Now, what objection can be raised against a suppliant, if he prays to
Allâh for something entreating Him by one of the above-mentioned
things - considering the fact that Allâh Him­self has sworn by those
things and has given them a sublimity and dignity? Why an exception
should be made in case of the Apostle of Allâh only? Is it not an
affront to the Prophet to remove him from this common way of showing
respect? By my life, Muhammad, the Apostle of Allâh (s. a. w. a.) is not
less honourable in the eyes of Allâh than an Iraqi fig or a Syrian
olive! These people forget that Allâh Himself has sworn by His Prophet:
By your life! they were blindly wandering on in their intoxication (15
:72).

Now we should have a look at the "right". Right, as opposed to wrong,
means a factual thing, existing outside imagination, like the earth and
the man; in short, every real and substantial thing, as opposed to
illusory and imaginary ones. Monetory and other social rights come
within this category because they are firmly established by the
society.

The Qur’ân has nullified all the rights claimed by man, except that
which is laid down and confirmed by Allâh - in creation as well as in
legislation. Right in the legislative and social spheres is that which
Allâh Himself has established, like the monetary rights, the rights of
the brothers and the rights of the parents etc.

It is necessary to mention here that no one can lay down a right
against Allâh, no one can make it incumbent upon Allâh to do or give
something. But it is possible for Allâh to make it incumbent upon
Himself to do something, or to give someone something, all in the sphere
of legislation. Then that "someone" shall have a right on Allâh which
Allâh Himself has established. For example, Allâh says: even so (now) it
is a right on Us (that) We deliver the believers (10:103); And certainly
Our word has already gone forth in respect of Our servants, the
apostles: Most surely they shall be assisted ones, and most surely Our
host alone shall be the victorious ones (37:171-173)

The assistance, promised here, is general and unconditional, not
restricted by any proviso. Getting deliverance is the right of the
believers on Allâh, and getting assistance is, in the same way, the
right of the apostles. By establishing this right on Himself for the
apostles, Allâh has enhanced their dignity and honour. And there is
nothing to prevent a suppliant from entreating Allâh to help and deliver
him from his difficulties, by the right of His apostle or apostles.
Allâh Himself has laid down that right and He Himself swears by every
honourable thing, showing us that such oaths and adjurations are in fact
liked by Him.

In short, there is no hitch in entreating Allâh by His Apostle or by
the right of His Apostle. The same applies to entreating Him by His
friends, or by the right of His friends. He has estab­lished a right for
them on Himself that He will surely assist them in the path of
happiness, with every related assistance.

The claim that "no one has any right on Allâh" is just a nonsense. Of
course, no one can lay down a right for himself on Allâh; no one can
make it incumbent on Allâh to do some thing. But a suppliant does not
pray to Allâh by a right forced on Allâh by someone else; he pleads to
Him by a right which He Himself has established pledging His Own word;
and His Promise is never broken.


