Chapter 6 : 2:21-25
===================

O men! worship your Lord Who created you and those before you so that
you may guard (against evil) (21) ; Who made the earth a bed (resting
place) and the sky a structure; and (Who) sends down rain from the
heaven, thereby brings forth with it subsistence for you of the fruits;
therefore do not set up equals to Allâh while you know (22). And if you
are in doubt as to that which We have revealed to Our servant, then
produce a chapter like it and call on your witnesses besides Allâh if
you are truthful (23). But if you do (it) not - and never shall you do
(it) - then be on guard against the fire of which men and stones are the
fuel; it is prepared for the unbelievers (24) . And convey good news to
those who believe and do good deeds that for them are gardens in which
rivers flow; whenever they shall be given a portion of the fruit
thereof, they shall say: "This is what was given to us before;- and they
shall be given the like of it, and they shall have pure mates in them;
and in them they shall abide (25).

**COMMENTARY**

QUR’?N: O men! worship your Lord . . . may guard (against evil): The
preceding nineteen verses have described the positions of the three
groups category-wise: The pious ones who are on the guidance from their
Lord; the disbelievers whose hearts and ears have been sealed and who
have their eyes covered; and the hypo­crites in whose hearts there is
disease so Allâh added to their disease and they are deaf, dumb and
blind.

In this background, Allâh calls the men to be His good ser­vants, to
worship Him and to join, not the disbelievers and the hypocrites, but
the pious ones, those who guard themselves against evil. This context
shows that the clause, "so that you may guard (against evil)", is
governed by the verb "worship" - you should worship Allâh to join those
who guard against evil, who are pious. It may also be governed by the
verb, "created" - Allâh created you in order that you may guard
yourselves against evil.

QUR’?N: Who made the earth a bed . . . do not set up equals to Allâh
while you know: "al-Andâd" () is plural of an-nidd ( = alike, equal,
peer) . The phrase, "while you know" , is unconditional, and
grammatically it is circumstantial phrase of "do not set up"; these two
factors lend extra-ordinary force to the prohibition of setting up
equals to Allâh. The sentence shows that a man who has even a little
knowledge should not ascribe any equal or partner to Allâh; he should
know that it is Allâh Who has created him and those before him and
arranged and managed this system in the creation for their sustenance
and survival.

QUR’?N : And if you are in doubt . . . then produce a chapter like it .
. . : It is a challenge which human beings and jinn can never meet. This
challenge has been offered to demonstrate the miracle of the Qur’ân, to
show that it is a Book sent down by Allâh, there is no doubt in it; that
it has been revealed as an ever­lasting miracle that will remain alive
till the end of the world. This challenge has repeatedly been given in
the Qur' an:

Say: "If men and jinn should combine together to bring the like of this
Qur’ân, they could not bring the like of it, even though some of them
were aiders of the others" (17:88). Or, do they say: "He has forged it?"
Say: "Then bring ten chapters like it forged and call upon whom you can
besides Allâh, if you are truthful " (11:13).

This context shows that the pronoun "it" in "like it" refers to "that
which We have revealed to Our servant", that is, the Qur’ân. It is a
challenge to them to bring a like of the Qur’ân in its inimitable style
and meaning.

The word "min mithlihi" ( = translated here as "like it") may also be
rendered as "from like him". In that case it will be a challenge to
bring a like of the Qur’ân written by someone like the Holy Prophet.
This Qur’ân has been brought by a person who was never taught by any
teacher, who had not learnt these valuable and marvelous truths from any
human being, nor had he taken this most eloquent style from any mortal.
If the disbelievers thought that such a man can write such a Book, then
let them bring its like from some such illiterate man. In this light,
the verse would have the same import as the following one: ­Say: "If
Allâh had desired (otherwise) I would not have recited it to you, nor
would He have taught it to you; indeed I have lived a lifetime among you
before it; do you not then understand?" (10:16)

Both explanations have been given in some traditions.

Obviously, this and the other challenging verses dare the antagonists
to bring, if they can, like of even the shortest chapter of the Qur’ân -
say, the Chapter of al-Kawthar or al- Asr.

A strange exegesis has been written by someone that "like it " means
like this Chapter, The Cow, in which this verse occurs. This explanation
is totally devoid of good literary taste. Those who disbelieved in the
Qur’ân, rejected the whole Book as being forged against Allâh. What
purpose could be served by challenging them to bring a Chapter like that
of The Cow? Such a challenge would, in final analysis, mean this: If you
are in doubt the short Chapter of al-Kawthar or al- Ikhlds, then bring a
like of the largest Chapter of The Cow. Absurd, isn't it!

**MIRACLE AND ITS QUIDDITY**

The claim of the Qur’ân that it is a miraculous sign, and the challenge
to the doubters offered by this verse, contains in reality two claims:
First, that miracles, super-natural events, do occur; second, that the
Qur’ân is one of such miracles. If the second claim is proved, the first
will automatically be proved. That is why the Qur’ân has challenged the
men to bring its like, as it would prove both aspects of the claim.

How does a miracle happen? After all, it is against the deep-­rooted
system of the cause-and-effect which is never negated. The Qur’ân
explains this subject in the following two stages:

First: The miracle is a reality; the Qur’ân is one of the miracles,
which in itself proves the existence of miracles in general; it offers a
challenge to its adversaries, and in this way proves its truth.

Second: What is the reality of miracle? How can a thing happen in this
world of nature against the universal law of the cause-and-effect?

**THE MIRACLE OF THE QUR’?N**

Undoubtedly, the Qur’ân has offered a continuing challenge, by which it
proves itself to be a miracle. This challenge has been given in many
verses of Meccan as well as Medinite period. All of them show that this
Book is a divine miracle, a super-natural sign. The verse under
discussion, "And if you are in doubt as to that which We have revealed
to Our servant, then produce a chapter like it . . . ", is one of those
challenges: Produce a chapter like one of the Qur’ân from someone like
the Prophet. It should be noted that it does not purport to prove the
prophethood of Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) directly; it does not say, \`if you
are in doubt as to the prophethood of Our, servant'; instead it says,
\`if you are in doubt as to that which We have revealed to Our servant'.
Likewise, all the challenges given in the Qur’ân aim to prove that this
Book is a super-natural sign from Allâh. And when this fact is
established, the prophethood of the Prophet will automatically be
proved.

The verses of challenge vary in their scope and generality. The most
general is the verse: Say: \` If men and jinn should combine together to
bring the like of this Qur'ân, they could not bring the like of it, even
though some of them were aiders of the others" (17:88). The verse is of
Meccan period, and it is easy to see that it contains an
all-encompassing challenge.

This challenge is not confined to its unsurpassed eloquence and purest
style. Otherwise, the challenge would not cover non­-Arabs; it could be
addressed to only those who spoke pure Arabic before it was debased by
foreign influence - in other words, only to the Arabs of the days of
paganism or to those whose life-span bridged the time of paganism and
that of Islam. But the verse chal­lenges not only the whole mankind but
confronts the jinn also.

As for other special qualities of the Qur’ân (like the exposi­tion of
spiritual realities, the high morals, the most comprehensive and the
fairest legal code, the information of the things unseen as well as
other subjects which the man had not even thought of when the Qur’ân was
revealed), they are of such a nature that only a selected group - and
not the whole mankind - may appreciate them. But the challenge is
general and covers elites and common men and jinn. It is clear in this
light that it is not confined to any one quality; it defies them to
bring a like of this Book in all its qualities together.

The Qur’ân is a miracle: For a man of eloquence, in its spellbinding
sublimity and style; for a sage, in its sagacity; for a scholar, in its
knowledge; for a sociologist, in its social system; for a legislator, in
its legislation; for a politician, in its politics; for a ruler, in its
rule of justice; and for the whole world, in such things which none of
them can grasp like the information of the unseen, prophecies of future
events, freedom from discrepancy in its laws, knowledge and
expression.

The Qur’ân claims to be a comprehensive miracle, covering all its
aspects. It is a miracle for every individual man and jinn -an average
person or a select one, learned or ignorant, man or woman, of a very
high rank of excellence or of a lower level -in short, anyone who has
enough intelligence to understand the Qur'ânic speech. Man, by nature,
comprehends a virtue and understands its various grades. Every person
should look into an excellence which he or someone else has got; then he
should compare that excellence or virtue with what the Qur’ân contains
of the same; and then he should decide - in all honestly and justice -
whether it is in human power to bring a like of the Qur’ân. Is it
possible for a man to bring such divine knowledge, so well-reasoned, as
the Qur’ân has done?

Is it within human power to build such character, based on foundation
of reality, which may honestly be compared with the Qur’ânic teaching in
purity and excellence? Can human beings legislate perfect laws covering
all human activities without blundering into discrep­ancies, with the
spirit of monotheism and the word of piety permeating every order and
its every implication, with purity and cleanliness feeding its root and
shoots? Can such astonishing comprehensiveness and all-inclusiveness
come from an untaught man? A man who was born and brought up among a
people whose only share in human virtues was a life sustained with
raids, plunders and wars; they buried their daughters alive, and killed
their children for fear of poverty; they boasted of their fathers and
married their mothers; debauchery was their pride; they condemned
knowledge and showed off their ignorance; in spite of their haughtiness
and chauvinism, they were preyed upon by every hunter and were easy
targets for anyone who wished to conquer them - one day they were under
the Yemen­ite rule, the next day were ruled over by the Ethiopians; some
day Byzantine emperors lorded over them, the other day it was Persia's
turn to humiliate them. This is the picture, in miniature, of the Arabs
before Islam. And in such environment, the Qur’ân was brought by the
Prophet of Islam.

Again, suppose a man brings a book, claiming that it is a guidance for
the worlds. Will he dare to include in it the news and informations of
the unseen - both past and future - not in one or two places but spread
over a lot of topics - in stories, in prophecies, and about the events
that are to happen in future? And what will be your judgement if not a
single detail proves wrong?

Once again, man is a part of this natural world; this world is
constantly changing and developing from perfection to per­fection. Is it
possible for a man to talk about each -and every affair of human life;
to give the world knowledge, laws, wisdom, admonition, parables,
stories - concerning every matter, big or small - without committing any
discrepancy, without showing any trace of gradual development? And
especially so, if his talks are not delivered all at one time, are
delivered piecemeal in a long period of twenty-three years? And even
more so when some topics are repeated again and again, when there are
shoots sprout­ing from a previously planted root? Undoubtedly, it is not
poss­ible, because no man can remain unchanged in his knowledge and
outlook throughout his life.

When a man ponders over these facts about the Qur’ân -containing the
above-mentioned distinctions besides many more - he can entertain no
doubt whatsoever about its divine origin; he will feel sure that it is
beyond human power, over and above the natural and material causes. If
someone is not in a position to understand this clear fact, he should
follow the dictate of his nature - in other words, he should ask those
who are knowledge­able about this subject.

Question: Why did not the Qur’ân confine its challenge to the elite
only? What is the use of including general public in this call? After
all, a common man is easily- influenced by such claims and it takes him
no time to accept pretensions of every pretender. Don't you see that it
was this group that surrendered to al-Bâb, al-Bahâ', Mirzâ Ghulâm Ahmad
Qâdiyânî and al- Musay­lamah, even though what those deceivers brought
as their proof was more like a senseless jabber and raving delirium than
a sensible talk?

Reply: It was the only way to keep the miracle all-inclusive; the only
possible method for discerning the perfection and excel­lence in a
quality that has various ranks and grades. People have different grades
of understanding; likewise, the virtues differ in their perfection.
Those who have high level of understanding and correct perception will
easily appreciate the high quality of an excellent work. Those who have
a lower understanding should refer to the former for their judgement. It
is the dictate of nature and demand of human psyche.

A miracle that can be universal and comprehensive, that can be
addressed to every individual, in every place and at all times, that can
be conveyed to all and can remain alive to the last day of the world,
must necessarily be a set of divine know­ledge and spiritual realities.
All other miracles were either material objects or a tangible event that
were governed by the laws of nature inasmuch as they were confined to a
certain time and space. They were seen by only a limited number of
people; even supposing, for the sake of argument, that it was observed
by all people of that particular place, it could not be witnessed by
peo­ple of other localities; and suppose that an impossible happened,
that is, it was seen by the whole world, it could not continue eternally
for the future generations to observe.

It was for this reason that Allâh chose this academic and spiritual
miracle, that is, the Qur’ân, for the Prophet of Islam, so that it may
continue its challenge to the whole mankind -in all places and in all
generations. And thus the miracle con­tinues in its generality, defying
every person, in every area and every era.

**FIRST SPECIFIC CHALLENGE: THE KNOWLEDGE IT CONTAINS**

Now we come to its specific challenges. It has offered par­ticular
challenge concerning the knowledge it imparts arid cogni­tion it
contains. Allâh says: . . . and We have revealed the Book to you
explaining clearly everything (16:89) ; . . . nor anything green nor dry
but (it is all) in a clear book (6:59). There are many other verses of
the same theme. Look at the fundamental teachings given in the text of
the Qur’ân; then see its details for which it has referred the people to
the Prophet - as Allâh says: . . . and whatever the Apostle gives you,
take it, and from what­ever he forbids you, keep back . . . (59:7) ; . .
. that you may judge between people by means of that which Allâh has
taught you (4:105). Then you will know that Islam has put its attention
to all big and small topics relevant to divine knowledge, moral virtues
and religious laws - covering worship, mutual dealings, social
regulations, penal code, and, in short, everything that affects life and
character. All this is based on the foundation of human nature and
monotheism. Analyze the details and you will find monotheism as their
basis; combine the basis with relevant principles and you will get the
details.

Then it has declared that all this knowledge will remain valid to the
end of the world; will continue to guide mankind and will always be
relevant to human needs and environment. Allâh says: . . . and most
surely it is a Mighty Book: Falsehood shall not come to it from before
it nor from behind it; a revelation from the Wise, the Praised One
(41:41-42). Surely We have revealed the Reminder and We will most surely
be its guardian (15:9) . In other words, it is a Book which is beyond
the reach of the law of change and development; it will never be
disturbed by abrogation.

A question may be asked here: The sociologists are of the opinion that
the laws and regulations controlling the society must change according
to the changes occurring in the structure of society. As the time passes
and civilization marches ahead, it becomes necessary to change the laws
to cope with the changed situation. Then how can the sharî \`ah of Islam
continue without any change or abrogation all these centuries? We shall
explain this matter, God willing, under the verse: Mankind was but one
peo­ple . . . (2:213). Here it is enough to point out that the Qur’ân
has built its laws on the foundation of monotheism and excellent ethics
that spring from healthy human nature; it declares that legislation must
grow up from the seed of creation and existence. The scholars of
sociology, on the other hand, have fixed their eyes on changes of
society, totally ignoring the spiritual side of monotheism and morality.
As a result, their word concentrates on material development of the
society - and society is not a living organism, it does not have a soul;
and the word of Allâh is the highest.

**SECOND SPECIFIC CHALLENGE: THE RECIPIENT OF THE REVELATION**

Another aspect of this challenge is the personality of the untaught
Prophet who brought this Qur’ân as a miracle in its words and in its
meanings. He had not learnt from any teacher, was not trained by any
instructor. This challenge is contained in the following words of Allâh:
Say: "If Allâh had desired (otherwise) I would not have recited it to
you, nor would He have taught it to you; indeed I have lived a lifetime
among you before it; do you not then understand?" (10:16). The Prophet
lived among them as one of them. In all those years, he had not risen
above them in scholarship, nor was he renowned for any knowledge. He did
not deliver any lecture, nor did he compose a single line of poetry,
upto his fortieth year - that is to say, for about two-thirds of his
total life-span; he did not get any distinction in literature or
scholarship all these years. Then, all of a sudden, he brought what he
said was the revelation from God, before which giants of literature felt
like pigmies, and elo­quent speakers became tongue-tied. He published
that revelation to the furthest limits of the world, but no one dared to
bring its like in all these centuries.

The outmost that his adversaries could say was that he must have learnt
those stories from Christian monks during his trade-journeys to Syria.
But he had gone to Syria only twice: First, in his early childhood, with
his uncle, Abû Tâlib and then, at the age of twenty-five, with Maysarah,
the slave of Khadîjah. In both these journeys he was never alone day or
night, and no­body ever reported any such meeting with any supposed
teacher. Even if we accept for the sake of argument that such training
session did take place, many questions will arise from it: Who taught
him this divine knowledge of monotheism? Where did he get these wise
rules and these realities? And lastly, who gave him this unsurpassed
elocution which has kept the silver-tongued elocutionists dumbfounded
all these years?

Another suggestion was that he learned these sublime truths from a
blacksmith, of Roman origin, who made and sold swords. Allâh replied to
this allegation in this verse: And certainly We know that they say:
"Only a mortal teaches him ". The tongue of him whom they are inclined
to blame for it is barbarous, and this is clear Arabic language (16:103)
.

A third accusation was that he gained this knowledge from Salmân, the
Persian, who allegedly knew all about various religions and sects. But
Salmân met the Prophet in Medina and thereafter accepted Islam, while
the major portion of the Qur’ân was re­vealed at Mecca, and that part
contained all the principles, know­ledge and stories that were later
repeated at Medina - we may say that Meccan revelation had more of these
thing, than the verses revealed at Medina. The question is: What
knowledge did Salmân add after his conversion to Islam? Nothing.
Moreover, read the Old and the New Testaments, and compare the stories
of the previous prophets and their people written in them with those
revealed in the Qur’ân. You will see that the latter's history and
stories are different from the former's. The Bible attributes such sins
and evils to the prophets of Allâh which one would be loth to ascribe to
an average man of good character. But the Qur’ân absolves them from such
blames. Then you will find in the Bible many topics that have no bearing
on, and relevance to, the spiritual knowledge or moral excellence. The
Qur’ân never talks except about that which is truly beneficial to people
in their spiritual upliftment and char­acter-building.

**THIRD SPECIFIC CHALLENGE: ITS PROPHECIES AND INFORMATION OF
UNSEEN**

The Qur’ân's third specific challenge is concerning its proph­ecies and
the information it gives of the unseen. Such verses may be divided in
four categories:

1. The information about previous prophets and their nations: Allâh
says about some of these stories: These are of the tidings of the unseen
which We revealed to you; you did not know them - (neither) you nor your
people - before this. . . (11:49); .and He says after the story of
Yûsuf: This is of the tidings of the unseen (which) We revealed to you,
and you were not with them when they resolved upon their affair, and
they were devising plans (12 :102) ; also, about the story of Maryam:
This is of the tidings of the unseen which We reveal to you; and you
were not with them when they cast their pens (to decide) which of them
should have Maryam in his charge, and you were not with them when they
contended one with another (3:44); and about \`Isâ: Such is ‘Isâ, son of
Maryam; (this is) the saying of truth about which they dispute (19:34).
There are many verses of the same import.
2. Prophecies of future events: For example: The Romans would avenge
their defeat: The Romans are vanquished, in a near land; and they, after
being vanquished, shall overcome within a few years (30:2-4); the
Prophet would return to Mecca after his hijrah: Most surely He Who has
made the Qur’ân binding on you will bring you back to the destination
(28 :85); the vision of the Prophet would certainly come true: Certainly
Allâh had shown to His Apostle the vision with truth: You shall most
cer­tainly enter the Sacred Mosque, if Allâh pleases, in security,
(some) having their heads shaved and (others) having their hair­cut, you
shall not fear (48:27); the behaviour, in future, of a group of Muslims:
Those who are left behind will say when you set forth for the gaining of
acquisition: Allow us (that) we may follow you. They desire to change
the words of Allâh (48:15); nobody would be able to harm the Prophet: .
. . and Allâh will protect you form the men (5:70); the Qur’ân will
remain under the protection of Allâh: Surely We have revealed the
Reminder and We will most surely be its guardian (15:9). We may include
in this category other numerous verses giving good tidings to the
believers and threatening the disbelievers and pagans of Mecca of
various retributions.

In this category come the prophecies of the signs and dis­turbances
appearing soon before the Day of Judgement. For example: And it is
forbidden to a town which We destroyed that they shall not return, until
when Gog and Magog are let loose and they shall hasten forth from every
elevated place. And the true promise shall draw nigh, then lo! the eyes
of those who disbelieved shall be fixedly open: O woe to us! surely we
were in heedlessness as to this; nay, we were unjust ones (21:95-97).
Allâh has pro­mised to those of you who believe and do good that He will
most certainly make them successors in the earth as He made successors
those before them . . . (24:55). Say: \`He has the power that He should
send on you a chastisement from above you or from beneath your feet, or
that He should throw you into confusion, (making you) of different
parties; and make some of you taste the fighting of to others . .. .
(6:65).

3. The verses based on such scientific realities which were unknown,
and even unthought of, when the Qur’ân was revealed, and which have just
now been discovered after long researches: And We send the winds
fertilizing (15:22); And the earth - We have spread it forth and put in
it anchors (i.e. mountains) and caused to grow in it of everything,
weighed (15:19); Have We not made the earth a resting place, and the
mountains as pegs (therein)? (78:6 - 7 ).

4. The verses that allude to many great events and disorders that were
to happen in the Islamic community, or the world in general, after the
lifetime of the Prophet. For example: O you who believe! whoever of you
turns back from his religion, then soon Allâh will bring a people that
He shall love them and they shall love Him, humbled before the
believers, mighty against the unbelievers, they shall strive hard in
Allâh's way and shall not fear the censure of any censurer; this is
Allâh's grace, He gives it to whom He pleases (5:54); And every nation
had an apostle; so when their apostle came, the matter was decided
between them with justice and they shall not be dealt with unjustly. And
they say: "When will this threat come about, if you are truthful?" Say;
"I do not control for myself any harm, or any benefit, ex­cept what
Allâh pleases; every nation has a term; when their term comes, they
shall not then remain behind for an hour, nor can they go before (their
time)". Say: "Tell me if His punishment overtakes you by night or by
day! what then is there of it that the guilty would hasten on?"
(10:47-50) ; Then set your face uprightly for the (right) religion in
natural devotion (to the truth), the nature made by Allâh in which He
has made men; . . . and be not of the polytheists, of those who divided
their religion and became sects; every sect rejoicing in what they had
with them (30:30-32). There are many verses that come into this
category, and we shall describe some of them when explaining the
seven­teenth chapter (The Night-journey). It should be noted here that
this category is one of the specialties of this book of ours.

**FOURTH SPECIFIC CHALLENGE: NO DISCREPANCIES IN THE QUR’?N**

It is one of the challenges of the Qur’ân that there is no discrepancy
in it. Allâh says: Do they not then meditate on the Qur'ân? And if it
were from any other than Allâh, they would have found in it many a
discrepancy (4:82).

This is a material world, governed by the law of change and
development. Every item in this world changes day after day from
weakness to strength, from deficiency to perfection -in its own self as
well as in all its concomitants and attachments. Man is no exception to
this rule. He also undergoes constant change and development in his
existence as well as in effects of his actions and reactions. And this
law applies also to what he gets through his perception and intellect.
Every man finds that his to­day is a bit more perfect than his
yesterday. Every passing hour makes him realize what mistakes he had
committed in the past hour, what erronous views he had held a few hours
back. It is a fact that no sane person can deny.

In this background, look at the Qur’ân. Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) brought
this book piece by piece, one small chapter or a few verses at a time.
It continued for twenty-three years in different places, various
conditions and divergent situations: In Mecca and Medina, by day and by
night, during journeys and at home, in thick of battle and in time of
peace, during hard up days and in easy times, when Muslims suffered
defeat and when they were victorious, in safety and in danger. It
contained all types of subjects - it unveiled spiritual knowledge,
taught excellent ethics and ordained laws for every conceivable aspect
of life. In spite of all these factors, there is not a whiff of
discrepancy in its matter or meaning - it is an oft-repeated book whose
parts resemble one with the other. There is not a least difference,
contradiction or contrariety in the realities it has explained, in the
principles it has laid down. One verse explains the rest, one sentence
clarifies the others, as 'Alî (a.s.) said: "Its one part speaks with the
other, and one portion testifies about the others."

No doubt, if such a book would have been from other than Allâh, there
would have been a lot of ups and downs in its style; the speech would
have bounced between elegance and clumsiness; the themes would have
ranged from correct to er­ronous. In short, the book would have been
uneven, unbalanced and full of discrepancies.

Question: This is a claim without any proof. Non-Muslim scholars have
written many books showing that the Qur’ân suffers from many
discrepancies and mistakes - in construction of sen­tences (which fall
short of the standard of eloquence) as well as in themes and meanings
(which contain errors in its views and teachings). The replies given by
the Muslims are just piteous attempts to explain away those
contradictions and shortcomings. Those are defects that a correct and
good speech should not have had in the first place.

Reply: The so-called discrepancies and defects have not been discovered
by our adversaries; they have been mentioned (together with their
replies) by Muslims in their books of exegesis and other subjects
related to the Qur’ân (not excepting this book of ours); the Muslim
authors have used this method to show that what looks at the first
glance an unusual style or expression is in fact a gem of highest
eloquence. The non-Muslim writers have just picked out those supposed
defects and discrepancies and collected them in their books, ignoring
the replies that showed the real beauty of those expressions. If eye of
love is blind, the eye of enmity is not any brighter.

Question: Well, how can you explain away the difficulty that arises out
of abrogation? Many Qur’ânic verses have been abrogated, as the Qur’ân
itself says: Whatever signs We abrogate or cause to be forgotten, We
bring one better than it or like it (2:106) ; And when We change (one)
communication for (an­other) communication, and Allâh knows best what He
reveals . . . (16:101) . Abrogation is at least a change of opinion, an
incon­sistency of thought, if not an outright contradiction in speech.

Reply: Abrogation is neither a contradiction in speech nor a change of
opinion or thought. A rule is abrogated when the society, the
environment, changes in such a way that the under­lying wisdom of that
rule remains no longer valid. The difference, if any, is not in the
opinion; it is rather in the subject matter. A clear evidence of it may
be seen in the abrogated verses themselves - they invariably always
contained some phrases or clauses to show that the given order was a
temporary one, that it would soon be abrogated. For example: And as for
those who are guilty of lewdness from among your women, call to witness
against them four (witnesses) from among you; then if they bear witness
con­fine them to the houses until death takes them away or Allâh makes
some way for them (4:15). Note the last sentence and the hint it gives.
Another example: Many of the people of the Book wish that they could
turn you back into unbelievers after your faith . . . But pardon and
forgive (them) until Allâh should bring about His command (2:109). Here
too the concluding phrase shows that the rule ordained was not for
ever.

**FIFTH SPECIFIC CHALLENGE: ITS ELOQUENCE**

The Qur’ân has also challenged its adversaries to bring its like in its
eloquence. Allâh says: Or, do they say: "He has forged it?" Say: "Then
bring ten chapters like it forged and call upon whom you can besides
Allâh, if you are truthful. " But if they do not answer you, then know
that it is revealed by Allâh's knowledge and that there is no god but
He; will you then sub­mit? (11:13-14) These verses were revealed at
Mecca. Again Allâh says: Or, do they say: "He has forged it?" Say: "Then
bring a chapter like this and call whom you can besides Allâh, if you
are truthful." Nay, they have rejected that of which they have no
comprehensive knowledge, and its final interpretation has not yet come
to them (10:38-39) . These are Meccan verses too.

All these verses challenge the doubters and disbelievers to bring the
like of ten or even one chapter of the Qur’ân in its style and
eloquence, as eloquence was the most accomplished art of the Arabs of
those days. Undoubtedly, they had reached the highest peak of eloquence.
No preceding, contemporary or following nation ever reached even near
them in their mastery of literature. Their expression was elegant, their
style enchanting; their words perfectly fitted their themes and
meanings; their talks were always in harmony with the occasions; their
words were plain and their sentences beautiful; and their speech had an
easy flow and inimitable grace. It was a way of which they were the
pioneers and the only walkers. The Qur’ân challenged such a nation in
every possible way, so as to excite their rage, rouse their fury and
fire them with determination to meet the challenge. It should not be
forgotten that they were extremely proud of their art of eloquence and
never acknowledged the least elocutionary skill to anyone else. In spite
of that arrogance of theirs, the Prophet dared them to bring just one
chapter like the Qur’ân. It is a challenge that even now is ringing in
the ears of disbelievers, defying them to forge, if they can, just one
chapter like it. But the Arabs' only answer was to avoid it; the more
forcefully they were challenged, the more evident their helplessness
was. Ulti­mately, they used to hide themselves to avoid hearing its
sound.

Allâh says: Now surely they fold up their breasts that they may conceal
from Him; now surely, when they put their garments as a covering, He
knows what they conceal and what they make known (11:5).

Even after fourteen centuries, no one has been able to bring its like.
Those who tried it put themselves to shame and made themselves targets
of ridicule. History has preserved some samples of those pathetic
attempts. Musaylamah (who posed as a prophet) wrote these words in reply
to the Qur’ân ch. 105 (The Elephant): "The elephant, what is the
elephant! And what will make you understand what the elephant is? It has
an unwholesome tail, and a long trunk." In another "verse", which he
recited before al-Sajâh (who also claimed to be a prophetess), he said:
". . . then we penetrate it into you women a hard penetration, and take
it out from you forcefully. . ." Look at this rigmorale and decide its
worth. A Christian in latter days wrote this "chapter" in reply to the
Chapter of The Opening: "All praise is due to the Beneficent, the Lord
of the beings, the King, the Subduer. For Thee is the worship, and from
Thee is the help. Guide us to the path of faith."

All attempts to meet this challenge suffered the same fate.

Two Questions:

First: It is unreasonable to say that a speech can reach a level where
it would become a miracle, a super-natural work. Language has been made
by human ingenuity. How can a pro­duct of nature be above the reach of
nature? A maker is more powerful than the thing he makes; a cause always
encompasses its effect. It is the man who invented the words to meet his
social needs, to convey to others' minds what one thinks or feels. The
relationship of a word with its meaning is created by man. It is a
subjective quality given to the word by man. This quality cannot reach
beyond the ability of the maker himself. In other words, it is
impossible for a speech to rise above the human ability.

Second: Let us accept for the time being that a particular composition
of a speech may reach super-natural level, may be­come a miracle. Every
intended theme may be clothed in various sentences, each differing from
the others in grades of perfection; and out of those numerous sentences
one would reach a standard which would be beyond human ability and
power - and that composition would be a miracle. It means that for every
intended meaning there would be one miraculous sentence; and other
struc­tures would be below that standard. But we see that the Qur’ân,
more often than not, repeats many themes - and especially the stories -
using different compositions and dissimilar styles. Whichever
sentence-structure and style is accepted as a miracle, the other ones
would fall short of that standard.

Reply: Before replying to these objections one matter should be
clarified here. It were such questions which led some Muslim scholars to
believe in the theory of as-sarf ( = to turn away). They believed like
other Muslims that it was impossible for men to bring a like of the
whole Qur’ân; or its ten chapters, or even one chap­ter. But, according
to them, this inability of men was not based on the fact that the
Qur'ânic speech in itself was beyond the human power. The real reason
was that Allâh, by His predominant will and decree, has turned away and
dissuaded would-be adver­saries from bringing its like. Allâh has done
so to preserve and protect the sanctity of the prophethood.

This theory was totally wrong. This explanation is not in conformity
with the clear import of the challenging verses. Allâh says for example:
Or, do they say: "He has forged it?" Say: "Then bring ten chapters like
it forged and call upon whom you can besides Allâh, if you are truthful.
"But if they do not answer you, then know that it is revealed by Allâh's
knowledge and that there is no god but He; will you then submit?
(11:13-14). Ponder on the sentences, "then know that it is revealed by
Allâh's knowledge". The challenge was meant to prove that the Qur'ân was
a revelation; that it was not a speech forged by the Apostle; and that
it was revealed by Allâh's knowledge and not by the Satans. The same
theme is found in the following verses:

Or, do they say: "He has forged it." Nay! they do not believe. Then let
them bring a talk like it if they are truthful. (52:33-34). And the
Satans have not come down with it; and it behooves them not, and they
have not the power to do (it). Most surely they are far removed from the
hearing (of it) (26:210-212). On the other hand, this theory of "turning
away" implies that the reality of the Qur’ân's miracle was not in its
being a revelation from Allâh; the miracle was that Allâh pre­vented the
people from bringing a like of it. Again look at the verse: Or, do they
say: "He has forged it?" Say: "Then bring a chapter like this and call
whom you can besides Allâh, if you are truthful." Nay, they have
rejected that of which they have no comprehensive knowledge, and its
final interpretation has not yet come to them . . . (10:38-39). This
verse clearly says that what made them helpless before the Qur’ân, what
made it impossible for them to bring a like of even one of its chapters,
was the fact that it has a final interpretation whose knowledge is
reserved for Allâh - a knowledge which they lacked. It is this inherent
quality of the Qur’ân which vanquished the adversaries. It was not that
they had ability to bring its like but Allâh pre­vented them from doing
so. Then, there is the verse: Do they not then meditate on the Qur'ân?
And if it were from any other than Allâh, they would have found in it
many a discrepancy (4:82). It shows that the miracle is in the inherent
quality of the Qur’ân that it was free from discrepancy in its words and
mean­ings - because it is a quality which is not within the power of any
creature - not that there was some discrepancy in this Book, but Allâh
prevented people from finding it out.

All these Qur’ânic declarations prove that the theory of as-sarf has no
leg to stand, and one should not take it seriously.

**Now we come to the objections mentioned earlier**

It is a fallacious argument that as the language is a product of human
ingenuity, it can never reach a level which would be beyond the grasp or
ability of human beings; language, being a product, cannot be more
powerful than its producer. The fallacy lies in the fact that what has
been invented by man is simple words for particular meanings. But this
congruity of the words with their meanings does not teach the man how to
arrange those words, how to plan, draft and deliver a talk in the best
possible way - in a way that the talk reflects the beauty of the meaning
as it is in the mind, and the meaning in its turn becomes a mirror of
the reality, remains in complete agreement with the fact. It requires a
dexterity in the art of eloquence, an adroitness in elocution; also it
depends on sharp intelligence and comprehensive knowledge so that the
speaker may be fully cognizant of all as­pects of the subject matter. It
is this skill and knowledge that differs from man to man, and creates
difference between talk and talk in their respective perfection and
beauty.

So, there are three aspects of a human talk; Knowledge of language - a
man may be having the most comprehensive know­ledge of the words of a
language, without being able to speak it; elocutionary skill - a man may
be the most accomplished orator, without being cognizant of material and
spiritual realities; Know­ledge of realities - a man may be the most
learned scientist or theologian without having the ability to express
his views and meanings intelligibly. These three factors may be found
separately (as mentioned above) and may also combine together in some
people. And on them depend the beauty and the eloquence of a speech.

The first factor - single words for their meanings - has been invented
by social instinct of man. But the remaining two depend on intellectual
refinement and delicate discernment.

Human perception, intelligence and discernment is limited and
restricted. We cannot comprehend all the details of an event, all
concomitants of a fact. As a result, we cannot be sure of being right at
any time. Furthermore, we are gradually moving from deficiency to
perfection, and so is our perception and discern­ment. Look at any
spellbinding orator or enchanting poet; com­pare his earlier work with
his latest and you will see the difference.

In this background, let us look at human speech - any human speech.
First, we cannot be sure that it is free from errors of fact and
judgement, because, as mentioned above, no speaker can have
comprehensive knowledge of all the details and con­comitants of an
event. Second, it will not be on the same level with speaker's former or
later speech. Not only that: Even in the same speech the beginning will
surely be on a level different from that of the end, although we,
probably, will not be able to discern it because of the minuteness of
difference.

Now, when we find a decisive speech, based on comprehen­sive knowledge,
and free from all types of discrepancy, we will have to admit that it is
not the work of a mortal man. This reality has been described in the
following verses: Do they not then meditate on the Qur'ân? And if it
were from any other than Allâhhhh, they would have found in it many a
discrepancy (4:82); (I swear) by the heaven endued with rotation, and by
the earth splitting (with plants etc.), most surely it is a decisive
word, and it is not a jest (86:11-14). Note the adjectives used for the
heaven and the earth - they point to the constant changes occur­ring
therein, because the oath is about a Book which is free from change and
difference, inasmuch as it is based on an unchange­able and lasting
reality, that is, its "interpretation". (It is a Qur’ânic terminology
that will be explained in Ch. 3.) Also, Allâh says: Nay! it is a
glorious Qur’ân, in a guarded tablet (85: 21-22) ; (I swear) by the Book
that makes manifest (the truth); surely We have made it an Arabic Qur'ân
so that you may under­stand. And surely it is in the original of the
Book with Us, truly elevated, full of wisdom (43:2 -4) ; But nay! (I
swear) by the falling of stars; and most certainly it is a great oath if
you only knew; most surely it is an honoured Qur'ân, in a book that is
hidden; none do touch it save the purified ones. A revelation by the
Lord of the worlds (56:75 -80).These and other similar verses show that
the Qur’ân is based on established realities that do not change, that
are never altered. And, therefore, the Qur’ân itself is safe from
change, alteration and discrepancy.

To come back to the main objection: Accepted that language has been
made by men. But it does not mean that there cannot be found a piece of
literature that is beyond the reach of the very men who made the
language. Otherwise, we would have to say that a sword-maker must be the
bravest of all the swordsmen, the inventor of chess or lute must be the
most accomplished chess-master or lutanist!

The perfect eloquence demands that, first, the word should be in
complete harmony with the intended meaning, and, second, the conveyed
meaning must be in accordance with the established fact. How the words
fit the meanings? The structural sequence of the words and their parts
should perfectly agree with the natural order of the intended meaning
and its parts - bringing the man-made language and sentences in total
agreement with the nature. (See for details Dalâ'ilu '1-ijâz of
ash-Shaykh \`Abdu '1-Qâhir al-Jurjânî.) As for the meaning, it must be
correct and true, based on a real fact existing outside our
imagination - and that fact should be of permanent value, unchangeable
and un­alterable. The first quality (the agreement of the word with
meaning) depends on this basic quality of the meaning. A very eloquent
sweet-sounding jocular speech cannot stand before a serious talk; nor
can an eloquent, serious speech - if it is based on wrong premises - be
equal to a talk that reflects true facts and comprehensive wisdom.

A speech attains the highest standard of eloquence when its words are
sweet, its style free-flowing, its meaning fitting the occasion and its
conveyed proposition based on true facts.

Such a talk, based as it is on reality, can never differ with other
realities, can never disagree with other truths. Truth and reality is a
non-divisible entity. Truth cannot refute another truth; reality cannot
oppose another reality. Lie, on the other hand, may be in opposition to
another lie as it surely is against the truth. Ponder on the verse: . .
. and what is there after the truth but error (10:32). Note that truth
is singular, there is no division in it. Again Allâh says: . . . and
follow not (other) ways, for they will scatter you away from His ways .
. . (6:153). Lie has many ways, it is not only disunited but also
disuniting.

Obviously, there can be no difference whatsoever between one truth and
the other; instead, there shall be total union and unison between them -
one truth will lead to the other, one reality will guide to the other;
thus, one part of the Qur’ân con­firms the others, one sentence
testifies for the others.

It is a wonderful quality of the Qur’ân. Take any verse; it is clear in
its meaning; add to it another relevant verse equally clear; and you
will find them together pointing to a new reality that was not shown by
either verse separately: then put them side by side with a third
relevant verse, and you will gain fresh insight into new sublime
realities. It is a unique quality of the Qur'ân, and you will see many
examples of this special character­istic in this book. Unfortunately the
exegetes had so far neglected this method. Had they followed this way
since the early days, they would have discovered by now so much of its
hidden treasures.

This lengthy discourse was necessary to show that the two objections
laid down against the Qur’ânic miracle of eloquence were baseless.
Miraculous eloquence is not based on words alone. Therefore, it is out
of place to say that as it is man who had made the language, how can any
speech be above the reach of the man himself? Also, there is no room for
the question that as only one out of many possible compositions can be
the highest, how is it possible to express one idea in different ways,
and then to claim that all were of miraculous standard? Our foregoing
explanation has made it clear that the miracle of eloquence depends on
mean­ing - on its agreement with sublime unchangeable reality and on its
conformity with the words.


