(1998-2002)
===========

Section I. Falsafa

a. Collective Works

*An Anthology of Philosophy in Persia* , vol. I, ed. by Seyyed Hossein
Nasr with Mehdi Aminrazavi. New York & Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1999, xxx-434 pp., ISBN 0-19-512699-8 [includes translations of passages
from al-Fârâbî, al-'Âmirî, al-Sijistânî,

Avicenna, Miskawayh, Bahmanyâr, al-Râzî, al-Bîrûnî; only new
translations will be detailed below].

*Aristotele eAlessandro di Afrodisia nella tradizione araba. Atti del
Colloquio* La ricezione arabe ed ebraica della filosofia e della scienza
greche, Padova, 14-15 maggio 1999, ed. by Cristina D'Ancona & Giuseppe
Serra. (Subsidia Mediaevalia Patavina, 3). Padua: Il Poligrafo, 2002,
334 pp., ISBN 88-7115-220-4.

*Aristotle's Animals in the Middle Ages and Renaissance* , ed. by Carlos
Steel, Guy Guldentops & Pieter Beullens (Mediaevalia Lovaniensia, I,
XXVII). Louvain: Leuven University Press, 1999, 408 pp., ISBN
90-6186-973-0.

*Aspects of Avicenna* , ed. by Robert Wisnovsky. Princeton: Markus
Wiener, 2001, xiii-182 pp., ISBN 1-55876-251-5.

Averroes and the Aristotelian Tradition: Sources, Constitution and
Reception of the Philosophy of Ibn Rushd (1126-1198). Proceedings of the
Fourth Symposium Averroicum (Cologne, 1996), ed. by Gerhard Endress &
Jan A. Aertsen with Klaus Braun (Islamic Philosophy, Theology, and
Science, Texts and Studies, XXXI). Leiden: Brill, 1999, x-441 pp., ISBN
90-04-11308-8.

*Avicenna and his Heritage. Acts of the International Colloquium,
Leuven-Louvain-la-Neuve September 8-September 11, 1999* , ed. by Jules
Janssens & Daniel De Smet (Ancient and Medieval Philosophy, De
Wulf-Mansion Centre, I, XXVIII). Louvain: Leuven University Press, 2002,
xiv-341 pp., ISBN 90-5867-209-3.

Le Commentaire entre tradition et innovation. Actes du Colloque
International de l'Institut des Traditions Textuelles (Paris et
Villejuif, 22-25 septembre 1999), ed. by Marie-Odile Goulet-Cazé with
Tiziano Dorandi, Richard Goulet, Henri Hugonnard-Roche, Alain Le
Boulluec & Ezio Oranto (Bibliothèque d'Histoire de la Philosophie).
Paris: Vrin, 2000, 608 pp., ISBN 2-7116-1445-X.

*A Companion to World Philosophies* , ed. by Eliot Deutsch & Ron
Bontekoe (Blackwell Companions to Philosophy). Oxford: Blackwell, 1997,
hardcover, ISBN 0-631-19871-7 & 1999, pb., ISBN 0-631-21327-9.

L'Elaboration du vocabulaire philosophique au moyen âge. Actes du
Colloque International de Louvain-la-Neuve et Leuven 12-14 septembre
1998, ed. by Jacqueline Hamesse & Carlos Steel (Rencontres de
Philosophie Médiévale, 8). Turnhout: Brepols, 2000, xii-566pp., ISBN
2-503-51117-1.

*Journées d'études Avicenne, Marrakech, 25-26 septembre 1998* .
Marrakech: Publications du Groupe d'Études Ibn Sînâ, 1999, xii-166 pp.,
ISBN 9981-9938-3-2.

*Medieval Iberia: Readings from Christian, Muslim, and Jewish Sources* ,
ed. by Olivia Remie Constable. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania
Press, 1997, xxviii-426 pp., ISBN cloth 0-8122-3333-6, pb.
0-8122-1569-9.

Philosophy and Arts in the Islamic World. Proceedings of the Eighteenth
Congress of the Union Européene des Arabisants et Islamisants held at
the Katholieke Universiteit Leuven (September 3-September 9, 1996), ed.
by U. Vermeulen & D. De Smet (Orientalia Lovaniensia Analecta, 87).
Louvain: Peeters, 1998, x-332 pp., ISBN 90-6831-977-9.

*La* Rhétorique*d'Aristote: Traditions et commentaires de l'Antiquité au
XVIIe siècle* , ed. by Gilbert Dahan & Irène Rosier-Catach (Tradition de
la Pensée Classique). Paris: Vrin, 1998, 356 pp., ISBN 2-7116-1307-

*Théories de la phrase et de la proposition de Platon à Averroès* , ed.
by Philippe Büttgen, Stéphane Diebler & Marwan Rashed (Etudes de
Littérature Ancienne, 10). Paris: Editions Ens rue d'Ulm, 1999, x-336
pp., ISBN 2-7288-0252-1.

Les Traducteurs au travail: leurs manuscrits et leurs méthodes. Actes du
Colloque International (Erice, 30 septembre-6 octobre 1999), ed. by
Jacqueline Hamesse (Fédération Internationale des Instituts d'Etudes
Médiévales, Textes et Etudes du Moyen Age, 18). Turnhout: Brepols, 2001,
xvi-546 pp., ISBN 2-503-51219-4.

b. Special Issues of Journals

*Arabic Sciences and Philosophy* , 10, n.2 (2000) focuses on Avicenna.

Medieval Arabic Philosophy and the West, ed. by Thérèse Bonin, Topoi: An
International Review of Philosophy, 19, n. 1 (2000): 1-75.

Medieval Islamic Thought, ed. by Thérèse-Anne Druart, American Catholic
Philosophical Quarterly, 73, n. 1 (Winter 1999): 1-230.

c. Bibliographies and Chronicles

Daiber, Hans,*Bibliography of Islamic Philosophy, Vol. I: Alphabetical
List of Publications; Vol. II: Index of Names, Terms & Topics* (Handbuch
der Orientalistik, Erste Abteilung: Der Nahe und Mittlere Osten, 43).
Leiden: Brill, 1999, lviii-974 pp. & 548 pp., ISBN Set 90-04-11347-9.

Druart, Thérèse-Anne, "Medieval Islamic Philosophy and Theology
Bibliographical Guide (1996-1998),"*MIDEO* , 24 (2000) [in fact 2001]:
381-414.

Janssens, Jules, An Annotated Bibliography on Ibn Sînâ: First Supplement
(1990-1994), see Avicenna.

Urvoy, Dominique, "Bulletin de philosophie arabe et islamique,"*Revue
Thomiste* . 102 (2002):107-24.

-----, "Chronique de philosophie arabe et islamique,"*Revue Thomiste* ,
100 (2000): 96-115.

-----, "Autour d'Averroès: Chronique de philosophie arabe et
islamique,"*Revue Thomiste* , 98 (1998): 660-74.

-----, "Chronique de philosophie arabe et islamique,"*Revue Thomiste* ,
97 (1997): 375-90.

-----, "Chronique de philosophei arabe et islamique,"*Revue Thomiste* ,
96 (1996): 129-46.

d. Greek and Syriac Sources

*Aristotle's* Meteorology*in the Arabico-Latin Tradition: A Critical
Edition of the Texts [Arabic & Latin]* by Peter L. Schoonheim
(Aristoteles Semitico-Latinus, 12). Leiden: Brill, 2000, l-209 pp., ISBN
90-04-11760-1.

Thémistius,*Paraphrase de la* Métaphysique*d'Aristote (livre Lambda)* ,
transl. from Hebrew & Arabic with Notes and Intro. by Rémi Brague
(Tradition de la Pensée classique). Paris: Vrin, 1999, 175 pp., ISBN
2-7116-1411-5.

Adamson, Peter, "Aristotelianism and the Soul in the Arabic
Plotinus,"*Journal of the History of Ideas* , 62 (2001): 211-32.

-----, "Two Early Arabic Doxographies on the Soul: al-Kindî and the
"Theology of Aristotle","*The Modern Schoolman* , 77 (2000): 105-25.

Ali, Salah Salim, "Arabic Reference to Plato's Lost Atlantis,"*The
Islamic Quarterly* , 43 (1999): 259-78.

Baffioni, Carmela, "Une citazione di*De Interpretatione* , 9 in Abû
Ma'shar?," in*Aristotele e Alessandro* , pp. 113-32.

Brock, Sebastian P., "Two Letters of the Patriarch Timothy from the late
Eighth Century on Translations from Greek,"*Arabic Sciences and
Philosophy* , 9 (1999): 233-46 [includes translation of the letters].

Carusi, Paola, "Filosofia greca e letteratura nel*Mâ' al-waraqî* di Ibn
Umail al-Tamîmî (X secolo)," in*Aristotele e Alessandro* , pp. 233-56.

Casari, Mario,*Alessandro e Utopia nei romanzi persiani medievali*
(Università di Roma "La Sapienza", Dipartimento di Studi Orientali,
Supplemento n.1 alla Rivista degli Studi Orientali, vol. LXXII). Roma:
Bardi, 1999, 87 pp.

D'Ancona Costa, Cristina, "Commenting on Aristotle: From Late Antiquity
to the Arab Aristotelianism," in*Der Kommentar in Antike und
Mittelalter: Beiträge zu einer Erforschung* , ed. by Wilhelm Geerlings &
Christian Schulze (Leiden: Brill, 2002), pp. 201-51.

-----, "Pseudo-*Theology of Aristotle* , Chapter I: Structure and
Composition,"*Oriens* 36 (2001): 78-112.

-----, "Porphyry, Universal Soul and the Arabic Plotinus,"*Arabic
Sciences and Philosophy* , 9 (1999): 47-88.

-----, "Le*Livre des Causes* : structure, antécédents, histoire
littéraire,"*Annuaire EPHE, Section sciences religieuses* , 106
(1997-1998): 423-33.

Endress, Gerhard, "Alexander Arabus on the First Cause. Aristotle's
First Mover in an Arabic Treatise attributed to Alexander of
Aphrodisias," in*Aristotele e Alessandro* , pp. 19-74 [includes
edition].

Fattal, Michel, "Postérité médiévale arabe du*logos* plotinien dans la
pseudo-*Théologie d'Aristote* ," in*Etudes sur Plotin* , ed. by Michel
Fattal (Paris: L'Harmattan, 2000), pp. 217-52.

Fazzo, Silvia, "Alessandro di Afrodisia sulle 'contrarietà tangibili'
(*De Gen. Corr. II 2* ): fonti greche e arabe a confronto,"
in*Aristotele e Alessandro* , pp. 151-89.

Gannagé, Emma, "Matière et éléments dans le commentaire d'Alexandre
d'Aphrodise*In De Generatione et corruptione* ," in*Aristotele e
Alessandro* , pp. 133-49.

Geoffroy, Marc, "La tradition arabe du Περι νο? d'Alexandre d'Aphrodise
et les origines de la théorie farabienne des quatre degrés de
l'intellect," in*Aristotele e Alessandro* , pp. 191-231.

Genequand, Charles,*Alexander of Aphrodisias on the Cosmos* (Islamic
Philosophy, Theology and Science, Texts and Studies, 44)\> Leiden:
Brill, 2001, viii-187 pp., ISBN 90-04-11963-9 [includes Arabic edition
and English translation].

Gutas, Dimitri,*Greek Philosophers in the Arabic Tradition* (Variorum
Collected Studies: CS698). Aldershot, Hampshire: Ashgate, 2000, xii-322
pp., ISBN 0-86078-837-7 [includes Pre-Plotinian Philosophy in Arabic
(Other than Platonism and Aristotelism): A Review of the Sources (1994);
Sayings by Diogenes Preserved in Arabic (1993); Adrastus of Aphrodisias,
(Pseudo-) Cebes, Democrates 'Gnomicus', and Diogenes the Cynic in the
Arabic Sources (1994); Plato's*Symposium* in the Arabic Tradition
(1988); Galen's*Synopsis* of Plato's*Laws* and Fârâbî's*Talhîs* (1997);
The Spurious and the Authentic in the Arabic Lives of Aristotle (1986);
The Life, Works, and Sayings of Theophrastus in the Arabic Tradition
(1985); Eudemus in the Arabic Tradition (2001); Paul the Persian on the
Classification of the Parts of Aristotle's Philosophy: A Milestone
between Alexandria and Baghdad (1983); The Starting Point of
Philosophical Studies in Alexandrian and Arabic Aristotelianism (1985);
Philoponus and Avicenna on the Separability of the Intellect: A Case of
Orhtodox Christian-Muslim Agreement (1986); The Malady of Love, in
collaboration with Heinrich Biesterfeldt (1984)].

-----, "Translations from Greek and Syriac" in the entry "tardjama"
of*Encyclopaedia of Islam* , 2nd ed., vol. X (leiden: Brill, 1998), pp.
225-31.

Hasnawi, Ahmed, "Topic and Analysis: The Arabic Tradition," in*Whose
Aristotle? Whose Aristotelianism?* , ed. by R.W. Sharples (UCL Keeling
Series in Ancient Philosophy). Aldershot: Ashgate, 2001, pp. 28-62, ISBN
0-7546-1362-3.

Hugonnard-Roche, Henri, "Les traductions du syriaque," in*Les
Traducteurs* , pp. 19-49.

-----, "Le traité de logique de Paul le Persan: une interprétation
tardo-antique de la logique aristotélicienne en syriaque,"*Documenti e
Studi* , 11 (2000): 59-82.

-----, "La théorie de la proposition selon Proba, un témoin syriaque de
la tradition grecque (Vie siècle)," in*Théories de la phrase* , pp.
191-208.

Ivry, Alfred, "The Arabic Text of Aristotle's*De anima* and its
Translator,"*Oriens* , 36 (2001): 59-77.

Janssens, Jules, "L'Avicenne latin: un témoin (indirect) des
commentateurs (Alexandre d'Aphrodise – Thémistius – Jean Philopon),"
in*Tradition et Traduction. Les textes philosophiques et scientifiques
grecs au moyen âge latin. Hommage à Fernand Bossier* , ed. by Rita
Beyers, Jozef Brams, Dirk Sacré, Koenraad Verrycken (Louvain: Leuven
University Press, 1999), pp. 89-105.

Joosse, N.P., "Bar Hebraeus'*Butyrum Sapientiae* . A Description of the
Extant Manuscripts," *Le Muséon* , 112 (1999): 417-58.

Kassim, Husain, "Aristotle and Aristotelianism in Medieval Muslim,
Jewish, and Christian Philosophy. Lanham: Austin & Winfield, 2000,
ii-219 pp., ISBN 1-57292-046-7 (cloth); 1-57292-045-9 (pb).

Kruk, Remke, "Timotheus of Gaza's*On Animals* in the Arabic
Tradition,"*Le Muséon* , 114 (2001): 355-87.

-----, "*On Animals* : Excerpts of Aristotle and Ibn Sînâ in
Marwazî's*Tabâ'i' al-Hayawân* ," in*Aristotle's Animals* , pp. 96-125.

Larcher, Pierre, "Eléments de rhétorique aristotélicienne dans la
tradition arabe hors la*Falsafa* ," in*La* Rhétorique, pp. 241-56.

Lettinck, Paul;*Aristotle's* Meteorology*and its Reception in the Arab
World with an Edition and Translation of Ibn Suwâr's* Treatise on
Meteorological Phenomena*and Ibn Bâjja's* Commentary on the Meteorology
(Arsitoteles Semitico-Latinus, 10). Leiden: Brill, 1999, x-505pp., ISBN
90-04-10933-1.

Martini, Cecilia, "La tradizione araba della*Metafisica* di Aristotele.
Libri α – A," in*Aristotele e Alessandro* , pp. 75-112.

-----, "The Arabic Version of the Book Alpha Meizon of Aristotle's
Metaphysics and the Testimony of the Ms. Bibl. Apostolica Vaticana, Ott.
Lat. 2048," in*Les Traducteurs* , pp. 173-206.

Rashed, Marwan, "La classification des lignes simples selon Proclus et
sa transmission au monde islamique," in*Aristotele e Alessandro* , pp.
257-79.

Rashed, Roshdi, "Al-Qûhî*vs* . Aristotle: On Motion,"*Arabic Sciences
and Philosophy* , 9 (1999): 7-24.

Saliba, George, "Competition and the Transmission of the Foreign
Sciences: Hunayn at the Abbasid Court,"*Bulletin of the Royal Institute
for Inter-Faith Studies* , 2, n. 2 (2000): 85-101.

Strohmaier, Gotthard, "Galen of Pergamon in Arabic and the Editorial
Program of the Corpus Medicorum Graecorum," in*Graeco-Arabica: Fourth
International Congress on Graeco-Oriental and Graeco-African Studies* ,
vol. V (Athens: 1993): 225-31.

e. Latin and Hebrew Translations and Influences

Aslanov, Cyril, "L'aristotélisme médiéval au service du commentaire
littéral: Le cas de Joseph Caspi,"*Revue des Etudes juives* , 161
(2002): 123-37.

Bonin, Thérèse, "The Emanative Psychology of Albertus Magnus,"*Topoi* ,
19 (2000): 45-57.

Burnett, Charles, "The Strategy of Revision in the Arabic-Latin
Translations from Toledo," in*Les Traducteurs* , pp. 57-113.

-----, "Translating from Arabic into Latin in the Middle Ages: Theory,
Practice, and Criticisn," in*Editer, traduire, interpréter; essais de
méthodologie philosophique* , ed. by Steve G. Lofts & Philipp W.
Rosemann (Philosophes médiévaux, 36). Louvain-la-Neuve: Editions de
l'Institut Supérieur de Philosophie & Louvain: Peeters, 1997, pp. 55-78,
ISBN 90-6831-354-X.

D'Ancona, Cristina, "L'influence du vocabulaire arabe:*causa prima est
esse tantum* ," in*L'Elaboration* , pp. 51-97.

Federici Vecsovini, Graziella, "La versio latina degli*Excerpta de
secretis Albumasar* di Sadan. Una edizione,"*Archives d'Histoire
doctrinale et littéraire du Moyen Age* , 65 (1998): 273-330.

Fontaine, Resianne, "The Study of Medieval Hebrew Philosophical
Terminology in the Twentieth Century: Klatzkin's*Thesaurus* and Later
Studies,"*Jewish Studies Quarterly* , 7 (2000): 160-81.

Harvey, Steven, "On the Nature and Extent of Jewish Averroism:
Renan's*Averroès et l'averroïsme* Revisited,"*Jewish Studies Quarterly*
, 7 (2000): 99-119.

Hissette, Roland, "Des traductions doubles et Guillaume de Luna ou de
Lunis," in*Les Traducteurs* , pp. 257-73.

-----, "Guillaume de Luna a-t-il traduit Abû Kâmil?," in*Averroes and
the Aristotelian Tradition* , pp. 300-15.

Hünemörder, Christian, "Der Text des Michael Scotus um die Mitte des 13.
Jahrhunderts und Thomas Cantimpratensis III," in*Aristotle's Animals* ,
pp. 238-48.

Ivry, Alfred L., "Salomon Munk and the Mélanges de Philosophie juive et
arabe," Jewish Studies Quarterly, 7 (2000): 120-26.

Jacquart, Danielle, "Les manuscrits des traductions de Gérard de
Crémone: quelques caractéristiques formelles," in*Les Traducteurs* , pp.
207-20.

Jolivet, Jean,*La Théologie et les arabes* (Initiations au Moyen Age).
Paris: Cerf, 2002, 121pp. ISBN 2-204-06906-X [influence of Arabic
Metaphysics on Western Christian Theologians].

Köhler, Theodor Wolfram, "Die wissenschaftstheoretische und inhaltliche
Bedeutung der Rezeption von*De animalibus* für den
philosophisch-anthropologischen Diskurs im 13. Jahrhundert,"
in*Aristotle's Animals* , pp. 249-74.

Langermann, Y. Tzvi, "A New Hebrew Passage from the*Theology of
Aristotle* and its Significance,"*Arabic Sciences and Philosophy* , 9
(1999): 247-59 [includes hebrew edition].

Lohr, Charles, "The Arabic Background to Ramon Lull's*Liber chaos* 9ca.
1285),"*Traditio* , 55 (2000): 159-70.

Manekin, Charles H., "Steinschneider's*Die hebraeischen Übersetzungen
des Mittelalters* . From Reference Work to Digitalized Database,"*Jewish
Studies Quarterly* , 7 (2000): 141-59.

Martínez Gázquez, José, "Observaciones a la traduccíon latina del Corán
(Qur'an) de Robert de Ketene," in*Les Traducteurs* , pp. 115-27.

Pick, Lucy K., "Michael Scotin Toledo:*Natura naturans* and the
Hierarchy of Being,"*Traditio* , 53 (1998), 93-116.

Rucquoi, Adeline, "Gundisalvus ou Dominicus Gundisalvi,"*Bulletin de
Philosophie médiévale* , 41 (1999): 85-106.

Sarnowsky, Jürgen, "Place and Space in Albert of Saxony's Commentaries
on the*Physics* ,"*Arabic Sciences and Philosophy* , 9 (1999): 25-45.

Serra, Giuseppe, "Note in Margine a M. Zonta, Le traduzioni di Zerahya
Gracian e la versione ebraica del*De Generatione et corruptione* ,"
in*Aristotele e Alessandro* , pp. 319-23.

-----, "Da commedia e tragedia a punti e inchiostro. Ar., Gen. Corr.,
315b 14-15, tradotto dell'arabo in latino e in ebraico," in*Les
Traducteurs* , pp. 221-29.

Simon, Robert, "Remarks on Ramon Lull's Relation to Islam,"*Acta
Orientalia* , 51 (1998): 21-29.

Van Oppenraay, Aafke M.I., "Michael Scot's Arabic-Latin Translation of
Aristotle's*Books on Animals* . Some Remarks Concerning the Relation
Between the Translation and Its Arabic and Greek Sources,"
in*Aristotle's Animals* , pp. 31-43.

-----, "Michael Scot's Latin Translation of Avicenna's Treatise on
Animals. Some Preliminary Remarks on the Future Edition," in*Tradition
et Traduction* , pp. 107-14, see above.

Wippel, John, "Thomas Aquinas, Siger of Brabant, and Their Use of
Avicenna in Clarifying the Subject of Metaphysics," in*The Proceedings
of the Twentieth World Congress of Philosophy, vol. 2: Metaphysics* ,
ed. by Tom Rockmore (Bowling Green: Philosophy Documentation Center,
1999), pp. 15-26.

Zonta, Mauro, "Le traduzioni di Zerahyah Gracian e la versione ebraica
del*De Generatione et corruptione* ," in*Aristotele e Alessandro* , pp.
299-318.

-----, "Sulla tradizione ebraica di alcuni commenti arabi alla
Metafisica (Abû l-Fara? Ibn al-?ayyib e Averroè),"*Documenti e Studi* ,
12 (2001): 155-77.

-----, "The Relationship of European Jewish Philosophy to Islamic and
Christian Philosophies in the Late Middle Ages,"*Jewish Studies
Quarterly* , 7 (2000): 127-40.

-----, "Medieval Hebrew Translations:ethods and Textual Problems,"
in*Les Traducteurs* , pp. 129-42.

-----, "The Zoological Writings in the Hebrew Tradition. The Hebrew
Approach to Aristotle's Zoological Writings and their Ancient and
Medieval Commentators in the Middle Ages," in*Aristotle's Animals* , pp.
44-68.

-----, "Linee del pensiero islamico nella storia della filosofia ebraica
medievale (parte prima),"*Annali (Istituto Universitario Orientale)* ,
57 (1997): 101-44.

f. General Studies

Arkoun, Mohammed, "Peut-on parler de l'humanisme en contexte
islamique?,"*Israel Oriental Studies* , XIX (1999): 11-22.

Black, Antony,*The History of Islamic Political Thought From the Prophet
to the Present* . New York: Routledge, 2001, xviii-377 pp., ISBN
0-415-93242-4 (hb) & 0-415-93243-2 (pb).

Black, Deborah L., "Imagination and Estimation: Arabic Paradigms and
Western Transformations,"*Topoi* , 19 (2000): 59-75.

-----, "Aesthetics in Islamic Philosophy," in*Routledge Encyclopedia of
Philosophy* , vol. V.1 (London: Routledge, 1998), pp. 75-79.

-----, "Logic in Islamic Philosophy," in*Routledge Encyclopedia of
Philosophy* , vol. V.5 (1998): pp. 706-13.

-----, "Traditions and Transformations in the Medieval Approach to
Rhetoric and Related Linguistic Arts," in L'enseignement de la
philosophie au XIIIe siècle. Autour du "Guide de l'étudiant" du ms.
Ripoll 109. Actes du

Colloque International, ed. by Claude Lafleur with Joanne Carrier
(Studia Artistarum, 5) (Laval: 1997), pp. 233-54.

Carter, M.G., "Infinity and Lies in Medieval Islam," in*Philosophy and
the Arts* , pp. 233-42.

Deledalle, Gérard, "La philosophie à Carthage de l'Africa Vetus à
l'Ifriqiyya: Apulée, Augustin, Ibn Khaldûn,"*Les Cahiers de Tunisie* ,
49, n. 179 (1997): 87-102.

Druart, Thérèse-Anne, "Medieval Islamic Thought and the "What is x?"
Question,"*American Catholic Philosophical Quarterly* , 73 (Winter
1999): 1-8.

Endress, Gerhard, "Philosophische Ein-Band-Bibliotheken aus
Isfahan,"*Oriens* , 36 (2001): 10-58.

Fakhry, Majid, "Rationality in Islamic Philosophy," in*A Companion to
World Philosophies* , pp. 504-14.

-----, A Short Introduction to Islamic Philosophy, Theology and
Mysticism. Oxford: Oneworld, 1997, x-151 pp., ISBN 1-85168-134-5.

Fontaine, Resianne, "Between Scorching Heat and Freezing Cold: Medieval
Jewish Authors on the Inhabited and Uninhabited Parts of the
Earth,"*Arabic Sciences and Philosophy* , 10 (2000): 101-37
[independence of Averroes].

Gocer, Asli, "A Hypothesis Concerning the Character of Islamic
Art,"*Journal of the History of Ideas* , 60 (1999): 683-92.

Goodman, Lenn E.,*Jewish and Islamic Philosophy: Crosspollination in the
Classic Age* . New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1999,
xvi-256 pp., ISBN 0-8135-2760-0.

Griffel, Frank, Apostasie und Toleranz im Islam. Die Entwicklung zu
al-?azâlîs Urteil gegen die Philosophie und die Reaktionen der
Philosophen (Islamic Philosophy, Theology and Science, 40). Leiden:
Brill, 2000, xii-521 pp., ISBN 90-04-11566-8.

Gutas, Dimitri, "The Study of Arabic Philosophy in the Twentieth
Century: An Essay on the Historiography of Arabic Philosophy,"*British
Journal of Middle Eastern Studies* , 29 (2002): 5-25.

Hechaïmé, Camille, "Lecture sereine d'une biographie tempêtueuse. 'Abd
ar-Rahmân Badawî entre les outrances et les sophismes,"*al-Machriq* , 74
(2000): 397-415 [in Arabic].

Hosseini, Hamid, "Seeking the Roots of Adam Smith's Division of Labor in
Medieval Persia,"*History of Political Economy* , 30 (1998): 653-81.

Ivry, Alfred, "The Utilization of Allegory in Islamic Philosophy,"
in*Interpretation and Allegory: Antiquity to the Modern Period* , ed. by
Jon Whitman (Brill's Studies in Intellectual History, 101) (Leiden:
Brill, 2000), pp. 153-80.

Jolivet, Jean, "Le commentaire philosophique arabe," in*Le Commentaire*
, pp. 397-410.

Kochin, Michael S., "Weeds: Cultivating the Imagination in Medieval
Arabic Political Philosophy,"*Journal of the History of Ideas* , 60
(1999): 399-416.

Kukkonen, Taneli, "Plenitude, Possibility, and the Limits of Reason. A
Medieval Arabic debate on the Metaphysics of Nature,"*Journal of the
History of Ideas* , 61 (2000): 539-60.

Landolt, Hermann, "Henry Corbin, 1903-1978: Between Philosophy and
Orientalism,"*Journal of the American Oriental Society* , 119 (1999):
484-90.

Leaman, Oliver,*An Introduction to Classical Islamic Philosophy* , 2nd
ed. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002, xvi-253 pp., ISBN
0-521-79757-8 [1st ed. 1985].

-----, "Islamic Philosophy and the Attack on Logic,"*Topoi* , 19 (2000):
17-24.

-----,*A Brief Introduction to Islamic Philosophy* . Cambridge, UK:
Polity Press, 1999, xii-199 pp., ISBN 0-7456-1961-4.

Lomba Fuentes, Joaquín,*La idea de felicidad en el Aragón musulmán*
(Lección Inaugural del Curso Académico MMI-MMII). Saragossa: Universidad
de Zaragoza, 2001, 158 pp., no ISBN but D.L.:Z-2359-2001. [particularly
on Ibn Gabiral, Ibn Paqûda & Avempace].

-----, "El*Criticón* de Gracián y la tradición hispanomusulmana
anterior. Defensa de la unidad cultural,"*Boletín de la Fundación
Federico García Lorca* , 29-30 (2001): 193-206.

Marcotte, Roxanne, "An Attempt at Deconstruction of Islamic Thought: Ian
Netton and His "Semiotic Project","*The Islamic Quarterly* , 43, n. 2
(1999):89-99.

Nasr, Seyyed Hossein, "Islamic Aesthetics," in*A Companion to World
Philosophie* , pp. 448-59.

Netton, Ian,*Seek Knowledge: Thought and Travel in the Hosue of Islam* .
Richmond, Surrey: Curzon Press, 1996, 160 pp., ISBN 0-7007-0340-3
[includes "Foreign Influences and Recurring Ismâ'îlî Motifs in
the*Rasâ'il* of the Brethern of Purity,": 27-41; "The Neoplatonic
Substrate of Suhrawardî's Philosophy of Illumination:*Falsafa*
as*Tasawwuf* ,": 43-58; "The Breath of Felicity:*Adab, Ahwâl, Maqâmât*
and Abû Najîb al-Suhrawardî,": 71-91].

O'Sulliva, P., "The Comparison and Contrast of the Islamic Philosophy,
Ideology and Paradigms of Sayyid Qutb. Mawlana Abul A'la Mawdudi and
Fazlur Rahman,"*The Islamic Quarterly* , 42, n. 2 (1998): 99-124.

Puig Montada, Josep, "Reality and Divinity in Islamic Philosophy," in*A
Companion to World Philosophies* , pp. 460-71.

Rámon Guerrero, Rafael, "La religión por filósofos andalusíes," in*El
saber en al-Andalus: Textos y Estudios, III* , ed. by Fátima Roldán
Castro & Isabel Hervás Jávega (Sevilla: Universidad de Sevilla: 2001),
pp. 57-75.

-----, "El Lenguaje del ser: de Ibn Sina a Mulla Sadra,"*Convivium* , 14
(2001): 113-27.

-----, "Discurso filosófico y discurso místico. Divergencias,"*Anales
del Seminario de Historia de la Filosofía* , n. 17 (2000): 53-75.

Saliba, George, "Artisans and Mathematicians in Medieval Islam,"*Journal
of the American Oriental Society* , 119 (1999): 637-45.

Schöller, Marco, "Zum Begirff des "islamischen Humanismus","*Zeitschrift
der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft* , 151 (2001): 275-320.

Smirnov, Andrey, "Truth and Islamic Thought," in*A Companion to World
Philosophies* , pp. 437-47.

-----, "Causality and Islamic Thought," in*A Companion to World
Philosophies* , pp. 493-503.

Spinelli, Miguel, "Neoplatonismo e aristotelismo da filosofia árabe
medieval,"*Revista Portuguesa de Filosofia* , 55 (1999): 59-98.

Street, Tony, "Towards a History of Syllogistic After Avicenna: Notes on
Rescher's Studies in Arab Modal Logic,"*Journal of Islamic Studies* , 11
(2000): 209-28.

Tamer, Georges,*Islamische Philosophie und die Krise der Moderne: das
Verhältnis von Leo Strauss zu Alfarabi, Avicenna und Averroes* (Islamic
Philosophy, Theology and Science, Texts and Studies, 43). Leiden: Brill,
2001, xvii-345 pp., ISBN 90-04-12029-7.

Urvoy, Dominique & Marie-Thérèse, "Un aspect particulier de relation
entre*adab* et*falsafa* ,"*Israel Oriental Studies* , 11 (1999): 207-20.

Wahba, Mourad, "The Concept of the Good in Islamic Philosophy," in*A
Companion to World Philosophie* s*s* , pp. 484-92.

Walbridge, John, "Selfhood/Personhood in Islamic Philosophy," in*A
Companion to World Philosophies* , pp. 472-83.

Averroes

[Averroës]*The Book of the Decisive TreatiseDetermining the Connection
between the Law and Wisdom & Epistle Dedicatory* , transl. with Intro.
and Notes by Charles E. Butterworth (Islamic Translation Series). Provo,
Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 2001, xlii-63 + 42 Arabic pp.,
ISBN 0-8425-2479-7 [with Arabic facing].

[Averroès]*La Béatitude de l'âme* , Latin ed., annotated transl. by Marc
Geoffroy & Carlos Steel (Sic et Non). Paris: Vrin, 2001, 338 pp., ISBN
2-7116-1519-7 [ed. of*Averroys De animae beatitudine* &*Tractatus
Averoys De perfectione naturali secundum mentem philosophi* ].

[Averroès]*Commentaire Moyen sur le* De interpretatione, Intro. transl.
and notes by Ali Benmakhlouf & Stéphane Diebler (Sic et Non). Paris:
Vrin, 2000, 206 pp., ISBN 2-7116-1441-7.

[Averroès]*L'Islam et la raison. Anthologie de textes juridiques,
théologiques et polémiques* , transl. by Marc Geoffroy with a Foreward
by Alain de Libera (GF 1132). Paris: Flammarion, 2000, 225 pp., ISBN
2-08-071132-7 [*Livre du discours décisif, Dévoilement, L'Incohérence*
].

[Averroes]*Faith and Reason in Islam: Averroes' Exposition of Religious
Arguments* , transl. by Ibrahim Y. Najjar (Great Islamic Writings).
Oxford: Oneworld, 2001, xiv-146 pp., ISBN 1-85168-263-5 [transl. of
*al-Kashf* ].

Averroes and the Aristotelian Tradition, see above.

Endress, Gerhard, "A Bibliography of Editions and Contributions to the
Text," in*Averroes and the Aristotelian Tradition* , pp. 339-81.

Arnaldez, Roger,*Averroes: A Rationalist in Islam* , transl. by David
Streight. Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press, 2000, 158 pp.,
ISBN 0-268-02008-6.

Aouad, Maroun & Rashed, Marwan, "Commentateurs "satisfaisants" et "non
satisfaisants" de la*Rhétorique* selon Averroès," in*Averroes and the
Aristotelian Tradition* , pp. 83-124.

Bauloye, Laurence, "Le genre des substances dans la métaphysique
d'Averroès,"*Documenti e Studi* , 12 (2001): 143-53.

Benmakhlouf, Ali,*Averroès* (Figures du Savoir, 22). Paris: Les Belles
Lettres, 2000, 208 pp. ISBN 2-251-76028-8.

-----, "Averroès et les propositions indéfinies," in*Théories de la
phrase* , pp. 269-79.

Black, Deborah L., "Conjunction and the Identity of Knower and Known in
Averroes,"*American Catholic Philosophical Quarterly* , 73 (Winter
1999): 159-84.

Burnett, Charles, "The 'Sons of Averroes with the Emperor Frederick' and
the Transmission of the Philosophical Works by Ibn Rushd," in*Averroes
and the Aristotelian Tradition* , pp. 259-99.

Butterworth, Charles E., "A Propos du traité*al-Darûrî fî l-mantiq*
d'Averroès et les termes*tasdîq* et*tasawwur* qui y sont développés,"
in*Averroes and the Aristotelian Tradition* , pp. 163-71.

-----, "Averroes' Platonization of Aristotle's*Art of Rhetoric* , in*La*
Rhétorique, pp. 227-40.

de Libera Alain & Geoffroy, Marc, "Le philosophe barbu,"*Critique (Vies
de Philosophes)* , 627-628 (August-September 1999): 668-85 [a review
article of Urvoy, Dominique,*Averroès. Les ambitions d'un intellectuel
musulman* . Paris: Flammarion, 1998].

de Libera, Alain, "Averroïsme éthique et philosophie mystique: De la
félicité intellectuelle à la vie bienheureuse," in*Filosofia e teologia
nel trecento. Studi in ricordo di Eugenio Randi* (Textes et études du
moyen âge) (Louvain-la-Neuve: Fédération Internationale des Instituts
d'Etudes Médiévales, 1994), pp. 33-56.

Eichner, Heidrun, "Ibn Rushd's Middle Commentary and Alexander's
Commentary in their relationship to the Arab commentary tradition on
the*De Generatione et corruptione* ," in*Aristotele e Alessandro* , pp.
281-97.

Elamrani-Jamal, Abdelali,"La démonstration du signe (burhân al-dalîl)
selon Ibn Rushd (Averroès),"*Documenti e Studi* , 11 (2000): 113-31.

-----, "La proposition assertorique (*de inesse* ) selon Averroès,"
in*Théories de la phrase* , pp. 249-67.

El Ghannouchi, Abdelmajid, "Du syncrétisme philosophico-religieux
au*Fasl al-Maqâl* ,"*Les Cahiers de Tunisie* , 49, n. 178 (1997): 61-90.

-----, "Ibn Rochd ou la double vérité (Essai de résolution des questions
litigieuses de l'averroïsme),"*Les Cahiers de Tunisie* , 49, n. 172
(1996): 71-98.

Endress, Gerhard, "Le Projet d'Averroès," in*Averroes and the
Aristotelian Tradition* , pp. 3-31.

Fakhry, Majid,*Averroes (Ibn Rushd): His Life, Works, and Influence*
(Great Islamic Thinkers). Oxford: Oneworld, 2001, xvi-187 pp., ISBN
1-85168-269-4.

-----, "Averroës, Dante et la naissance de la laïcité
moderne,"*al-Machriq* , 74 (2000): 303-20 [in Arabic].

Fierro, Maribel, "The Legal Policies of the Almohad Caliphs and Ibn
Rushd's*Bidâyat al-Mujtahid* ,"*Journal of Islamic Studies* , 10 (1999):
226-48.

Freudenthal, Gad, "The Medieval Astrologization of Aristotle's Biology:
Averroes on the Role of the Celestial Bodies in the Generation of
Animate Beings,"*Arabic Sciences and Philosophy* , 12 (2002): 111-37.

Geoffroy, Marc, "L'almohadisme théologique d'Averroès (Ibn
Ru\_d),"*Archives d'Histoire doctrinale et littéraire du moyen âge* , 66
(1999): 9-47.

Glasner, Ruth, "Ibn Rushd's Theory of*Minima Naturalia* ,"*Arabic
Sciences and Philosophy* , 11 (2001): 9-26.

Gutas, Dimitri, "Averroes on Theophrastus, through Themistius,"
in*Averroes and the Aristotelian Tradition* , pp. 125-44.

Harvey, Steven, "Conspicuous by His Absence: Averroes' Place Today as an
Interpreter of Aristotle," in*Averroes and the Aristotelian Tradition,*
pp. 32-49.

Hissette, Roland, "Le vocabulaire philosophique des traductions
d'Averroès attribuées à Guillaume de Luna," in*L'Elaboration* , pp.
99-110.

Hugonnard-Roche, Henri, "La formulation logique de l'argumentation dans
les commentaires d'Averroès au*De Caelo* ," in*Le Commentaire* , pp.
387-95.

Hugonnard-Roche, Henri, "Averroès et la tradition des*Seconds
Analytiques* ," in*Averroes and the Aristotelian Tradition* , pp.
172-87.

Hyman, Arthur, "Averroes' Theory of the Intellect and the Ancient
Commentators," in*Averroes and the Aristotelian Tradition* , pp. 188-98.

Ivry, Alfred L., "Averroes' Three Commentaries on*De Anima* ,"
in*Averroes and the Aristotelian Tradition* , pp. 199-216.

Janssens, Jules, "Averroïstica,"*MIDEO* , 24 (2000): 415-22.

Jéhamy, Gérard, "D'Aristote à Averroès: Genèse et évolution d'une
terminologie," in*Averroes and the Aristotelian Tradition* , pp. 50-72.

Kukonen, Taneli, "Possible Worlds in the*Tahâfut al-tahâfut* : Averroes
on Plenitude and Possibility,"*Journal of the History of Philosophy* ,
38 (2000): 329-47.

Langhade, Jacques, "Foi et raison: le destin d'Averroès. Aspects
historiques et philosophiques,"*al-Machriq* , 72 (1998): 395-408 [in
Arabic].

Maiza Ozcoidi, Idoia,*La Concepción de la filosofía en Averroes.
Análisis crítico del Tahâfut al-tahâfut* (Al-Andalus, Textos y
Estudios). Madrid: Trotta, 2001, 446 pp., ISBN 84-8164-426-9.

Mc Aleer, Graham J., "The Presence of Averroes in the Natural Philosophy
of Robert Kilwarby,"*Archiv für Geschichte der Philosophie* , 81 (1999):
33-54.

Mesbahi, Mohamed, "Ibn Rushd critique d'Ibn Sinâ ou le retour à
Aristote," in*Averroes and the Aristotelian Tradition* , pp. 73-80.

Mohamed, Ismail, "Concept of Predestination in Islam and Christianity:
Special Reference to Averroes and Aquinas,"*The Islamic Quarterly* , 44
(2000): 393-413.

Peres-Estevez, Antonio, "Substantiality of Prime Matter in
Averroes,"*The Modern Schoolman* , 78 (2000): 53-70.

Pozzo, Riccardo, "*Res considerata* and*Modus considerandi rem* :
Averroes, Aquinas, Jacopo Zabarella, and Cornelius Martini on
Reduplication,"*Medioevo* , 24 (1998): 151-75.

Puig Montada, Josep, "Zur Bewegungsdefinition im VIII. Buch der Physik,"
in*Averroes and the Aristotelian Tradition* , pp. 145-59.

Rosemann, Philipp W., "Is Kant Doctrine on the*Bewusstsein überhaupt*
Averroistic?,"*American Catholic Philosophical Quarterly* , 73 (Winter
1999): 185-230.

Schmieja, Horst, "Urbanus Averroista und die Mittelalterlichen
Handschriften des Physikkommentars von Averroes,"*Bulletin de
Philosophie médiévale* , 42 (2000): 133-53.

-----, "*Secundum aliam translationem* —Ein Beitrag zur
arabisch-lateinischen Übersetzung des Grossen Physikkommentar von
Averroes," in*Averreos and the Aristotelian Tradition* , pp. 316-36.

Taylor, Richard C., "*Cogitatio, Cogitativus* and*Cogitare* : Remarks on
the Cogitative Power in Averroes," in*L'Elaboration* , pp. 111-46.

-----, "'Truth Does Not Contradict Teruth': Averroes and the Unity of
Truth,"*Topoi* , 19 (2000): 3-16.

-----, "Averroes' Epistemology and Its Critique by Aquinas," in*Medieval
Masters: Essays in Memory of Mgr. E.A. Synan* , ed. by R.E. Houser
(Thomistic Papers) (Houston, TX: Center for Thomistic Studies, 1999),
pp. 147-77.

-----, "Remarks on Cogitatio in Averroes' Commentarium Magnum in
Aristotelis De Anima Libros," in Averroes and the Aristotelian
Tradition, pp. 217-255.

-----, "Personal immortality in Averroes' Mature Philosophical
Psychology,"*Documenti e Studi* , 9 (1998): 87-110.

Avicenna

[Ibn Sînâ]*Lettre au Vizir Abû Sa'd* , ed. & transl. by Yahya Michot
(Sagesses musulmanes, 4). Beirut: Al-Bouraq, 2000, 130\*+61 & 61 pp. of
facing French and Arabic+63-186 pp., ISBN 2-84161-150-7 [includes also
an ed. & transl. of a brief letter on Divine Decree].

"Commentaire par Ibn Sînâ, de la sourate "Al-Ihlâs"," intro. and ed. by
'Abd-Allâh 'Abd-ar-Rahmân al-Hatîb,*al-Machriq* , 75 (2001): 383-433 &
76 (2002): 121-200.

[Avicenne]*Le Livre des directives et remarques (Kitâb al-'isharât wa
l-tanbîhât)* , transl. by A.-M. Goichon (Bibliothèque des textes
philosophiques). Paris: Vrin, 1999 [reprint of 1951 ed.].

"Mathématiques, ch. XII, Kitâbu' sh-shifâ'," [Treatise on Music] in
Rodolphe d'Erlanger,*La Musique arabe* , vol. II (Paris: Librairie
Orientaliste Paul Geuthner, 2001, pp. 102-210, ISBN 2-84306-070-2
[reprint of 1935]

"The Healing: On Theodicy and Providence, Metaphysics, IX," transl. by
Shams Inati in*An Anthology* , pp. 226-37 [ch. 6].

"The Healing: On Time, Physics," transl. by Yegane Shayegan in*An
Anthology* , pp. 241-50.

"The Logic of the Orientals," transl. by Seyyed Hossein Nasr, in*An
Anthology* , pp. 268-70 [partial, beginning].

"On the Stations of the Knowers," transl. by Shams Inati, in*An
Anthology* , pp. 251-59 [partial].

"Remarks and Admonitions," transl. by Shams Inati, in*An Anthology* ,
pp. 218-26 & pp. 237-41 [part III, partial].

"Treatise on Knowledge, Dedicated to Prince 'Alâ' al-Dawlah," transl. by
Thomas Gaskil, in*An Anthology* , pp. 198-218 [Met. 28-37 & Phys.
42-50].

McGinnis, Jon, "Ibn Sînâ on the Now: Text and Commentary,"*American
Catholic Philosophical Quarterly* , 73 (Winter 1999): 73-106
[translation from the*Shifâ', Physics* ].

Sabri, Tahani, "*Risâla fî l-'ishq* , Le traité sur l'amour d'Avicenne.
Traduction et Etude (2 ndpart)," *Revue des Etudes islamiques* , 61-62
(1993-19994), in fact 1998,: 175-218.

Janssens, Jules, An Annotated Bibliography on Ibn Sînâ: First Supplement
(1990-1994), see above.

Aspects of Avicenna, see above.

Avicenna and his Heritage, see above.

Journées d'études Avicenne, see above.

Aouad, Maroun, "Les prémisses rhétoriques selon les*I\_arât*
d'Avicenne," in*Théories de la phrase* , pp. 281-304.

Ayada, S., "Le modèle avicennien de la subjectivité,"*Revue des Sciences
philosophiques et théologiques* , 83 (1999): 491-526.

Bäck, Allan, "The Ontological Pentagon of Avicenna,"*Journal of
Neoplatonic Studies* , 7, n. 2 (1999): 87-109.

Benjelloun, Thérèse, "Connaissance, rupture, exil chez Ibn Sînâ,"
in*Journées d'études* , pp. 115-22.

Benmokhtar, Rachid, "Réflexions sur la transmission du savoir à partir
de la biographie d'Avicenne," in*Journées d'études* , pp. 11-20.

Bertolacci, Amos, "Albert the Great and the Preface of Avicenna's*Kitâb
al-Shifâ'* , in*Avicenna and his Heritage* , pp. 131-52.

-----, "From al-Kindî to al-Fârâbî: Avicenna's Progressive Knowledge of
Aristotle's*Metaphysics* according to his Autobiography,"*Arabic
Sciences and Philosophy* , 11 (2001): 257-95.

-----, "Le citazioni implicite testuali della Philosophia prima di
Avicenna nel Commento alla Metafisica di Alberto Magno: analisi
tipologica,"*Documenti e Studi* , 12 (2001): 179-274.

-----, "'Subtilius speculando'. Le citazioni della 'Philosophia prima'
di Avicenna nel Commento all 'Metafisica' di Alberto Magno,"*Documenti e
Studi* , 9 (1998): 261-339.

Black, Deborah L., "Mental Existence in Thomas Aquinas and
Avicenna,"*Mediaeval Studies* , 61 (1999): 45-79.

Bonmariage, Cécile, "L'intellection comme identification. Mullâ
Sadrâ*vs* . Avicenna," in*Avicenna and his Heritage* , pp. 99-112.

Brown, Deborah J., "Aquinas' Missing Flying Man,"*Sophia* , 40 (2001):
17-31.

Butterworth, Charles E., "The Political Teaching of Avicenna,"*Topoi* ,
19 (2000): 35-44.

Caster, Kevin J., "The Distinction between Being and Essence according
to Boethius, Avicenna, and William of Auvergne,"*The Modern Schoolman* ,
63, n. 332 (May 1996): 309-32.

Cherkaoui, Abdelmalek, "La lecture du futur à travers l'oeuvre et la vie
d'Ibn Sînâ," in*Journées d'études* , pp. 93-102.

Counet, Jean-Michel, "Avicenne et son influence sur la pensée de Jean
Duns Scot," in*Avicenna and his Heritage* , pp. 225-52.

Cruz Hernández, Miguel, "El concepto de Metafísica de Avicena,"
in*Avicenna and his Heritage* , pp. 47-56.

Decorte, Jos, "Avicenna's Ontology of Relation: A Source of Inspiration
to Henry of Ghent," in*Avicenna and his Heritage* , pp. 197-224.

De Smet, Daniel, "Avicenne et l'ismaélisme post-fatimide, selon
la*Risâla al-Mufîda fî îdâh muldjaz al-Qasîda* de 'Alî b. Muhammad b.
al-Walîd (*ob* . 1215)," in*Avicenna and his Heritage* , pp. 1-20.

-----, "La doctrine avicennienne des deux faces del'âme et ses racines
ismaéliennes,"*Studia Islamica* , n. 93 (2001): 77-89.

Djebbar, Ahmed, "Les mathématiques dans l'oeuvre d'Ibn Sînâ
(370/980-428/1037)," in*Journées d'études* , pp. 70.

Dobbs-Weinstein, Idit, "Maimonides' Reticence toward Ibn Sînâ,"
in*Avicenna and his Heritage* , pp. 281-96.

Druart, Thérèse-Anne, "Avicenna's Influence on Duns Scotus' Proof for
the Existence of God in the*Lectura* ," in *Avicenna and his Heritage* ,
pp. 253-66.

-----, "Shay' or Res as Concomitant of 'Being' in Avicenna," Documenti e
Studi, 12 (2001): 125-42.

-----, "The Human Soul's Individuation and its Survival after the Body's
Death: Avicenna on the Causal Relation between Body and Soul,"*Arabic
Sciences and Philosophy* , 10 (2000): 259-73.

Elamrani-Jamal, Abdelali, "Vision contemplative dans les*Ishârât* et
"*Philosophie orientale* " d'Ibn Sînâ," in*Journées d'études* , pp.
145-52.

El-Bizri, Nader, "Avicenna and Essentialism,"*The Review of Metaphysics*
, 54, 216 (June 2001): 753-78.

El Kochairi, Jamal-Eddine, ""Urjûzatu Ibn Sînâ: poétique médicale et
vertus de la métaphore," in*Journées d'études* , pp. 103-13.

Finianos, Ghassan, "La philosophie de l'être (*al-mawjûd* ) chez Ibn
Sînâ," in*Journées d'études* , pp. 123-44.

Gutas, Dimitri, "The Heritage of Avicenna: The Golden Age of Arabic
Philosophy, 1000-ca. 1350," in*Avicenna and his Heritage* , pp. 81-97.

-----, "Intuition and Thinking: The Evolving Structure of Avicenna's
Epistemology," in*Aspects of Avicenna* , pp. 1-38.

-----, "Avicenna's Eastern ("Oriental") Philosophy. Nature, Contents,
Transmission,"*Arabic Sciences and Philosophy* , 10 (2000): 159-80.

Hasnawi, Ahmad, "La*Physique* du*Shifâ'* : aperçus sur sa tructure et
son contenu," in*Avicenna and his Heritage* , pp. 67-80.

-----, "La définition du mouvement dans la*Physique* du*\_ifâ'*
d'Avicenne,"*Arabic Sciences and Philosophy* , 11 (2001): 219-55.

-----, "Commentaire et démonstration. Brèves remarques sur la Physique
du*Shifâ'* d'Avicenne," in*Le Commentaire* , pp. 509-19.

Hasse, Dag Nikolaus, "Avicenna on Abstraction," in*Aspects of Avicenna*
, pp. 39-72.

-----, "King Avicenna: the Iconographic Consequences of a
Mistranslation,"*Journal of the Warburg and Courtauld Institutes* , 60
(1997): 230-43.

Houser, R.E., "Let Them Suffer into the Truth: Avicenna's Remedy for
Those Denying the Axioms of Thought,"*American Catholic Philosophical
Quarterly* , 73 (Winter 1999): 107-33 [on*Shifâ'* ,*Metaphysics* , I,
8].

Jacquart, Danielle, "Lectures universitaires du*Canon* d'Avicenne,"
in*Avicenna and his Heritage* , pp. 313-24.

Janssens, Jules, "L'Avicenne latin: particularités d'une traduction,"
in*Avicenna and his Heritage* , pp. 113-129.

Jolivet, Jean, "Le vocabulaire de l'être et de la création dans
la*philosophia prima* de l'*Avicenna latinus* ," in*L'Elaboration* , pp.
35-49.

Kâya, Esin, "One of the Samples of the Influences of Avicenna on the
Ottoman Medicine, Shams Al-Din Itaqi,"*Belleten* , 64, n. 239
(2000):63-68.

Karliga, Bekir, "Un nouveau traité d'éthique d'Ibn Sînâ inconnu jusqu'à
nos jours," in*Avicenna and his Heritage* , pp. 21-35.

Kruk, Remke, "Ibn Sînâ*On Animals* : Between the First Teacher and the
Physician," in*Avicenna and his Heritage* , pp. 325-41.

Maróth, Miklos, "Stylistics in Ibn Sînâ's Philosophy," in*Avicenna and
his Heritage* , pp. 57-66.

Mayer, Toby, "Ibn Sînâ's*Burhân al-Siddîqîn* ,"*Journal of Islamic
Studies* , 12 (2001): 18-39 [on the proof of the existence of God].

Mourad, Khireddine, "Ibn Sînâ: Mythe et réalité," in*Journées d'études*
, pp. 3-10.

Rashed, Marwan, "Théodicée et approximation: Avicenne,"*Arabic Sciences
and Philosophy* , 10 (2000): 223-57.

Reisman, David C., "Avicenna at the ARCE [American Research Center in
Egypt]," in*Aspects of Avicenna* , pp. 131-82.

Rizvi, S., "Roots of an Aporia in Later Islamic Philosophy: The
Existence-Essence Distinction in the Metaphysics of Avicenna and
Suhrawardî,"*Studia Iranica* , 29 (2000): 61-108.

Rosheger, John P., "A Note on Avicenna and the Divine Attributes,"*The
Modern Schoolman* 77 (2000): 169-77.

Sanagustin, Floreal, "Le*Canon de la Médecine* d'Avicenne," in*Avicenna
and his Heritage* , pp. 297-311.

Sebti, Meryem,*Avicenne. L'âme humaine* (Philosophies). Paris: Presses
Universitaires de France, 2000, 129 pp., ISBN 2-13-050654-2.

-----, "L'imagination est-elle rationnelle selon Ibn Sînâ?," in*Journées
d'études* , pp. 153-62.

Segovia, Carlos, "Avicena en Oriente,"*Revista de Filosofia* , 11, n. 20
(1998): 285-98.

Steel, Carlos, "Avicenna and Thomas Aquinas on Evil," in*Avicenna and
his Heritage* , pp. 171-96.

Steigerwald, Diane, "L'apport avicennien à la cosmologie à la lumière de
la critique d'al-Shahrastânî et d'Averroès,"*Laval théologique et
philosophique* , 52 (1996): 735-59.

Stone, Abraham D., "Simplicius and Avicenna on the Essential Corporeity
of Material Substance," in*Aspects of Avicenna* , pp. 73-130.

Street, Tony, "'The Eminent later Scholar' in Avicenna's*Book of the
Syllogism* ,"*Arabic Sciences and Philosophy* , 11 (2001): 205-18.

Strohmaier, Gotthard, "Avicenne et le phénomène des écrist
pseudépigraphiques," in*Avicenna and his Heritage* , pp. 37-46.

Syamsuddin, Arif, "Intuition and its Role in Ibn Sînâ's
Epistemology,"*Al-Shajarah* , 5, n.1 (2000): 95-126.

Teske, Roland, "William of Auvergne's Debt to Avicenna," in*Avicenna and
his Heritage* , pp. 153-70.

Tougui, Mohamed, "Le rôle de l'observation et de l'expérimentation dans
l'évolution des sceinces chez Ibn Sînâ,' in*Journées d'études* , pp.
43-49.

Wisnovsky, Robert, "Notes on Avicenna's Concept of Thingness
(*\_ay'iyya* ),"*Arabic Sciences and Philosophy* , 10 (2000): 181-221.

Zonta, Mauro, "Avicenna in Medieval Jewish Philosophy," in*Avicenna and
his Heritage* , pp. 267-79.

Bahmanyâr

"The Book of the Exposition," transl. by Everret K. Rowson, in*An
Anthology* , pp. 334-50 [partial].

Al-Barâdi'î

Fierro, Maribel, "El*Tahdîb* de al-Barâdi'î en al-Andalus: A Propósito
de un manuscrito aljamiado de la Real Academia de la Historia,"
*al-Qantara* , 21 (2000): 227-36.

al-Bîrûnî

"Questions and Answers," transl. by Seyyed Hossein Nasr, in*An
Anthology* , pp. 396-99 [partial].

Khan, M.S., "Al-Bîrûnî, the Pioneer Indologist,"*Islamic Culture* , 76,
n.1 (2002):33-67.

Strohmaier, G., "Al-Bîrûnî und der griechische Parthenoperoman,"
in*Graeco-Arabica* , vol. V (Athens: 1995), pp. 72-78.

al-Fârâbî

[al-Fârâbî]*L'Harmonie entre les opinions de Platon et d'Aristote* ,
Arabic ed. by Fawzi Mitri Najjar, transl. and Notes by Dominique Mallet.
Damascus: Institut Français de Damas, 1999, 208+24 pp., ISBN
2-901315-52-6.

[Al-Fârâbî]*L'Epître sur l'intellect (al-Risâla fî-l-'aql)* , transl. by
Dyala Hamzah, Foreword by Jean Jolivet and Postword by Rémi Brague
(Traduire la philosophie). Paris: L'Harmattan, 2001, 109 pp., ISBN
2-7475-1501-X.

[Alfarabi]*Philosophy of Plato and Aristotle* , transl. with an Intro by
Muhsin Mahdi, rev. ed., Foreword by Charles E. Butterworth & Thomas L.
Pangle. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2001, xxxvi-158 pp., ISBN
0-8014-3857-8 [reprint of 1969; includes also*The Attainment of
Happiness* ].

[Alfarabi]*The Political Wrtings: "Selected Aphorisms" and Other Texts*
, transl. and annotated by Charles E. Butterworth. Ithaca & London:
Cornell University Press, 2001, xiv-179 pp., ISBN 0-8014-3857-8
[includes also ch. 5 of*Enumeration of the Sciences* ,*Book of Religion*
&*The Harmonization of the Two Opinions of the Two Sages: Plato the
Divine and Aristotle* ].

"Grand Traité de la Musique (Kitâbu l-Mûsîqî al-Kabîr," in Rodolphe
d'Erlanger,*La Musique arabe* , Vol. I-II. Paris: Librairie Orientaliste
Paul Geuthner, 2001, Vol. I [Bk I-II}, 329 pp. & Vol. II [Bk III], pp.
1-101, ISBN 2-84306-069-9 & 2-84306-070-2 [reprint of 1930 & 1935]

"Paraphrase of Aristotle's*Analytica Posteriora* ," transl. by Majid
Fakhry, in*An Anthology* , pp. 93-110 [ch. I & II, plus beginning of
III].

"Reconciliation of the Opinions of the Two Sages, Spiritual Plato and
Aristotle," transl. by Shams Inati, in*An Anthology* , pp. 110-18 [ch.
I-X]].

Aouad, Maroun, "Le texte arabe du chapitre sur la rhétorique d'Ibn
Ridwân et ses correspondants dans la*Didascalia in Rhetoricam
Aristotelis ex glosa Alpharabii* : Fragments du*Grand Commentaire à la
Rhétorique* d'al-Fârâbî," in*La* Rhétorique, pp. 169-225.

Fakhry, Majid,*Al-Fârâbî, Founder of Islamic Neoplatonism: His Life,
Works and Influence* (Great Islamic Thinkers). Oxford: Oneworld, 2002,
viii-168 pp., ISBN 1-85168-302-X.

López Farjeat, Luis Xavier, "El silogismo poético y la imaginación en
Alfarabi,"*Topico: Revista de filosofía* , n. 18 (2000): ????

Lucchetta, Francesca Picchetti, "Le Bonheur suprême de l'homme selon
l'"Epître sur l'intellect" de Fârâbî,"*Les Caheirs de Tunisie* , 49, n.
176 (1997): 105-14 [translated from*Annali di Ca' Foscari* , 14, n.3
(1975): 185-91].

Mahdi, Muhsin S.,*Alfarabi and the Foundation of Islamic Political
Philosophy* , Foreword by Charles E. Butterworth. Chicago & London: The
University of Chicago Press, 2001, xviii-264 pp., ISBN 0-226-50186-8
[the English version is superior to the French one]..

-----,*La Cité vertueuse d'Alfarabi. La fondation de la philosophie
politique en Islam* , transl. by François Zabbal (Chaire de l'I.M.A.).
Paris: Albin Michel, 2000, 343 pp., ISBN 2-226-11749-0 [translation of
the previous].

Netton, Ian Richard,*Al-Fârâbî and his School* . Richmond, Surrey:
Curzon, 1999, 128 pp., ISBN 0-7007-1064-7 [reprint of 1992].

Ramón Guerrero, Rafael, "Razón práctica e intelecto agente en
Alfarabi,"*Topicos: Revista de filosofía* , n. 18 (2000): 73-95.

-----, "La*Ética a Nicómaco* en la obra de Alfarabi," in*Ética y
sociologia. Estudios en memoria del professor José Todolí, O.P.*
(Salamanca: Editorial SanEsteban, ????), pp. 201-12.

Rosier-Catach, Irène, "Roger Bacon, al-Fârâbî et Augustin. Rhétorique.
Logique et philosophie morale," in*La Rhétorique* , pp. 87-110.

Zonta, Mauro, "Al-Fârâbî's commentaries on Aristotelian logic: new
discoveries," in*Philosophy and Arts* , pp. 219-32.

Ibn Abî al-Ash'ath

Kruk, Remke, "Ibn Abî al-Ash'ath's*Kitâb al-Hayawân* : A Scientific
Approach to Anthropology, Dietetics and Zoological Systematics,"
*Zeitschrift für Geschichte der arabisch-islamischen Wissenschaften* ,
14 (2001): 119-68.

Ibn Bâjjah

For his Commentary on the Meteorology, see*Aristotle's* Meteorology,
above.

Lomba Fuentes, Joaquín, Le idea de felicidad en al Aragón musulmán, see
above.

-----,*Avempace o la pasión por el espíritu* (Pliegos de Encuentro
Islamo-Cristiano, 24). Madrid: Darek-Nyumba, 1999, 56 pp., ISBN
84-88059-11-6.

Ibn Khaldûn

Alatas, Syed Farid, "Introduction to the Political Economy of Ibn
Khaldun,"*The Islamic Quarterly* , 45 (2001): 307-24.

Evstatiev, Simeon, "Ibn Khaldûn on the Correlation "Spiritual
Authority-Secular Power" in the Theory and Historical Practice of
Medieval Islam,"*al-Masâq: Islam and the Medieval Mediterranean, 11
(1999): 121-36.*

Gierer, Alfred*,* "Ibn Khaldûn on Solidarity ('Asabiyah') – Modern
Science on Cooperativeness and Empathy: a Comparison,"*Philosophia
naturalis* , 38 (2001): 91-104.

Irwin, Robert*,* "Toynbee and Ibn Khaldun,"*Middle Eastern Studies,* 33
(1997): 461-79.

Kayadibi, Fahri*,* "Ibn Khaldûn on Education, *" Hamdard Islamicus,* 24,
n.2 (2001): 7-12.

Ikhwân al-Safâ'

Khoury-Samani, Mariana, "Les Ikhwân al-Safâ' et la mystique. Etude et
traduction partielle de l'épître XLVI,"*Mélanges de l'Université
Saint-Joseph* , 53 (1993-1994): 307-52.Aguiar Aguilar, M., "'Ilm
al-misâha en las epístolas de los Ikhwân al-Safâ'," in *Philosophy and
Arts* , pp. 193-200.Baffioni, Carmela, "Different conceptions of
religious practice, piety and God-man relations in the epistles of the
Ikhwân al-?afâ'," *Al-Qan?ara* , 21 (2000): 381-86.Baffioni, Carmela,
"Bodily resurrection in the Ikhwân al-Safâ'," in *Philosophy and Arts* ,
pp. 201-208.Marquet, Yves, "Ibn al-Rûmî et les Ikhwân al-Safâ',"
*Arabica* , 47 (2000): 121-23.-----, La Philosophie des Ikhwân al-Safâ',
2nd rev. ed. ( *Textes et Travaux de Chrysopoeia* , 5). Paris: S.E.H.A.
Milan: *ARCHE* , 1999, xvi-620 pp., ISBN88-7252-211-0.-----, "Socrate et
les Ikhwan a?-?afâ'," *Journal Asiatique* , 286 (1998):
409-49.al-JâbirCapezzone, L, "?âbir ibn Hayyân nella città cortese,"
*Rivista degli Studi orientali* , 71 (1997): 99-146.Gannagé, Emma,
"Alexandre d'Aphrodise 'In De Generatione et corruptione' apud ?âbir b.
Hayyân, 'K. al-Ta?rîf'," *Documenti e Studi* , 9 (1998): 35-86.

Al-Jâhiz

Aarab, A., Provencal, Philippe, & Idaomar, Mohamed, "Eco-Ethological
Data according to ?âhiz through his Work Kitâb al-Hayawân,"*Arabica* ,
47 (2000): 278-86.

al-Kindî

Adamson, Peter, "Before Essence and Existence: al-Kindî's Conception of
Being,"*Journal of the History of Philosophy,* 40 (2002):
297-312.D'Ancona Costa, Cristina, "Aristotelian and Neoplatonic Elements
in Kindî's Doctrine of Knowledge," *American Catholic Philosophical
Quarterly* , 73 (Winter 1999): 9-35.Druart, Thérèse-Anne, "Philosophical
Consolation in Christianity and Islam: Boethius and al-Kindî," *Topoi* ,
19 (2000): 25-34.Kennedy-Day, Kiki, "Al-Kindî: A New Dîbâjah?," *The
Islamic Quarterly* , 44 (2000): 429-33.

al-Marwazî

Kruk, Remke, "Of Rukhs and Rooks, Camels and Castles,"*Oriens* , 36
(2001): 288-98 [on *Book of Animals* ].

Miskawayh

"Perennial Philosophy," transl. by Alma Giese, in*An Anthology* , pp.
276-302 [partial].Marcotte, Roxanne, "The Role of Imagination in Ibn
Miskawayh's Theory of Prophecies," *American Catholic Philosophical
Quarterly* , 73 (Winter 1999): 37-72.Nasir Bin Omar, Mohamed,
"Preliminary Remarks on Christian Sources of Muslim Ethics: Miskawayh's
Experience," *Hamdard Islamicus* , 23, n. 3 (2000): 53-56.

Mullâ ?adrâ al-Shîrazî

Burrell, David B., "Thomas Aquinas (1225-1274) and Mulla Sadra Shirazi
(980/1572-1050/1640) and the Primacy of esse/wujûd in Philosophical
Theology,"*Medieval Philosophy and Theology* , 8 (1999): 207-19.

Janssens, Jules, "Mullâ Sadrâ's Use of Ibn Sînâ's Ta'lîqât in the
Asfâr,"*Journal of Islamic Studies* , 13 (2002): 1-13.

al-Râzî (Abû Bakr)

Goodman, Lenn E., "Râzî vs. Râzî—Philosophy in the Majlis," in*The
Majlis* , pp. 84-107 [see below, Kalam].

Rashed, Marwan, "Abû Bakr al-Râzî et le Kalâm,"*MIDEO* , 24(2000):
39-54.

Stroumsa, Sarah, Freethinkers of Medieval islam: Ibn al-Râwandî, Abû
Bakr al-Râzî, and Their Impact on Islamic Thought (Islamic Philosophy,
Theology and Science, Texts and Studies, XXXV). Leiden: Brill, 1999,
xii-261 pp., ISBN 90-04-11374-6.

Tornero, Emilio, "Falsafa versus 'Arabiyya: al-Râzî,"*al-Qantara* , 21
(2000): 3-16.

**al-Shahrastânî**

Struggling with the Philosopher: A Refutation of Avicenna's Metaphysics.
A New Arabic Edtion and English Translation of Muhammad b. 'Abd al-Karîm
al-Shahrastânîs Kitâb al-Musâra'a, ed. and transl. by Wilferd Madelung &
Toby Mayer (The Institute of Ismaili Studies, Ismaili Texts and
Translations Series, 2). London: I.B. Tauris, 2001, x-106 & 136 pp.,
ISBN 1-86064-693-X.

Jolivet, Jean, "Al-\_ahrastânî critique d'Avicenne dans la*Lutte contre
les philosophes* (quelques aspects),"*Arabic Sciences and Philosophy* ,
10 (2000): 275-92.

Al-Shahrazûrî al-Ishrâqî

Privot, Michael, "Some Notes on the Typology of the Works of
Al-Shahrazûrî Al-Ishrâqî,"*Journal of Islamic Studies* , 12 (2001):
312-21.

al-Sijistânî

Walker, Paul E.,*Abû Ya'qûb al-Sijistânî: Intellectual Missionary* (The
Institute of Ismaili Studies, Ismaili Heritage Series, 1). London: I.B.
Tauris, 1998, xvi-132 pp., ISBN pb. 1-86064-294-4.

al-Suhrawardî

[Suhrawardî]*The Philosophy of Illumination. A New Critical Edition of
the Text of* Hikmat al-ishrâq*with Translation, Notes, Commentary and
Introduction* by John Walbridge & Hossein Ziai (Islamic Translation
Series). Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1999, ISBN
0-8425-2457-6.

Huda, Qamar-ul, "The Remembrance of the Prophet in Suhrawardî's*'Awârif
al-Ma'ârif* ,"*Journal of Islamic Studies* , 12 (2001): 129-50.

Latiri Azouz, Rajet, "Esthétique et mystique chez Sohrawardi,"*IBLA* ,
61, n. 182 (1998): 245-62.

Yahyâ ibn 'Adî

Baffioni, Carmela & Nasti de Vincentis, Mauro, "Archimedean Influences
on Yahyâ ibn 'Adî (died 974),"*Parole de l'Orient* , 24 (1999): 203-33.

Yûhannâ Ibn Mâsawayh

Troupeau, Gérard, "Le premier traité arabe de minéralogie: le livre de
Yûhannâ Ibn Mâsawayh sur les pierres précieuses [transl. with
glossary],"*Les Annales islamologiques* , 32 (1998): 219-38.

Section II: Kalâm

a. Collective Works

*The Majlis: Interreligious Encounters in Medieval Islam* , ed. by Hava
Lazarus-Yafeh, Mark R. Cohen, Sasson Somekh & Sidney H. Griffith
(Studies in Arabic Language and Literature, 4). Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz,
1999, 204 pp.

b. General Studies

"The Almohad Creed," transl. by Madeleine Fletcher, in*Medieval Iberia*
, pp. 190-97 [ch. 1-11].

"Two Arguments in Support of Christian Faith: A. Mozarabic Refutation of
Islam; B. In Support of the Trinity," transl. by Thomas E. Burman,
in*Medieval Iberia* , pp. 143-51.

Abisaab, Rula, "Shî'ite Beginnings and Scholastic Tradition in Jabal
'Âmil in Lebanon,"*The Muslim World* , 88, n. 2 (1998): 1-21.

Abrahamov, Binyamin,*Islamic Theology: Traditionalism and Rationalism* .
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1998, xii-112 pp., ISBN
0-7486-1102-9.

Abu Bakar, Ibrahim, "Some Epistemological Issues in Shî'ism and
Sunnism,"*Hamdard Islamicus* , 34, n.2 (2001): 31-39.

Ahmed, Shahab, "Mapping the World of a Scholar in Sixth/Twelfth-Century
Bukhâra: Regional Tradition in Medieval islamic Scholarship as Reflected
in a Bibliography,"*Journal of the American Oriental Society* , 120
(2000): 24-43.

Amir-Moezzi, M.A., "Seul l'homme de Dieu est humain. Théologie et notes
d'anthropologie mystique à travers l'exégèse imamite ancienne,"*Arabica*
, 45 (1998): 193-214.

Bar-Asher, Meir M.,*Scripture and Exegesis in Early Imâmî Shiism*
(Islamic Philosophy, Theology and Science, Texts and Studies, 37).
Leiden: Brill, 1999, xvi-274 pp., ISBN 90-04-114955.

Brinner, W.M., "A Fifteenth-century Karaite-Raabanite Dispute in Cairo,"
in*The Majlis* , pp. 184-96.

Calverley, Edwin E. & Pollock, James W., Nature, Man and God in Medieval
Islam: 'Abd Allah Baydawi's Text Tawali' al-Anwar min Matasli' al-Anzar
Along With Mahmud isfahani's Commentary Matali' al-Anzar, Sharh Tawali'
al-Anwar Edition and Translation, 2 vol. (Islamic Philosophy, Theology
and Science, 45). Leiden: Brill, 2002, xlvi-723 pp. & xiv-724-1183 pp.

Cameron, Averil, "Interfaith Relations in the First Islamic
Century,"*Bulletin of the Royal Institute for Inter-Faith Studies* , 1,
n.2 (1999): 1-12.

Clarke, L., "The Shî'î Construction of*Taqlîd* ,"*Journal of Islamic
Studies* , 12 (2001): 40-64.

Cohen, M.R. & Somekh, S., "Interreligious*Majâlis* in Early Fatimid
Egypt," in*The Majlis* , pp. 128-36.

Crone, Patricia, "A Statement by the Najdiyya Khârijites on the
Dispensability of the Imamite,"*Studia Islamica* , n. 88 (1998): 55-76.

Fierro, Maribel, "Christian Success and Muslim Fear in Andalusî Writings
During the Almoravid and Almohad Periods,"*Israel Oriental Studies* , 17
(1997): 155-78.

Frank, Richard M., "The non-existent and the possible in classical
ash'arite teaching,"*MIDEO* 24 (2000): 1-37.

-----, "The A\_'arite Ontology: I Primary Entities,"*Arabic Sciences and
Philosophy* , 9 (1999): 163-231.

-----, "Contrastes entre trois systèmes: Mu'tazilisme. Ash'arisme et
Ghazâlî,"*Les Cahiers de Tunisie* , 49, n. 173 (1996): 87-104.

Genequand, Charles, "Idolâtrie, astrolâtrie et sabéisme,"*Studia
Islamica* , n. 89 (1999): 109-28.

Gilliot, Claude, "La théologie musulmane en Asie centrale et au
Khorasan,"*Arabica* , 49 (2002): 135-203.

-----, "Une leçon magistrale d'orientalisme: l'*Opus Magnum* de J. Van
Ess (II),"*Arabica* , 47 (2000): 141-93.

-----, "Al-Dhahabî contre la "pensée spéculative","*Zeitschrift der
Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft* , 150 (2000): 69-106.

-----, "Les sciences coraniques chez les Karrâmites du Khorasan:
le*Livre des foundations* ,"*Journal Asiatique* , 288, n. 1 (2000):
5-81.

-----, "De l'impossible censure du récit légendaire:*Adab* et*tafsîr* :
deux voies pour édifier l'*ethos* de l'*homo islamicus* ,"*Israel
Oriental Studies* , 19 (1999): 49-96.

-----, "Mythe et théologie: calame et intellect, prédestination et libre
arbitre,"*Arabica* , 45 (1998): 151-92.

Griffith, Sidney H., "The Monk in the Emir's*Majlis* : Reflections on a
Popular Genre of Christian Literary Apologetics in Arabic in the Early
Islamic Period," in*The Majlis* , pp. 13-65.

-----, "Arab Christian Culture in the Early Abbasid Period,"*Bulletin of
the Royal Institute for Inter-Faith Studies* , 1, n.2 (1999): 25-44.

Hallaq, Wael B.,*A History of Islamic Legal Theories: An Introduction to
Sunnî* Usûl al-fiqh. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997, x-294
pp., ISBN 0-521-59986-5.

Hamarnek, Saleh K., "Al-Mutawakkil, Imâm al-Shâfi'î and the Mu'tazilites
(Revival of the*Sunnah* ),"*Hamdard Islamicus* , 23, n. 1 (2000): 7-13.

Hamdani, Sumaiya, "The Dialectic of Power: Sunni-Shi'i Debates in
Tenth-Century North Africa,"*Studia Islamica* , n. 90 (2000): 5-21.

Harrak, Amir, "Christianity in the Eyes of the Muslims of the Jazîrah at
the End of the Eighth Century,"*Parole de l'Orient* , 20 (1995): 337-56.

Hawting, Gerald R., "*Shirk* and "Idolatry" in Monotheist
Polemic,"*Israel Oriental Studies* , 17 (1997): 107-126.

Jackson, Sherman A., "The Alchemy of Domination? Some Ash'arite
Responses to Mu'tazilite Ethics,"*International Journal of Middle East
Studies* , 31 (1999): 185-201.

Juynboll, G.H.A., "An Excursus on the*ahl as-unna* in Connection with
Van Ess, "*Theologie und Gesellschaft"* , IV, "*Der Islam* , 75 (1998):
318-30.

Kedar, B.Z., "The Multilateral Disputation at the Court of the Grand Qan
Möngke, 1254," in*The Majlis* , pp. 162-83.

Klein-Franke, F., "The Relation between Knowledge and Belief in Islam.
Annotations to Rashîd ad-Dîn's "Book of Questions and Answers","*Le
Muséon* , 113 (2000): 205-19.

Marquet, Yves, "La tolérance dans l'ismailisme médiéval," in*Philosophy
and the Arts* , pp. 209-18.

Nagel, Tilman,*The History of Islamic Theology From Muhammad to the
Presen* t, transl. by Thomas Thornton. Princeton: Markus Wiener, 2000,
xii-329 pp., ISBN 1-55876-203-5.

Onur, Yildirim, "L'instruction du procès d'Ibn Tumart et
Muvahhid,"*Belleten* , 62, n. 234 (1998): 403-34 [in Turkish].

Perler, Dominik & Rudolph, Ulrich,*Occasionalismus. Theorien der
Kausalität im arabisch-islamischen und im europäischen Denken*
(Abhandlungen der Akademie der Wissenschaften in Göttingen, 235).
Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 2000, 278 pp., ISBN 3-525-82507-2.

Poya, Abbas, "'*I?tihâd* ' und Glaubensfreiheit: Darstellung einer
islamisch-glaubensfreiheitlichen idee anhand
sunnistisch-rechtsmethodologischer Diskussion,"*Der Islam* , 75 (1998):
226-58.

Rahman, A.K.M. Shamsur, "Al-Mu'tazilah and the Unity of God,"*Hamdard
Islamicus* , 34, n.2 (2001): 67-71.

Reynolds, Gabriel Said, "The Ends of*al-Radd al-Jamîl* and its Portrayal
of Christian Sects,"*Islamochristiana* , 25 (1999): 45-65.

Saadi, Abdul-Massih, "Apologetic Literature Between Christians and
Mulims & Bar Hebraeus (d. 1286),"*KARMO* , 1, n. 2 (1999): 2-7.

Sklare, D., "Responses to Islamic Polemics by Jewish Mutakallimûn in the
Tenth Century," in*The Majlis* , pp. 137-61.

Stapa, Zakaria, "A Discussion on the Concept of*Tawhîd* : The Viewpoint
of the Early Islamic Sources,"*Hamdard Islamicus* , 24, n.4 (2001):
7-35.

Straface, Antonella, "Il concetto di estremismo nell'eresiografia
islamica,"*Annali* , 56 (1996): 471-87.

Strohmaier, Gotthard, "Die christliche Schulen in Bagdad und der
alexandrinische Kanon der Galenschriften: eine Korrektur in Hunains
Sendschreiben an 'Alî ibn Yahyâ," in*Oriens* , 36 (2001): 268-75.

Tabbaa, Yasser,*The transformation of Islamic Art during the Sunni
Revival* . Seattle 7 London: University of Washington Press, 2001,
xiv-210 pp., ISBN 0-295-98125-3.

Talmom, "Tawaddud—The Story of a*Majlis* ," in*The Majlis* , pp. 120-27.

van Ess, Josef,*Prémices de la théologie musulmane* (La Chaire de
l'I.M.A.). Paris: Albin Michel, 2002, 164 pp., ISBN 2-226-13285-6.

-----, "Die Pest von Emmaus. Theologie und Geschichte in der Frühzeit
des Islams,"*Oriens* , 36 (2001): 248-67.

Walbridge, John, "Explaining Away the Greek Gods in Islam,"*Journal of
the History of Ideas* , 59 (1998): 389-403.

Walker, Paul, "The Identity of One of the Ismaili*dâ'îs* Sent by the
Fatimids to Ibn Haf?ûn,"*Al-Qan?ara* , 21 (2000): 387-88.

Wasserstein, D.J., "The "Majlis al-Ridâ': A Religious Debate in the
Court of the Caliph Al-Ma'mûn as Represented in a Shî'î Hagiographical
Work about the Eighth Imâm 'Alî ibn Mûsâ Al-Ridâ," in*The Majlis* , pp.
108-19.

-----, "The Muslims and the Golden Age of the Jews in
Al-Andalus,"*Israel Oriental Studies* , 17 (1997): 179-96.

Az-Zubaydi, Mohammad Abdallah, "L'homme est-il créateur de ses actes? La
notion de "Kasb" et la justice de l'imposition des obligations ches les
premiers ash'arites,"*al-Machriq* , 72 (1998): 409-40.

'Abd al-Jabbâr

Heemskerk, Margaretha T., Suffering in the Mu'tazilite Theology. 'Abd
al-Jabbâr's Teaching on Pain and Divine Justice (Islamic Philosophy,
Theology and Science, Texts and Studies, 41). Leiden: Brill, 2000, x-217
pp., ISBN 90-04-11726-1.

al-Ash'arî

Stapa, Zakaria, "A Discussion on the Concept of*Tawhîd* : The Viewpoint
oa al-Ash'arî," *Hamdard Islamicus* , 23, n.2 (2000): 55-60.

Fakhr al-Dîn al-Râzî

[Ar-Râzî], Traité sur les noms divins (Lawâmi' al-bayyinât fî al-asmâ'
wa al-çifât) (Le Livre des preuves éclatantes sur les noms et les
qualités), transl. with Intro. and notes by Maurice Gloton, Foreword by
Pierre Lory. Beirut: Al-Bouraq, 2000, 669 pp., ISBN 2-84161-111-6.

Lagarde, Michel,*Index du Grand Commentaire de Fakhr al-Dîn al-Râzî* .
Leiden: Brill, 1996, 82+360 pp.

Abrahamov, Benjamin, "Fakhr al-Dîn al-Râzî on the Knowability of God's
Essence and Attributes,"*Arabica* , 49 (2002): 204-30.

?skendero?lu, Muammer,*Fakhr al-Dîn al-Râzî and Thomas Aquinas on the
Question of the Eternity of the World* (Islamic Philosophy, Theology and
Science, Texts and Studies, XLVIII). Leiden: Brill, 2002, xiv-198 pp.,
ISBN 90-04-12480-2.

Jomier, Jacques, "L'index du*Grand Commentaire* de Fakhr al-Dîn
al-Râzî,"*MIDEO* , 24 (2000): 423-34.

Kafrawi, Shalahudin, "Fakhr al-Dîn al-Râzî's Sources of*Ta'wîl* :
Between Revelation and Reason," *The Islamic Quarterly* , 43 (1999):
186-202.

al-Ghazâlî

*Bidayatu-l-Hidaya* , ed. by 'Abdu-l-Hamîd Muhammad al-Darwîsh. Beirut:
Dar Sader, 1998, 176 pp.

*al-Munqidh min al-Dalâl* , ed. by Muhammad Muhammad Abûlaylah & Nûrshîf
Abdul-Rahim Rif'at. Washington, D.C.: The Council for Research in Values
and Philosophy, 2001, iii-321 pp., ISBN 1-56518-082-1.

[Al-Ghazâlî]*Deliverance from Error & Mystical Union with the Almighty
(Al-Munqidh min al-Dalâl)* , transl & Intro. by Muhammad Abûlaylah,
Intro. and notes by George F. McLean (Cultural Heritage and Contemporary
Change, Series IIA, Islam, 2B). Washington, D.C.: The Council for
Research in Values and Philosophy, 2001, 142 pp., ISBN 1-56518-081-X.

[Al-Ghazâlî]*Deliverance from Error: Five Key Texts Including His
Spiritual Autobiography al-Munqidh min al-Dalal* , transl. by Richard J.
McCarthy. Louisville, KY: Fons Vitae, s.d. 1999?, 334 pp., ISBN
1-887752-27-7 [some kind of reprint of McCarthy's *Freedom and
Fulfillment* , 198; includes *The Clear Criterion for Distinguishing
between Islam and Godlessness, The Infamies (Enormities) of the
Bâtinites and the Virtues (Merits) of the Mustazhirites* [partial], *The
Correct Balance, The Noblest of Aims in the Explanation of God's Fairest
Names* [selections], *The Book of the Marvels of the Heart* [selections
from one of the parts of the *'Ihya* ']].

[Al-Ghazali] Faith in Divine Unity & Trust in Divine Providence (Kitâb
al-tawhîd wa'l-tawakkul, Bk. XXXV of the Revival of the Religious
Sciences, Ihyâ' 'ulûm al-dîn), transl. with Intro. and notes by David B.
Burrell. Louisville, KY: Fons Vitae, 2001, xxvi-177 pp., ISBN
1-88775-235-8

[Al-Ghazâlî]*Initiation à la foi: Bidyatu-l-Hidaya [Revivifaction des
sciences de la religion]* , transl. by Muhammad Diakho, 2nd ed. Beirut:
Al-Bouraq, 1999, 166 pp., ISBN 2-84161-026-8.

[Al Ghazali] La Balance juste ou La connaissance rationnelle dans la
tradition musulmane (Qistâs al mustaqîm), transl. by Victor Chelhot.
Paris: IQRA, 1998, 247 pp., ISBN 2-911509-17-X.

al-'Ajam, Rafîq, "'L'espace' de Ghazâlî et ses dimensions,"*al-Machriq*
, 76 (2002): 435-70 [in Arabic].

Burrell, David, "Al-Ghazali on Created Freedom,"*American Catholic
Philosophical Quarterly* , 73 (Winter 1999): 135-57.

Dutton, Blake D., "Al-Ghazâlî on Possibility and the Critique of
Causality,"*Medieval Philosophy and Theology* , 10 (2001): 23-46.

Ghazanfar, S.M., "The Economic Thought of Abu Hamid Al-Ghazali and St.
Thomas Aquinas: Some Comparative Parallels and Links,"*History of
Political Economy* , 32 (2000): 857-88.

Giacaman, George & Bahlul, Raja, "Ghazali on Miracles and Necessary
Connection,"*Medieval Philosophy and Theology* , 9 (2000): 39-50.

Gianotti, Timothy J.,*Al-Ghazâlî's Unspeakable Doctrine of the Soul:
Unveiling the Esoteric Psychology and Eschatology of the* Ihyâ' (Brill's
Studies in Intellectual History, 104). Leiden: Brill, 2001, xii-205 pp.,
ISBN 90-04-12083-1 [includes a translation of *The Epistle of Presence*
].

Griffel, Frank, Apostasie und Toleranz im Islam, see above.

Halevi, Leor, "Natural Philosophy and al-Ghazâlî,"*Journal of the
History of Ideas* , 63 (2002): 19-39.

Harvey, Steven, "Why Did Fourteenth-Century Jews Turn to Alghazali's
Account of Natural Science?,"*The Jewish Quarterly Review* , 91 (2001):
359-76.

Janssens, Jules, "Al-Ghazzâlî's*Tahâfut* : Is It Really a Rejection of
Ibn Sînâ's Philosophy?,"*Journal of Islamic Studies* , 12 (2001): 1-17.

Kukkonen, Taneli, "Possible Worlds in the*Tahâfut al-Falâsia* :
Al-Ghazâlî on Creation and Contingency,"*Journal of the History of
Philosophy* , 38 (2000): 479-502.

Marmura, Michael E., "Ghazali and Ash'arism Revisited,"*Arabic Sciences
and Philosophy* , 12 (2002): 91-110.

Mat Akhir, Noor Shaskirah, "Al-Ghazâlî's Concept of
Personality,"*Hamdard Islamicus* , 25, n.2 (2002): 29-34.

Mitha, Farouk,*Al-Ghazâlî and the Ismailis: A Debate on Reason and
Authority in Medieval Islam* (The Institute of Ismaili Studies, Ismaili
Heritage Series, 5). London: I.B. Tauris, 2001, xxiv-128 pp., ISBN
1-86064-819-3 [A study of*Kitâb al-Mustazhiri* ].

Rafiabadi, Hamid Nassem, "Ghazzâlî's Approach to Natural Sciences and
Philosophy,"*Hamdard Islamicus* , 24, n.4 (2001): 37-58.

Sambur, Bilal, "Al-Ghazali on Ritualism and Spirituality,"*The Islamic
Quarterly* , 44 (2000): 565-73.

Hasan al-Basrî

Bodiur Rahman, Muhammad, "Imam Hasan al-Basri's Unique Logical
Reflections on Some Important Qur'anic Terms Concerning Human
Choice,"*The Islamic Quarterly* , 42, n.1 (1998): 53-67.

Ibn Hanbal

Williams, Wesley, "Aspects of the Creed of Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal: A
Study of Anthropomorphism in Early Islamic Discourse,"*International
Journal of Middle East Studies* , 34 (2002): 441-63.

Ibn Hazm

"On Forgetting a Beloved:*The Ring of the Dove* ," transl. by A.J.
Arberry in*Medieval Iberia* , pp. 77-80 [very partial].

"On the Inconsistencies of the Four Gospels:*Al-Fasl fî al-milal* ,"
transl. by Thomas E. Burman, in*Medieval Iberia* , pp. 81-83 [very
partial].

Adang, Camilla, "Islam as the Inborn Religion of Mankind: The Concept
of*fitra* in the Works of Ibn Hazm,"*al-Qantara* , 21 (2000): 391-410.

Coope, Jessica A., "With Heart, Tongue, and Limbs: Ibn Hazm on the
Essence of Faith,"*Medieval Encounters* , 6, nn.1-3 (2000): 101-113.

Kaddouri, Samir, "Identificación de un manuscrito andalusí anónimo de
una obra contra Ibn Hazm al-Qurtubî (m. 456/1064),"*al-Qantara* , 22
(2001): 299-320.

Makin, Al, "The Influence of Zâhirî Theory on Ibn Hazm's Theology: The
Case of his Interpretation of the Anthropmorphic Text "The Hand of
God","*Medieval Encounters* , 5, n.1 (1999): 112-20.

Ibn al-Jawzî

Rosenbaum, Gabriel M., "A Certain Laugh: Serious Humor and Creativity in
the*Adab* of Ibn al-Jawzî,"*Israel Oriental Studies* , 19 (1999):
97-129.

Swartz, Merlin,*A Medieval Critique of Anthropomorphism: Ibn al-Jawzî's*
Kitâb Akhbâr a?-\_ifât, cirtical ed. with transl, intro. and notes
(Islamic Philosophy, Theology and Science, Texts and Studies, 46).
Leiden: Brill, 2002, xvi-330+116 (Arabic) pp., ISBN 90-04-123768.

Ibn al-Râwandî

Stoumsa, Sarah, "Ibn al-Râwandî's*s adab al-mujâdala* : The Role of Bad
Manners in Medieval Disputations," in *The Majlis* , pp. 66-83.

Stroumsa, S., Freethinkers of Medieval Islam, see above.

Ibn Taymiyya

"Mas'alat al-Kanâ'is (The Question of the Churches)," presentation and
transl. by Benjamin O'Keeffe,*Islamochristiana* , 22 (1996): 53-78.

Isfahânî

Mohamed, Yasien, "Knowledge and Purification of the Soul: An Annotated
Translation with Introduction of Isfahânî's*Kitâb al-Dharî'a ilâ Makârim
al-Sharî'a (58-76; 89-92)* ," *Journal of Islamic Studies* , 9, n.1
(1998): 1-34.

al-Juwaynî

Chaumont, Eric, "En quoi le madhab shâfi'ite est-il shâfi'ite selon tle
Mudjit al-khalq de Juwaynî?,"*Annales Islamologiques* , 35 (2001):
17-26.

al-Mâturîdî

Thomas, David, "Abû Mansûr al-Mâturîdî on the Divinity of Jesus Christ
[ed. and transl.],"*Islamochristiana* , 23 (1997): 43-64.

Özcan, Hanifi, "Abû Mansûr al-Mâturîdî's Remarks on the relation Between
Faith, Islam, Beneficence and Infidelity,"*Hamdard Islamicus* , 25, n.1
(2002): 7-19.

-----, "Abû Mansûr al-Mâturîdî's Religious Pluralism,*Islamochristiana*
, 23 (1997): 65-80.

al-Mufîd

Marcinkowski, Muhammad Ismail, "Selected Aspects of the Life and Works
of al-Shaykh al-Mufîd (336-413/498-1022),"*Hamdard Islamicus* , 23, n.2
(2000): 41-54.

Qutâ ibn Lûqâ

Zilio-Grandi, Ida, "La refutazione della profezia di Muhammad e del
miracolo coranico di Qu?ta ibn Lûqâ,"*Parole de l'Orient* , 22 (1997):
677-89.

Rashîd al-Dîn

Klein-Franke, F., "Rashîd al-Dîn's Self-Defence through his Commenting
on al-Ghazzâlî's "Reply to the Opponents of the 'Proof of Islâm'". A
Philosophical

Interpretation of the Koranic Expression "al-Amâna","*Le Muséon* , 115
(2002): 197-214.

al-Râzî (Abû Hâtim)

Goodman, Lenn E., "Râzî vs. Râzî—Philosophy in the*Majlis* ," in *The
Majlis* , pp. 84-107.

al-Sanûsî, Muhammad ibn Yûsuf

Kenny, Joseph, O.P., "The*Muqaddimah* : An Introductory Summary of
*Kalâm* by Muhammad ibn Yusûf al-Sanûsî [edition]," *Hamdard Islamicus*
, 23, n.2 (2000): 31-40.

Theodorus Abû Qurrah

Pizzo, Paola, "L'Islam e I musulmani nella difesa delle icone di Teodoro
Abû Qurrah,"*Parole de l'Orient* , 22 (1997): 667-76.

Samir, Samir K., "Théodore Abû-Qurra. Du nouveau sur sa vie et son
oeuvre,"*al-Machriq* , 73 (1999): 417-49 [in Arabic].


