(2012-2013)
===========

I cannot thank enough all the scholars who kindly sent me information
and, in particular, those who provided me with a copy of their
publications or photocopies of tables of contents of collective works.
They are true scholars and true friends.

a- Collective Works or Collections of Articles

***Ad notitiam ignoti. L’*** **organon** ***dans la*** **translatio
studiorum** ***à l’époque d’Albert le Grand*** , ed. by Julie
Brumberg-Chaumont (Studia Artistarum 37). Turnhout: Brepols, 2013, 348
pp., ISBN 9782503541839.

Circolazione dei saperi nel Mediterraneo. Filosofia e scienze (secoli
IX-XVII). Circulation des savoirs autour de la Méditerranée. Philosophie
et sciences (IXe-XVIIe siècle). Atti del VII Colloquio Internazionale
della Société Internationale d’Histoire des Sciences et de la
Philosophie Arabes et Islamiques, Firenze, 16-28 febbraio 2006, ed. by
Graziella Federici Vescovini e Ahmad Hasnawi (Dipartimento di Scienze
dell’Educazione e dei Processi Culturali e Formativi, Facoltà di Scienze
della Formazione, Università degli Studi di Firenze; Istituto e Museo di
Storia della Scienza, Università degli Studi di Firenze; Centre
d’Histoire des Sciences et des Philosophies Arabes et Médiévales, CNRS
Paris). Florence: Cadmo, 2013, xviii-402 pp., ISBN 9788879234085.

***The Early Islamic Grammatical Tradition*** , ed. by Ramzi Baalbaki
(The Formation of the Classical Islamic World 36). Farnham: Ashgate,
2007, l-365 pp., ISBN 9780860787181.

***Education and Learning in the Early Islamic World*** , ed. by Claude
Gilliot (Formation of the Classical Islamic World 43). Farnham: Ashgate,
2012, xc-410 pp., ISBN 9780860787174.

Fierro, Maribel,*The Almohad Revolution: Politics and Religion in the
Islamic West during the Twelfth-Thirteenth Centuries* (Variorum
Collected Studies Series: CS996). Farham: Ashgate, 2012, xiv-342 pp.,
ISBN 9781409440536.

***Ibn Hazm of Cordoba: The Life and Works of a Controversial Thinker***
, ed. by Camilla Adang, Maribel Fierro & Sabine Schmidtke (Handbook of
Oriental Studies, Section 1, The Near and Middle East 103).
Leiden-Boston: Brill, 2013, xxii-804 pp., ISBN 9789004234246 & e-bk
243101.

***Interpreting Avicenna: Critical Essays*** , ed. by Peter Adamson.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013, xii-300 pp., ISBN
978-0-521-19073-2 [not to be confused with*Interpreting Avicenna:
Science and Philosophy in Medieval Islam* , ed. by Jon McGinnis with
David C. Reisman in 2004].

***Islam: Identité et altérité. Hommage à Guy Monnot, O.P.*** , ed. by
Mohammad Ali Amir-Moezzi (Bibliothèque de l’École des Hautes Études,
Sciences Religieuses 165). Turnhout: Brepols, 2013, 420 pp., ISBN
9782503550268.

***Islamic Legal Thought: A Compendium of Muslim Jurists*** , ed. by
Oussama Arabi, David S. Powers & Susan A. Spectorsky (Studies in Islamic
Law and Society 36). Leiden-Boston: Brill, 2013, xvi-590 pp., ISBN
9789004254527 & e-bk 9789004255883.

***Islamic Medical and Scientific Tradition: Critical Concepts in
Islamic Studies*** , ed. by Peter E. Pormann, 4 vol. Abingdon & New
York: Routledge, 2011, ISBN set 9780415479530: vol. I, part 1. The
theoretical framework: the sciences in Islamic philosophy and theology &
part 2. The life sciences: biology, medicine, veterinary medicine,
xviii-380 pp., ISBN 9780415483124; vol. II, part 2. The life sciences,
continued, viii-427 pp., ISBN 9780415483117; vol. III, part 3. The
physical sciences: physics, astronomy, geodesy & part. 4. The occult
sciences: astrology, alchemy, geomancy, viii-428 pp., ISBN
9780415483100; vol. IV, part 5. The mathematical sciences: arithmetic,
algebra, geometry, optics & part. 6. The practical sciences:
agriculture, cartography, engineering, pp. viii-240, ISBN 9780415483094.

***Ismaili and Fatmid Studies in Honor of Paul E. Walker*** , ed. by
Bruce D. Craig (Chicago Studies on the Middle East). Chicago: Middle
East Documentation Center, 2010, xxii-214 pp., ISBN 9780970819963.

Al-Kitâb. La sacralité du texte dans le monde de l’Islam. Actes du
Symposium International tenu à Leuven et Louvain-la-Neuve du 29 mai au 1
juin 2002 (Acta Orientalia Belgica Subsidia III), ed. by D. De Smet, G.
de Callataÿ & J.M.F. Van Reeth. Brussels, Louvain-la-Neuve, Leuven: Acta
Orientalia & Peeters, 2004, 434 pp.

***Law and Tradition in Classical Islamic Thought. Studies in Honor of
Professor Hossein Modarressi*** , ed. by Michael Cook, Najam Haider,
Intisar Rabb & Asma Sayeed (Palgrave Series in Islamic Theology, Law,
and History). New York: Palgrave, 2013, xix-326 pp., ISBN 9780230113299.

***The Letter of Mara bar Sarapion in Context. Proceedings of the
Symposium Held at Utrecht University, 10-12 December 2009*** , ed. by
Annette Merz & Teun Tieleman (Culture and History of the Ancient Near
East 58). Leiden-Boston: Brill, 2012, xiv-250 pp., ISBN 9789004233003;
e-book 233010.

**Madelung** , Wilferd,***Studies in Medieval Muslim Thought and
History*** , ed. by Sabine Schmidtke (Variorum CS1021). Farnham:
Ashgate, 2013, xiv-306 pp., ISBN 9781409450122.

**-------** ,***Studies in Medieval Shi’ism*** , ed. by Sabine Schmidtke
(Variorum CS1015). Farnham: Ashgate, 2012, xii-312 pp., ISBN
9781409450115.

More modoque. Die Wurzeln der europäischen Kultur und deren Rezeption im
Orient und Okzident. Festschrift für Miklós Maróth zum siebzigsten
Geburtstag, ed. by Pál Fodor, Gyula Mayer, Martina Monostori, Kornél
Szovák & László Takács. Budapest: Forschungzentrum für
Humanwissenschaften der Ungarischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, 2013,
360 pp., ISBN 9786155133060.

***La nature et le vide dans la physique médiévale. Études dédiées à
Edward Grant*** , ed. by Joël Biard & Sabine Rommevaux (Studia
Artistarum: Études sur la Faculté des arts dans les Universités
médiévales 32). Turnhout: Brepols, 2012, 437 pp., ISBN 978250354476-2 &
e-version 9782503544823 [most articles include at least some reference
to Arabic philosophers].

***Orient-Occident. Racines spirituelles de l’Europe*** , ed. by
Frédéric Möri with Guy Bedouelle, Charles Méla & Charles-Antoine Chamay.
Paris: Cerf, 2009, 543 pp., ISBN 9782204090667 [the section Traditions
musulmanes covers pp. 469 to 535].

***El pensamiento politico en la Edad Media*** , ed. by Pedro Roche
Arnas. Madrid: Fundación Ramón Areces, 2010, 729 pp., no ISBN.

***La Périodisation en Histoire des Sciences et de la Philosophie. La
Fin d’un Mythe*** , ed. & intro. by Hassan Tahiri (Cahiers de Logique et
d’Épistémologie 13). London: College Publications, 2013, pp. lxxiv-101,
ISBN 9781848900967.

***Philosophical Psychology in Arabic Thought and the Latin
Aristotelianism of the 13*** *th* ***Century*** , ed. by Luis Xavier
López-Farjeat & Jörg Alejandro Tellkamp (Sic et Non). Paris: Vrin, 2013,
303 pp., ISBN 9782711624614.

***Philosophy and the Abrahamic Religions: Scriptural Hermeneutics and
Epistemology*** , ed. by Torrance Kirby, Rahim Acar & Bilal Baa.
Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 2012, xxxvi-426 pp.,
ISBN 9781443840439.

***The Princeton Encyclopedia of Islamic Political Thought*** , ed. by
Gerhard Böwering with Patricia Crone, Wadad Kadi, Devin J. Stewart &
Muhammad Qasim Zaman. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2013,
xlviii-656 pp., ISBN 9780691134840 & e-bk 9781400838554.

***Proceedings: The XXII World Congress of Philosophy*** , held in 2008
in Korea and published by the Korean Philosophical Association in 2012
as a DVD with multi volumes that can be consulted at the Philosophy
Documentation Center at www.pdcnet.org/wcp22, ISBN 9781889680927.

***Renaissance Averroism and Its Aftermath: Arabic Philosophy in Early
Modern Europe*** , ed. by Anna Akasoy & Guido Giglioni (International
Archives of he History of Ideas 211/Archives internationales d’histoire
des idées). Dordrecht, New York: Springer, 2013, viii-405 pp., ISBN
9789400752399; e-bk 9789400752405.

***Sharing Poetic Expressions: Beauty, Sublime, Mysticism in Islamic and
Occidental Culture*** , ed. by Anna-Teresa Tymieniecka (Islamic
Philosophy and Occidental Phenomenology in Dialogue 6). New York &
Dordrecht: Springer, 2011, xii-242 pp., ISBN 9789400707597; e-bk
9789400707603.

**Sources and Approaches across Disciplines in Near Eastern Studies** ,
Proceedings of the 24th Congress of Union Européenne des Arabisants et
Islamisants, Leipzig, 2008, ed. by Verena Klemm & Nuka Al-Sha’ar with L.
Behzadi, S. Brinkmann, S. Günther & M. Yagonak in cooperation with B.
Backe, H.-G. Ebert, L.M. Franke, M. Koertner & D. De Smet (Orientalia
Lovaniensia Analecta 215). Louvain: Peeters, 2013, xiv-562 pp., ISBN
9789042925588.

***Synoptikos. Mélanges offerts à Dominique Urvoy*** , ed. by Nicole
Koulayan & Mansour Sayah. Toulouse: Université de Toulouse le Mirail,
2011, 703 pp., ISBN 9782746640955 [this book can be ordered at
toulouse@siloe-librairies.com ].

***Travelling through Time: Essays in honour of Kaj Öhrnberg*** , ed. by
Sylvia Akar, Jaakko Hämeen-Anttila & Inka Nokso-Koivisto (Studia
Orientalia 114). Helsinki: Societas Orientalis Fennica, 2013, 574 pp.,
ISBN 9789519380841.

***Universal Representation, and the Ontology of Individuation*** , ed.
by Gyula Klima & Alexander W. Hall (Proceedings of the Society for
Medieval Logic and Metaphysics 5). Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge
Scholars Publishing, 2011, 108 pp., ISBN 9781443833721 & e-bk
9781283436076.

Section I. Falsafa

Bibliographies and Chronicles

**Bibliography of Ibn Hazm** : “Inventory of Ibn Hazm’s Works,” by José
Miguel Puerta Vílchez (pp. 683-760) & “Ibn Hazm—Bibliography of
Secondary Sources,” by Leigh Chipman (pp. 761-87) in*Ibn Hazm* .

**Druart** , Thérèse-Anne, “Brief Bibliographical Guide in Medieval
Islamic Philosophy and Theology (2011-2012),”
http://philosophy.cua.edu/faculty/tad/bibliography-11-12.cfm. This
installment and previous ones, 1998-2012 can be consulted at
http://philosophy.cua.edu/faculty/druart/bibliographical-guide.cfm .

New Journals

***Intellectual History of the Islamicate World*** published its double
first number, 1, nn.1-2 (2013), Brill, ISSN 22129421 & E-ISSN 2212-943X.

***Journal of Abbasid Studies*** , directed by Monique Bernards, is
calling for papers. It will be published by Brill.

***Oxford Studies in Medieval Philosophy*** , an annual coming by Oxford
University Press and directed by Robert Pasnau, published its first
volume in 2013. It contains a paper “Yahyâ Ibn ‘Adî on the Location of
God,” by Peter Adamson & Robert Wisnovsky and includes a brief text
edition.

***Studia graeco-arabica*** began as an open access e-journal at
http://www.greekintoarabic.eu but the first two voumes 1 (2011) & 2
(2012) were published in printed form in 2012, vol. 3 (2013) is
published simultaneously as an e-jounral and in print.

Special Issues of Journals

***The Thomist*** consecrated its fourth issues of vol. 76 (October
2012) to Aquinas and the Arabs: articles by Richard C. Taylor on The
Beatific Vision, Jon McGinnis on Making Something out of Nothing, R.E.
Houser on*De principiis naturae* , and Jörg Alejandro Tellkamp on*Vis
estimativa* and*vis cogitativa* .

Journal in Russian

***Simvol*** published in Russian since 1979 contains interesting
articles. Yury Arzanhov offers information about it and some of its
articles in*Studia graeco-arabica* , 3 (2013): 244-48.

Computing Tools

1. G2A

**Boschetti** , Federico, “Annotations in collaborative environments,”
*Studia graeco-arabica* , 3 (2013): 185-94.

**Bozzi** , Andrea, “G2A: a Web application to study, annotate and
scholarly edit ancient texts and their aligned translations. Part I.
General model of the computational philology application,”*Studia
graeco-arabica* , 3 (2013): 159-71 &**Marchi** , Simone, “Part II.
Towards a user manual,”*Ibid.* , 173-83.

**Del Grosso** , Angelo Mario, “Indexing techniques and variant readings
management,”*Studia graeco-arabica* , 3 (2013): 211-30.

**Nahli** , Ouafae, “Computational contributions for Arabic language
processing. Part I. The automatic morphologic analysis of Arabic
texts,”*Studia graeco-arabica* , 3 (2013): 195-206 & Nahili, Ouafae
&**Giovannetti** , Emiliano, “Part II.*Lisân al-‘arab* as a source of
lexical and morphological knowledge,”*Ibid.* , 207-10.

2. Other

***Online Greek and Arabic Glossary*** at http://telota.bbaw.de/glossga/
.

**Wisnovsky** , Robert, with R. Farrahi Moghaddam, M. Cheriet & T. Milo,
“A Prototype system for handwritten sub-word recognition: Toward
Arabic-manuscript transliteration,”*Proceedings of the 11*
th*International Conference on Information Sciences, Signal Processing
and their Applications* (2012): 1198-1204.

**-------** , with Y. Chherawala & M. Cheriet, “Sparse descriptor for
lexicon reduction in handwritten Arabic documents,”*Proceedings of the
21* st*International Conference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR)* (2012):
3729-32.

**-------** , with Y. Chherawala & M. Cheriet, “TSV-LR: Topological
Signature Vector-based Lexicon Reduction for Fast Recognition of
Pre-Modern Arabic Sub-words,” in*Proceedings of the 2011 Workshop on
Historical Document Imaging and Processing* (New York: Association for
Computing Machinery, 2011), pp. 6-13.

**-------** , with R. Farrahi Moghaddam, M. Cheriet, M. Adankon, & K.
Filonenko, “IBN SINA: A Database for Research on Processing and
Understanding of Arabic Manuscripts Images,” in*Proceedings of the 9*
th*IAPR International Workshop on Document Analysis Systems* (New York:
Association for Computing Machinery, 2010), pp. 257-73.

Online Arabic and Latin Glossary

Freely accessible at
http://www.philosophi.uni-wuerzburg.de/arabic-latin-glossary/ and ed. by
Dag Nikolaus Hasse.

Greek, Persian, and Syriac Sources

**Adamson** , Peter, „Aristotle and the Arabic Commentary Tradition,“
in*The Oxford Handbook of Aristotle* , ed. by Chr. Shields. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2012, pp. 645-64.

**-------** , „Vision, light, and color in al-Kindî, Ptolemy and the
ancient commentators,“ in*Islamic Medical and Scientific Tradition* ,
vol. IV, pp. 17-42 [reprint from 2006].

**Arnzen** , Rüdiger, „Proclus on Plato’s*Timaeus* 89e3-90c7,“*Arabic
Sciences and Philosophy* , 23.1 (2013): 1-45 [includes an edition and
English translation of the Arabic fragments].

**Bertolacci** , Amos, „From Athens to Bukhârâ, to Cordoba, to Cologne:
On the Transmission of Aristotle’s*Metaphysics* in the Arab and Latin
Worlds during the Middle Ages,“ in*Circolazione dei saperi* , pp.
217-33.

**Blank** , David L., „Mara bar Sarapion and Greek Philosophy,“
in*Letter of Mara bar Sarapion* , pp. 167-82.

**Bruns** , Peter, „Die metaphysische Problematik der Unendlichkeit
Gottes in der Philosophie des spätantiken Sasanidenreiches,“
in*Synoptikos* , pp. 41-53 [Ephrem, Bardaisan, Paul the Persian, Babai
the Great].

**Cabanillas Fernández** , Gustavo, « Tolerancia e intolerancia en la
transmissión del conocimiento griego al mundo islámico, » in*El
pensamiento político* , pp. 333-42 al-Fârâbî].

**Chase** , Michael, „Philoponus‘ Cosmology in the Arabic
Tradition,“*Recherches de Théologie et Philosophie médiévales* , 79.2
(2012): 271-306 [includes quotations and discussions in Averroes].

**D’Ancona** , Cristina, „*Quasi ab ipsa veritate coacti* : Histoire
gréco-arabe d’un thème aristotélicien,“ in*Omnia in uno. Hommage à
Alain-Philippe Segonds* , ed. by Caroline Noirot & Nuccio Ordine (Paris:
Les Belles Lettres, 2012), pp. 223-41 [*Theology of Aristotle* &
al-Kindî].

**Endress** , Gerhard,**Arnzen** , Rüdiger &**Arzhanov** , Yury,
„Griechische Wissenschaft in arabischer Sprache. Ein
griechisch-arabisches Fachwörterbuch der internationalen
Wissensgesellschaft in klassischen Islam,“*Studia graeco-arabica* , 3
(2013): 143-56.

A Greek and Arabic Lexicon (GALex): Materials for a Dictionary of the
Medieval Translations from Greek into Arabic, Fascicle 11, b’d to bky,
ed. By Gerhard Endress & Dimitri Gutas. Leiden: Brill, 2013, 160 pp.,
ISBN 9789004255661.

**Hugonnard-Roche** , Henri, „Un*Organon* court en syriaque: Paul le
Perse*versus* Boèce,: in*Ad notitiam ignoti* , pp. 193-216.

**King** , Daniel, „Origenism in Sixth Century Syria. The Case of a
Syriac Manuscript of Pagan Philosophy,“ in*Origenes und sein Erbe in
Orient und Okzident* , ed. by Alfons Furst (Adamantiana 1) (Münster:
Aschendorff, 2011), pp. 179-212 [Bardaisan, Sergius of Resh’aina}.

**Ntinti** , Anna, „The Death(s) of Plato,“ in*Letter of Mara bar
Sarapion* , pp. 183-92.

**Parker** , Emily &**Treiger** , Alexander, „Philo’s Odyssey into the
Medieval Jewish World: Neglected Evidence from Arab Christian
Literature,“*Dionysius* , 30 (2012): 117-41 [mainly from*De vita
contemplativa* ; al-Muqammis & Qirqisânî].

**Pietruschka** , Ute, „Plato als Eremit: Zu den
Überlieferungsbedingungen griechischer Populärphilosophie im
Äthiopischen,“*Der Islam* , 88.1 (Oct. 2012): 96-122.

**Rashed** , Marwan, „Nouveaux fragments anti-procliens de Philopon en
version arabe et le problème des origines de la théorie de
l‘“instauration“ (*Hudûth* ),“ in*Circolazione dei saperi* , pp. 323-60.

**Saliba** , George, „Arabic versus Greek astronomy: a debate over the
foundations of science,“ in*Islamic Medical and Scientific Tradition* ,
vol. III, pp. 135-46 [reprint from 2000].

**Schmidt** , Ernst A. &**Ulmann** , Manfred,*Aristoteles in Fes. Zum
Wert der arabischen Überlieferung der* Nikomachischen Ethik*für die
Kritik des griechischen Textes* . Heidelberg: Winter, 2012, 122 pp.,
ISBN 9783825360146.

**Schoeler** , Gregor, „The ‚Poetic Syllogism‘ Revisited,“*Oriens* ,
41.1-2 (2013): 1-26 [al-Fârâbî, Avicenna, Ibn Tumlûs].

**Sidarus** , Adel, „Alexandre le Grand dans la tradition syriaque
(recherches récentes et perspectives nouvelles),“*Oriens Christianus* ,
95 (2011): 1-5.

**Steigerwald** , Diane, „Point de vue ismaélien sur Socrate,“ in*Islam
: Identité et altérité* , pp. 383-92.

**Syros** , Vasileios, « Galenic Medicine and Social Stability in Early
Modern Florence and the Islamic Empires, »*Journal of Early Modern
History* , 17.2 (2013) : 161-213.

**[Timothy I, Patrirch]** ,*Die Briefe 42-58 des ostsyrischen
Patriarchen Timotheos I* , intro., transl. & notes by Martin Heimgartner
(Corpus Scriptorum Christianorum Orientalium 645, Scriptores Syri 249).
Louvain : Peeters, 2012, xciv-137 pp., ISBN 9789342926233 [letters 42,
43 & 48 include information about translations of Aristotle’s*organon*
from Greek into Syriac].

**Treiger** , Alexander, « A Fourteenth-century Arabic treatise*On the
Platonic Intellectual Ideas* , » in*Philosophy and the Abrahamic
Religions* , pp. 253-78.

**van der Horst** , Pieter W., « Consolation from Prison: Mara bar
Sarapion and Boethius, »*Letter of Mara bar Sarapion* , pp. 193-203.

**Wakelnig** , Elvira, « Al-Antâkî’s Use of the Lost Arabic Version of
Philoponus’*Contra Proclum* , »*Arabic Sciences and Philosophy* , 23.2
(2013) : 291-317.

**Walzer** . Richard, « On the Legacy of the Classics in the Islamic
World, » in*Education and Learning* , pp. 235-43 [original 1956].

**Watt** , John W., « Von Alexandrien nach Baghdad. Ein erneuter Besuch
bei Max Meyerhof, » in*Origenes und sein Erbe in Orient und Okzident* ,
ed. by Alfons Furst (Adamantiana 1) (Münster: Aschendorff, 2011), pp.
213-26.

**Yaman** , Hikmet, „Greek Thought and Prophetic Tradition: Revelatory
Background of Early Islamic Philosophy,“ in*Philosophy and the Abrahamic
Religions* , pp. 137-55.

**Yücesoy** , Hayrettin, „Translation as Self-Consciousness: Ancient
Sciences, Antediluvian Wisdom, and the Abbâsid Translation
Movement,“*Journal of World History* , 20.4 (2009): 523-57.

**Zonta** , Mauro, „Three New Fragments of a*Paraphrase of Aristotle’s
Topics* ascribed to Themistius in Hebrew Quotations of al-Fârâbî’s ‚Long
Coimmentary‘ on the*Topics* , Book VIII,“ in*Ad notitiam ignoti* , pp.
217-24.

Latin, Hebrew, Syriac, Byzantine, Renaissance, and Modern Translations
and Influences

**Bertelloni** , Francisco, “La filosofía explica la revelación sobre el
“averroismo politico” en el*Defensor pacis* de Marsilio de
Padua,”*Educação e Filosofia* , 25.50 (2011): 475-99.

**Bertolacci** , Amos, “Albert’s Use of Avicenna and Islamic
Philosophy,” in*A Companion to Albert the Great: Theology, Philosophy,
and the Sciences* , ed. by Irven M. Resnick (Brill’s Companion to the
Christian Tradition 38) (Leiden-Boston: Brill, 2013), pp. 601-14.

**-------** , “Albertus Magnus and ‘Avenzoreth’ (Ibn Zur’a, D. 1008):
Legend or Realitya,” in*The Medieval legnds of Philosophers and
Scholars* (Micrologus 21) (Florence: SISMEL, 2013), pp. 369-96.

**-------** , „From Athens to Bukhârâ, to Cordoba, to Cologne: On the
Transmission of Aristotle’s*Metaphysics* in the Arab and Latin Worlds
during the Middle Ages,“ in*Circolazione dei saperi* , pp. 217-33.

**Brague** , Rémi, „La transmission de l’héritage antique: Le rapport à
la tradition,“ in*More modoque* , pp. 453-62.

**Burnett** , Charles, “Revisiting the 1552-1550 and 1562
Aristotle-Averroes Edition,” in*Renaissance Averroism* , pp. 55-64.

**-------** , “’Spiritual medicine’: music and healing in Islam and its
influence in Western medicine,” in*Islamic Medical and Scientific
Tradition* , vol. II, pp. 252-59 [reprint from 2000].

**Colomba** , Coralba, “Ramon Lull at the Council of Vienne (1311-1312):
The Last Anti-Averroist Fight for the Demonstrability of the
Faith,”*Mediaeval Sophia* , 13.1 (2013): 44-64.

**Cordonnier** , Rémy, “Influences directes et indirectes de
l’Encyclopédie des Ikhwân al-Safâ’ dans l’Occident chrétien,”*Le Muséon*
, 125.3-4 (2012): 421-66.

**Côté** , Antoine, “Aquinas, the Kalâm, and Skepticism about Sense
Perception,” in*Skepticism, Causality, and Skepticism about Causality* ,
ed. by Gyula Klima and Alexander W. Hall (Proceedings of the Society for
Medieval Logic and Metaphysics 10) (Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge
Scholars Publisher, 2012), pp. 35-46.

**Daiber** , Hans, “Raymond Llull as a Humanist,” in*More modoque* , pp.
463-76.

**D’Ancona** , Cristina, „*Quasi ab ipsa veritate coacti* : Histoire
gréco-arabe d’un thème aristotélicien,“ in*Omnia in uno. Hommage à
Alain-Philippe Segonds* , ed. by Caroline Noirot & Nuccio Ordine (Paris:
Les Belles Lettres, 2012), pp. 223-41 [*Theology of Aristotle* &
al-Kindî].

**Di Branco** , Marco, “Ismailiti a Bisanzio. Immagini e
presenze,”*Studia graeco-arabica* , 3 (2013): 105-20.

**Didier** , Hugues, “Al-Faylasûf-El-Filsofo. Un mécréant tout compte
fait assez musulman dans le Libro de Vida de Jérôme Xavier [1600],”
in*Synoptikos* , pp. 193-207.

**Dinca** , Adinel-Ciprian &**Baumgarten** , Alexander, “Hic liber est
incorrectissime impressus. A Preliminary Discussion of the Liber De
causis in Mediaeval Transylvania,”*Chôra* , 9-10 (2011-12): 491-98.

**El Bouazzati** , Bennacer, “Le rôle de la science optique dans la
revolution scientifique,” in*Circolazione dei saperi* , pp. 125-39.

**Fidora** , Alexander, “From Arabic into Latin into Hebrew:
Aristotelian Psychology and its Contribution to the Rationalisation of
Theological Traditions,” in*Philosophical Psychology* , pp. 17-39
[Gundissalinus, Albert the Great, Hillel of Verona].

**-------** , “Dominicus Gundissalinus and the Introduction of
Metaphysics into the Latin West,”*The Review of Metaphysics* , 66.4
(2013): 691-712.

**Forte** , Francesca, “Uno strano caso di “translatio studii”. La
“Poetica” di Aristotele dal mondo arabo al mondo latino,” in*L’antichità
classica nel pensiero medievale* , ed. by A. Palazzo (Porto: Fédération
Internationale des Instituts d’Études Médiévales, 2011), pp. 131-47.

**Fraenkel** , Carlos, “Reconsidering the Case of Elijah Delmedigo’s
Averroism and Its Impact on Spinoza,” in*Renaissance Averroism* , pp.
213-36.

**Freudenthal** , Gad, and**Mauro** , Zonta, “The Reception of Avicenna
in Jewish Cultures, East and West,” in*Interpreting Avicenna: Critical
Essays* , pp. 214-41.

**García Valverde** , José Manuel, “Averroistic Themes in Girolamo
Cardano’s*De Immortalitate Animorum* ,” in*Ranaissance Averroism* , pp.
145-71.

**Giglioni** , Guido, “Introduction,” in*Renaissance Averroism* , pp.
1-34.

**Hollmann** , Joshua, “For the Peace of Constantinople: Nicholas of
Cusa’s*De pace fidei* and the*polis* as Nexus of Christian-Muslim
Dialogue,” in*Philosophy and the Abrahamic Religions* , pp. 297-312.

**Janssens** , Jules, “Albert le Grand et sa connaissance des écrits de
logique,” in*Ad notitiam ignoti* , pp. 225-57.

**Krinis** , Ehud, “The Arabic Background of the*Kuzari* ,”*Journal of
Jewish Thought & Philosophy* , 21.1 (2013): 1-56.

***Liber de causis*** , see Falsafa section.

**Maierù** , Alfonso, “Individuum vagum. L’influenza di Avicenna in un
commento a Porfirio della prima metà del secolo XIII,” in*Mots médiévaux
offerts à Ruedi Imbach* , ed. by I. Atucha, D. Calma, C. König-Pralong,
I. Zavattero (Textes et Études du Moyen Âge 57). (Porto: Fédération
Internationale des Instituts d’Études Médiévales, 2011), pp. 353-64.

**Mandosio** , Jean-Marc, „La place de la logique et de ses subdivisions
dans l’*Énumération des sciences* d’al-Fârâbî et chez Dominicus
Gundissalinus,“ in*Ad notitiam ignoti* , pp. 285-310

**Marenbon** , John, “Ernest Renan and Averroism: The Story of a
Misinterpretation,” in*Renaissance Averroism* , pp. 273-83.

**Martin** , Craig, “Humanism and the Assessment of Averroes in the
Renaissance,” in*Renaissance Averroism* , pp. 65-79.

**Montgomery** , James E., “Leo Strauss and the Alethiometer,”
in*Renaissance Averroism* , pp. 285-320 [mainly on al-Fârâbî].

**Obrist** , Barbara, “Twelfth-century Cosmography, the*De secretis
philosophie* , and Mâshâ’allah (attr. To),*Liber de Orbe* ,”*Traditio* ,
67 (2012): 235-76.

**Pormann** , Peter E., “The dispute between the philarabic and
philhellenic physicians and the forgotten heritage of Arabic medicine
(La querelle des médecins arabistes et héllenistes et l’héritage
oublié),” in*Islamic Medical and Scientific Tradition* , vol. II, pp.
283-316 [transl. From French by the author, reprint from 2004].

**Sgarbi** , Marco, “Immanuel Kant, Universal Understanding, and the
Meaning of Averroism in the German Enlightenment,” in*Renaissance
Averroism* , pp. 255-69.

**Shiloah** , Amnon, “Jewish and Muslim traditions of music therapy,”
in*Islamic Medical and Scientific Tradition* , vol. II, pp. 240-51
[al-Kindî, Ikhwân, reprint from 2000].

**Spruit** , Leen, “Intellectual Beatitude in the Averroist Tradition:
The Case of Agostino Nifo,” in*Renaissance Averroism* , pp. 125-44.

**Suarez-Nani** , Tiziana, “Raimondo Lullo, i demoni e gli
averroisti,”*Freiburger Zeitschrift für Philosophie und Theologie* ,
59.2 (2012): 360-75.

**Taylor** , Richard C., “Arabic/Islamic Philosophy in Thomas Aquinas’s
Conception of the Beatific Vision in IV*Sent* ., D. 49, Q. 2, A.1,”*The
Thomist* , 76.4 (2012): 509-50 [al-Farabi, Ibn Bajja, Avicenna,
Averroes].

**-------** , “Aquinas and ‘the Arabs’: Aquinas’s First Critical
Encounter with the Doctrines of Avicenna and Averroes on the Intellect,
In 2 Sent.d. 17, q. 2, a. 1,” in*Philosophical Psychology* , pp. 141-83
with in Appendix “Thomas Aquinas, In 2 Sent., d. 17, q. 2, a. 1. English
translation by Richard Taylor from a provisional Latin text prepared by
the late P.-M. Gils,” pp. 279-96.

**Woerther** , Frédérique, “Les traces du Grand commentaire d’al-Fârâbî
à la*Rhétorique* d’Aristote dans la traduction arabo-latine de
la*Rhétorique* par Hermann l’Allemand,”*Bulletin de Philosophie
médiévale* , 54 (2012): 137-54.

**Zavattero** , Irene, “I volgarizzamenti duecenteschi della*Summa
Alexandrinorum* ,” in*Freiburger Zeitschrift für Philosophie und
Theologie* , 59.2 (2012): 333-59.

General Studies

**Aavani** , Gholamreza, « Rethinking Philosophy in an Oriental Way,
»*Sophia Perennis* , 3.1 (2011) : 5-39 [in English].

**Abdollah** , Zahra, « Color in Islamic Theosophy : An Analytical
Reading of Four Scholars: Kubrâ, Râzî, Simnânî, and Kirmani, »*Journal
of Islamic Philosophy* , 7 (2011) : 35-51.

**Adamson** , Peter, “Abû Ma’shar, al-Kindî and the philosophical
defense of astrology,” in*Islamic Medical and Scientific Tradition* ,
vol. III, pp. 243-64 [reprint from 2002].

**Adoricio** , Chiara, « The Debate between Salomon Munk and Heinrich
Ritter on Medieval Jewish and Arabic History of Philosophy, »*European
Journal of Jewish Studies* , 6.1 (2012) : 169-82.

**Ahmed** , Asad Q., « Post-Classical Philosophical Commentaries/Glosses
: Innovation in the Margins, »*Oriens* , 41.3-4 (2013) : 317-48 [on
logic text of Muhibballâh al-Bihârî (d. 1707)].

**-------** , « Logic in the Khayrâbâdî School of India : A Preliminary
Exploration, » in*Law and Tradition* , pp. 227-45 pp.

**Ahmed** , Assad Q. &**Larkin** , Margaret, « The Hâshiya and Islamic
Intellectual History, »*Oriens* , 41.3-4 (2013) : 213-16.

**Alami** , Ahmed &**Badoual** , Guillaume,*La pensée philosophique dans
l’islam classique: Anthologie thématique* . Casablanca : Afrique Orient,
2012, 590 pp., ISBN 9789981257771 [I. Place of Philosophy: 1. Philosophy
as a controversial science; 2. Logic as a universal instrument; 3.
Reason and revealed law; 4. Proofs for the existence of God; II.
Ontology and metaphysics: 5, Thing, essence, existence; 6. The meaning
of being; 7. Status of the universal; 8. Doctrines about the intellect;
9. The question of causation: contingency and necessity; III. God and
human destiny: 10. The issue of free choice; 11. Good and evil: the
issue of divine justice; 12. Human and divine love; 13. Power and
rulership; French translations of brief but well-chosen passages with
the original Arabic texts at the end of each chapter. Covers some 25
philosophers and mutakllimûn].

**Amir-Moezzi** , Mohammad Ali, « Remarques sur le persan, seconde
langue sacrée de l’islam, » in*Synoptikos* , pp. 501-14.

**Arkoun** , Mohammed,*La question éthique et juridique dans la pensée
islamique* (Études musulmanes). Paris: Vrin, 2010, 202 pp., ISBN
9782711623013 [originally intended to be a new preface to the reprint of
Miskawayh’s*Traité d’Éthique* ].

**Asgariyazdi** , Ali, « Characteristics of Islamic Philosophy,
»*Existenz* . 7.1 (Spring 2012) : 56-59.

**Azadpur** , Mohammad,*Reason Unbound. On Spiritual Practice in Islamic
Peripatetic Philosophy* . Albany : State University of New York Press,
2011, viii-179 pp., ISBN 9781438437637 & e-bk 9781461906339.

**Belo** , Catarina, « Models of Causality in Islamic Philosophy, »
in*La Périodisation* , pp. 15-24 [Avicenna, al-Ghzâlî & Averroes].

**Bertolacci** , Amos, „From Athens to Bukhârâ, to Cordoba, to Cologne:
On the Transmission of Aristotle’s*Metaphysics* in the Arab and Latin
Worlds during the Middle Ages,“ in*Circolazione dei saperi* , pp.
217-33.

**Biesterfeldt** , Hans Hinrich, „Medieval Arabic encyclopedias of
science and philosophy,“ in*Islamic Medical and Scientific Tradition* ,
vol. I, pp. 48-67 [reprint from 2000].

**-------** , „Some opinions on the physician’s remuneration in medieval
Islam,“ in*Islamic Medical and Scientific Tradition* , vol. II, pp.
146-60 [reprint from 1984].

**Blasone** , Pino, « Il sé attraverso l’altro nel pensiero arabo, »
www.babelonline.net,*Rivista di Filosofia. N.S.(Rome),* 6 (2009) :
255-64.

**Brague** , Rémi, « Penser dans l’Islam, » in*Orient-Occident* , pp.
473-75.

**Bunyadzade** , Konul, « Pantheism in Thinking of he Medieval East, »
in*Proceedings : The XXII World Congress* , vol. 14 : Medieval
Philosophy, pp. 13-19 [in fact on Islamic East].

**Burrell** , David, « From al-Fârâbî to Mulla Sadra : The Two Phases of
Islamic Philosophical Theology, » in*Philosophy and the Abrahamic
Religions* , pp. 281-96.

**Butterworth** , Charles E., « Philosophy and Jurisprudence in Islam—A
Hermeneutic Perspective, »*Existenz* , 7.1 (Spring 2012) : 65-69.

**Cabanillas Fernández** , Gustavo, « Tolerancia e intolerancia en la
transmissión del conocimiento griego al mundo islámico, » in*El
pensamiento político* , pp. 333-42 al-Fârâbî].

**Carter** , M.-G., « Sentence Types in Grammar, Law, and Philosophy, »
in Centre and Periphery Within the Borders of Islam. Proceedings of the
23rd Congress of L’Union Européenne des Arabisants et Islamisants, ed.
by Giuseppe Contu (OLA 207) (Louvain-Paris-Walpole, MA: Peeters, 2012),
pp. 313-25.

**El-Cha’’âr** , Noha, “L’amitié et la vertu morale au sein de la
culture musulmane,”*al-Machriq* , 87.2 (2013): 615-33 [Miskawayh,
al-Tawhîdî & al-Mâwardî, in Arabic].

**Chittick** , William C., “The Aesthetics of Islamic Ethics,”
in*Sharing Poetic Expressions* , pp. 3-14.

**Cooper** , Glen, “Hagar Banished: Departing from the Latin Galen and
its Arabic Sources in the Aldine Edition,”*Early Science & Medicine* ,
17.6 (2012): 604-42.

**Daftary** , Farhad, “The Iranian School of Philosophical
Ismailism,”*Ishraq* , 4 (2013): 13-24.

**Daiber** , Hans, “Wissen und Handeln in der philosophischen Ethik des
Islam. Griechische Wurzeln und islamische Transformation,”
in*Phronêsis—Prudentia—Klugheit. Das Wissen des Klugen in Mittelalter,
Renaissance und Neuzeit. Il sapere del saggio nel Medioevo, nel
Rinascimento e nell’età moderna* , ed. by Alexander Fidora, Andreas
Niederberger & Merio Scattola (Turnhout: Brepols, 2013), pp. 35-61.

**D’Ancona** , Cristina, „*Quasi ab ipsa veritate coacti* : Histoire
gréco-arabe d’un thème aristotélicien,“ in*Omnia in uno. Hommage à
Alain-Philippe Segonds* , ed. by Caroline Noirot & Nuccio Ordine (Paris:
Les Belles Lettres, 2012), pp. 223-41 [*Theology of Aristotle* &
al-Kindî].

**De Smet** , Daniel,*La philosophie ismaélienne. Un ésotérisme chiite
entre néoplatonisme et gnose* , with forward byMohammad Ali Amir-Moezzi
(Les Conférences de l’École Pratique des hautes Études). Paris: Cerf,
2012, 190 pp., ISBN 9782204099233.

**Ebstein** , Michael,*Mysticism and Philosophy in al-Andalus : Ibn
Masarra, Ibn al-‘Arabî and the Ismâ’îlî Tradition* (Philosophy, Theology
and Science). Leiden-Boston : Brill, 2013, 300 pp., ISBN 9789004255364 &
e-bk 9789004255371.

**-------** , « The Word of God and the Divine Will : Ismâ’îlî Traces in
Andalusî Mysticism, »*Jerusalem Studies in Arabic and Islam* , 39
(2012): 247-302 [*Theology of Aristotle* , Ikhwân al-Safâ’, and Eastern
Neoplatonists among others].

**El Bouazzati** , Bennacer, “Le rôle de la science optique dans la
revolution scientifique,” in*Circolazione dei saperi* , pp. 125-39.

**Esmail** , Aziz, « Philosophical Remarks on Scripture, » in*Al-Kitâb*
, pp. 23-48.

**Fancy** , Nahyan, « Medical Commentaires : A Preliminary Examination
of Ibn al-Nafîs’s*Shûrûh* , the*Mûjaz* and Subsequent Commentaries on
the*Mûjaz* , »*Oriens* , 41.3-4 (2013) : 525-45 [also Ibn Sînâ].

**Fatoorchi** , Pirooz, “On Intellectual Skepticism: A Selection of
Skeptical Arguments and Tûsî’s Criticisms, with Some Comparative
Notes,”*Philosophy East and West* , 63.2 (2013): 213-50.

**Feldman** , Noah, « The Ethical Literature: Religion and Political
Authority as Brothers, »*Journal of Persianate Studies* , 5.2 (2012):
95-127.

**Fraenkel** , carlos, « Theocracy and Autonomy in Medieval Islamic and
Jewish Philosophy, »*Political Theory* , 38.3 (2010): 340-66.

**Ganjipour** , Anoush, « What is Islamic Philosophy, »*Critique* , 68,
n.787 (Dec. 2012): 1075-90.

**Gillon** , Fârès, « Aperçus sur les origines de l’ismaélisme à travers
le*Kitâb al-Kashf* , attribué au*dâ’î* Gha’far b. Mansûr al-Yaman,
»*Ishraq* , 4 (2013): 90-111.

**Gutas** , Dimitri, « Medical theory and scientific method in the age
of Avicenna, » in*Islamic Medical and Scientific Tradition* , vol. I,
pp. 33-47 [reprint from 2003].

**Hajatpour** , Reza, Vom Gottesentwurf zum Selbstenwurf: Die Idee der
Perfektibilität in der islamischen Existenzphilosophie. Freiburg: Verlag
Karl Alber, 2013, 392 pp., ISBN 3495485732.

**Ibrahim** , Bilal, „Fakhr ad-Dîn ar-Râzî, Ibn al-Haytam and
Aristotelian Science: Essentialism versus Phenomenalism in
Post-Classical Islamic Thought,“*Oriens* , 41.3-4 (2013): 379-431 [also
Ibn Sînâ].

**Jambet** , Christian, « Dieu, le monde et l’homme en philosophie
islamique, » in*Philosophies d’ailleurs. Les pensées hébraïques, arabes,
persanes et égyptiennes* , ed. by Roger-Pol Droit (Paris : Hermann,
2009), pp. 173-95.

**Joosse** , N. Peter, « A Newly-Discovered Commentary on the
Hippocratic*Prognostic* by Barhebraeus : Its Contents and Its Place
within the Arabic*Taqdimat al-ma’rifa* Tradition, »*Oriens* , 41.3-4
(2013): 499-523 [also ‘Abd al-Latîf al-Baghdâdî].

**Karimullah** , Kamran I, « Rival Moral Traditions in the Late Ottoman
Empire, 1839-1908, »*Journal of Islamic Studies* , 24.1 (2013): 37-66.

**Khamenei** , Sayyed Muhammad, « The Beginnings of Ismailism, »*Ishraq*
, 4 (2013): 25-31 [in Russian ; English summary 621].

**Krinis** , Ehud, « The Arabic Background of the Kuzari, »*Journal of
Jewish Thought & Philosophy* , 21.1 (2013): 1-56.

**Lauzi** , Egle,*Il destino degli animali. Aspetti delel tradizioni
culturali arabe e occidentale nel Medio Evo* . Florence ; Edizioni del
Galluzzo, 2012, xiv-276 pp., ISBN 9788884504319 [al-Jâhiz, Ikhwân,
al-Damîrî].

**Lea** , David, « The Philosophers of Al Andalus and European
Modernity, » in*Migrating Texts & Traditions* , ed. by William Sweet
(Ottawa: University of Ottawa Press, 2012), pp. 251-66 [mainly Ibn
Tufayl, Descartes, Rousseau, Kant & Guénon].

**Leiser** , Gary, « Medical education in Islamic lands from the seventh
to the fourteenth century, » in*Islamic Medical and Scientific
Tradition* , vol. II, pp. 160-84 [reprint from 1983].

**Liu** , Yihong, « Islamic Philosophy in China : The Combination of the
Spiritualities, » in*Proceedings : The XXII World Congress* , vol. 8:
Comparative Philosophy, pp. 173-78.

**Mahdi** , Muhsin, « Language and Logic in Calssical Islam, » in*Early
Islamic Grammatical Tradition* , pp. 135-67 [1970 original].

**Marín** , Manuela, « The Transmission of Knowledge in al-Andalus (up
to 300/912), » in*Education and Learning* , pp. 297-306 [transl. By
David McLoghlin of 1987 Spanish original].

**Marlow** , Louise, « Among Kings and Sages : Greek and Indian Wisdom
in an Arabic Mirror for Princes, »*Arabica* , 60.1-2 (2013) : 1-57
[*Nasîhat al-mulûk* of al-Mâwardî].

**Martínez Lorca** , Andrés,*Maestros de Occidente. Estudios sobre el
pensamiento andalusí* (Al-Andalus. Textos y estudios). Madris: Trotta,
2007, 263 pp., ISBN 9788481649291.

**McGinnis** , Jon, “Pointers, Guides, Founts and Gifts: The Reception
of Avicennan Physics in the East,”*Oriens* , 41.3-4 (2013): 433-56
[al-Abharî, Mullâ Sadrâ, al-Kâtibî, Fadli Haqq al-Khayrâbâdî].

-------**,** « Natural Knowledge in the Arabic Middle Ages, »
in*Wrestling with Nature : From Omens to Science* , ed. by Peter
Harrison, Ronald L. Numbers & Michael H. Shank (Chicago & London : The
University of Chicago Press, 2011), pp. 59-82.

**Movahed** , Zia, « De re and de dicto Modality in Islamic Traditional
Logic, »*Sophia Perennis* , 2.2 (2010) : 5-14 [in English].

**Musallam** , Basim, « The human embryo in Arabic scientific and
religious thought, » in*Islamic Medical and Scientific Tradition* , vol.
II, pp. 317-31 [Avicenna & Ibn Qayyim, reprint from 1990].

**Nosko-Koivisto** , Inka &**Svärd** , Saana, „The Microcosm-Macrocosm
Analogy in Mesopotamia and Mediaeval Islamic Contexts,“ in*Travelling
through Time* , pp. 279-308.

**Pasnau** , Robert, „Divisions of Epistemic Labour: Some Remarks on the
History of Fideism and Esotericism,“ in*Continuity and Innovation in
Medieval and Modern Philosophy: Knowledge, Mind, and Language* , ed. by
John Marenbon (Proceedings of the British Academy 189). (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2013), pp. 83-117 [Averroes & al-Ghazâlî].

**Pazuki** , Shahram, « Philosophy of Art and Beauty in Shiraz School of
Philosophy, »*Sophia Perennis* , pp. 5-20 [in Persian, English abstract
p. 57].

***Philosophies d’ailleurs. Les pensées hébraïques, arabes, persanes et
égyptiennes*** , ed. by Roger-Pol Droit. Paris : Hermann, 2009, 448 pp.,
ISBN 9782705666668 [the Arab and Persian section, pp. 171-348, is ed. by
Christian Jambet and includes brief translations from Arabic or Farsi
texts by Avicenna, Suhrawardi, Amoli, al-Tusi, Sa’id Qommi, Mulla Sadra,
Ibn Sab’in, al-Sijistani, al-Farabi, Averroes, al-Ghazali, Mir Damad,
Mustansir bi l-lah, Aristotle’s Theology with glosses by Sa’id Qommi,
and Ahmad Ghazali, but which edition was used is not indicated].

**Piaia** , Gregorio, « Averroes and Arabic Philosophy in the
Modern*Historia Philosophica* : Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries, »
in*Renaissance Averroism* , pp. 237-53.

**Platti** , Emilio, « Entre théologie et philosophie : des Arabes
chrétiens dans l’œuvre de Shlomo Pines (1908-1990), » in*Sources and
Approaches* , pp. 101-12.

**Pormann** , Peter E., “The dispute between the philarabic and
philhellenic physicians and the forgotten heritage of Arabic medicine
(La querelle des médecins arabistes et héllenistes et l’héritage
oublié),” in*Islamic Medical and Scientific Tradition* , vol. II, pp.
283-316 [transl. From French by the author, reprint from 2004].

**Provençal** , Philippe, « Le problème de l’identité des espèces
animales et végéetales dans les textes arabes et les recherches faites
en cette matière par Peter Forskal (1732-1763), » in*Circolazione dei
saperi* , pp. 243-51.

**Ragep** , F. Jamil, « Freeing astronomy from philosophy : an aspect of
Islamic influence on science, » in*Islamic Medical and Scientific
Tradition* , vol. III, pp. 70-94 [includes ed. & transl. of a passage
from al-Qûshjî, reprint from 2001].

**Ramón Guerrero** , Rafael, « Legislador y poder en lafilosofía
política del islam y del judaísmo, » in*El pensamiento político* , pp.
191-213.

**Rashed** , Marwan, „Nouveaux fragments anti-procliens de Philopon en
version arabe et le problème des origines de la théorie de
l‘“instauration“ (*Hudûth* ),“ in*Circolazione dei saperi* , pp. 323-60.

**Rashed** , Roshdi, „Mathematical Modernity: Descartes and Fermat,“
in*La Périodisation* , pp. 63-76 [includes predecessors, i.e.,
al-Khayyâm & Ibn al-Haytham].

**-------** , „Metaphysics and mathematics in classical Islamic culture:
Avicenna and his successors,“ in*Islamic Medical and Scientific
Tradition* , vol. I, pp. 92-106 [reprint from 2002].

**Rezvantalab** , Mohammad Reza, „Philosophy in Islam and the
West,“*Existenz* , 7.1 (Spring 2012): 60-64.

**Sabra** , Abdelhamid I., „Configuring the universe: aporetic, problem
solving, and kinematic modeling as themes of Arabic astronomy,“
in*Islamic Medical and Scientific Tradition* , vol. III, pp. in*Islamic
Medical and Scientific Tradition* , vol. III, pp. 95-134 [reprint from
1998].

**Saleh** , Walid A., „The Gloss as Intellectual History: The Hâshiyahs
on*al-Kashshâf* ,“*Oriens* , 41.3-4 (2013): 217-59.

**Saliba** , George, „Arabic versus Greek astronomy: a debate over the
foundations of science,“ in*Islamic Medical and Scientific Tradition* ,
vol. III, pp. 135-46 [reprint from 2000].

**Savage-Smith** , Emily, „Attitudes towards dissection in medieval
Islam,“ in*Islamic Medical and Scientific Tradition* , vol. I, pp.
299-342 [reprint from 1995].

**Schoeler** , Gregor, „The ‚Poetic Syllogism‘ Revisited,“*Oriens* ,
41.1-2 (2013): 1-26 [al-Fârâbî, Avicenna, Ibn Tumlûs].

**Shihadeh** , Ayman, „The Argument from Ignorance and its Critics in
Medieval Arabic Thought,“ in*Arabic Sciences and Philosophy* , 23.2
(2013): 171-220 [‚Abd al-Jabbâr, al-Malâhimî, al-Juwaynî, Fakhr al-Dîn
al-Râzî, Ibn Khaldûn].

**Shiloah** , Amnon, “Jewish and Muslim traditions of music therapy,”
in*Islamic Medical and Scientific Tradition* , vol. II, pp. 240-51
[al-Kindî, Ikhwân, reprint from 2000].

**Stella** , Federico, « Filosofia islamica e storia della filosofia. Un
problema di tempo, »*Rivista degli Studi Orientali* , 34.1-4 (2011) :
431-38.

**Strohmaier** , Gotthard, « Koranische Kosmologie und das
Zusammentreffen der beiden Meere, » in*More modoque* , pp. 277-84.

**Suleiman** , Yasir, «The Notion of*‘illa* in Arabic Linguistic
Thinking, » in*Early Islamic Grammatical Tradition* , pp. 225-35 [1988
original].

**Syros** , Vasileios, « Galenic Medicine and Social Stability in Early
Modern Florence and the Islamic Empires, »*Journal of Early Modern
History* , 17 (2013) : 161-213.

**Tahiri** , Hassan, « La périodisation en histoire des sciences et de
la philosophie : la fin d’un mythe, » in*La Périodisation* , pp.
ix-lxxiii.

**Treiger** , Alexander, « A Fourteenth-century Arabic treatise*On the
Platonic Intellectual Ideas* , » in*Philosophy and the Abrahamic
Religions* , pp. 253-78.

**Türker** , Habip, « Beauty and its Projection in Christian and Islamic
Tradition, » in*Sharing Poetic Expressions* , pp. 69-79.

**Urvoy** , Dominique, « Pensée spéculative et choix de langue dans
l’aire moyen-orientale et méditerranéenne médiévale, » in*More modoque*
, pp. 313-24.

**-------** , « Sacralité du pouvoir. Le califat, » in*Orient-Occident*
, pp. 494-95.

**Verrier** , Ramón,*Introduction à la pensée économique de l’Islam du
VIIIe au XVe siècle* , Forward by Omar Akalay (Histoire et perspectives
méditerranéennes). Paris: L’Harmattan, 2009, 261 pp., ISBN
9782296090774.

**Wisnovsky** , Robert, “Avicennism and Exegetical Practice in the Early
Commentaries on the*Ishârât* ,”*Oriens* , 41.3-4 (2013): 349-78 [Fakhr
al-Dîn al-Râzî, al-Tûsî, and*tahqîq* notion].

**Yaman** , Hikmet, „Greek Thought and Prophetic Tradition: Revelatory
Background of Early Islamic Philosophy,“ in*Philosophy and the Abrahamic
Religions* , pp. 137-55.

**Yücesoy** , Hayrettin, „Translation as Self-Consciousness: Ancient
Sciences, Antediluvian Wisdom, and the Abbâsid Translation
Movement,“*Journal of World History* , 20.4 (2009): 523-57.

**Zadeh** , Travis, „The Wiles of Creation: Philosophy, Fiction, and
the*‚Ajâ’ib* Tradition,“*Middle Eastern Literatures* , 13.1 (2010):
21-48.

’Abd al-Latîf al-Baghdâdî

**Joosse** , N. Peter, „Decline and Decadence in Iraq and Syria after
the Age of Avicennaa ‚Abd al-Latîf al-Baghdâdî (1162-1231) between Myth
and History,“*Bulletin of the History of Medicine* , 84.1 (2010): 1-29.

**Martini Bonadeo** , Cecilia*‚ ‚Abd al-Latîf al-Baghdâdî’s
Philosophical Journey: From Aristotle’s* Metaphysics*to the
‚Metaphysical Science‘* (Islamic Philosophy, Theology and Science 88).
Leiden-Boston: Brill, 2013, xii-378 pp., ISBN 9789004249165 e-ISBN
42558914.

Abharî

**Chellougui** , Faïza, „Logique et mathématiques chez al-Abhari,
Premier travail bibliographique,“ in*Des mathématiques à la philosophie*
, ed. by M. Ouelbani. Tunis: Université de Tunis, Faculté des Sciences
Humaines et Sociales, 2012, pp. 61-74.

**Lameer** , Joep, “Tûsî’s Criticism of Abharî’s Account of*Tasdîq*
,”*Farhang* , 20, 61-62 (2006): 85-94.

al-Ash’ath

**Kruk** , Remke, “Ibn Abî-l-Ash’ath’s*Kitâb al-Hayawân* : a scientific
approach to anthropology, dietetics and zoological systematics,”
in*Islamic Medical and Scientific Tradition* , vol. II, pp. 242-84
[reprint from 2001].

Abû l-Barakât al-Baghdâdî

**Nony** , Sylvie, “Les audaces de la physique arabe du XIIe siècle dans
la synthèse d’Abû l-Barakât al-Baghdâdî (m. 1152),”*MIDEO* , 29 (2012)
[in fact 2013]: 27-50.

**-------** , “Two Arabic theories of impetus,” in*Islamic Medical and
Scientific Tradition* , vol. III, pp. 3-32 [transl. from French by P.
Pormann; the other theory is by Avicenna; reprint from 2009].

Averroes

**There is an Averroes-Database** that can be consulted at
http://thomasinstitut.uni-koeln.de/11721.html

**Averróis** ,*Exposição sobre a Substância do orbe* , transl. from
Latin by Anna Lia A. de Almeida Prado & Rosalie Helena de Souza Pereira
and intro. & notes by Rosalie Helena de Souza Pereira (Coleção Filosofia
198). Porto Alegre: EDIPUCRS, 2006, 160 pp., ISBN 9788574305863.

**Averroes** ,*El libro del Yihâd* , transl. by Carlos Quirós, intro.
and ed. by Manuel Enrique Prado Cueva (Bilioteca Filosofía en español).
Oviedo: Pentalfa & Fundación Gustavo Bueno, 2009, 82 pp., ISBN
9788493434144.

**Akasoy** , Anna, “Was Ibn Rushd an Averroista The Problem, the Debate,
and its Philosophical Implications,” in*Renaissance Averroism* , pp.
321-47.

**Allen** , Michael J.B., “Marsilio Ficino on Saturn, the Plotinian
Mind, and the Monster of Averroes,” in*Renaissance Averroism* , pp.
81-97.

**Alvarez-Millán** , C., “The Case History in Medieval Islamic Medical
Literature:*Tajârib* and*Mujarrabât* as Source,”*Medical History* , 54.2
(2010): 194-215.

**Bazán** , Bernardo Carlos, “A Body for the Human Soul,”
in*Philosophical Psychology* , pp. 243-77 [mainly on Thomas Aquinas].

**Belo** , Catarina,*Averroes and Hegel on Philosophy and Religion*
(Ashgate New Critical Thinking in Religion, Theology and Biblical
Studies). Farnham: Ashgate, 2013, viii-225 pp., ISBN 9781409433866 hbk,
e-bk 978409533873.

**Benmakhlouf** , Ali, “Les*Catégories* , al-Fârâbî, Averroès,” in*La
Périodisation* , pp. 25-33.

**-------** , “Averroès,*Commentaire sur le* De anima*d’Aristote* ,
Édition de Laurentius Canozius, 1472” & “Le*Discours decisif*
d’Averroès: entre sagesse et Loi divine,” in*Orient et Occident* , pp.
512-15.

**Bertolacci** , Amos, “Averroes against Avicenna on Human Spontaneous
Generation: The Starting-Point of a Lasting Debate,” in*Renaissance
Averroism* , pp. 37-54.

**Birgül** , Mehmet Fatih, “Discussion of Causality Based on the
Conceptions of Nature of Ibn Rushd and al-Ghazâlî,”*Ilahiyat Studies* ,
1.2 (Summer/Fall 2010): 241-63.

**Brenet** , Jean-Baptiste,*Les possibilités de jonction.
Averroès-Thomas Wylton* (Scientia Graeca-Arabica 10). Berlin: de
Gruyter, 2013, viii-371 pp., ISBN 9783110315066 & e-bk 9783110315172.

**-------** , “Siger de Brabant et la notion d’*operans intrinsecum* :
un coup de maîtrea,”*Revue des Sciences philosophiques et théologiques*
, 97.1 (2013): 3-36.

**-------** , “Acquisition de la pensée et acquisition de l’acte chez
Averroès. Une lecture croisée du*Grand Commentaire* au*De anima* et
du*Kitâb al-Kashf ‘an manâhij al-adilla* ,” in*Philosophical Psychology*
, pp. 111-39.

**Burnett** , Charles, “Revisiting the 1552-1550 and 1562
Aristotle-Averroes Edition,” in*Renaissance Averroism* , pp. 55-64.

**Caroti** , Stefano, “De Pierre de Padoue à Augustinus Niphus: la
discussion sur le vide dans quelques auteurs italiens (XIVe-XVIe
siècle),” in*La nature et le vide* , pp. 379-400.

**Cerami** , Cristina, “Contraires et accidents: la question de la
generation absolue dans le*Commentaire Moyen* d’Averroès au*De
generatione et corruptione* d’Aristote,” in*Circolazione dei saperi* ,
pp. 377-91.

**-------** , “Mélange,*Minima naturalia* et croissance animale dans
le*Commentaire Moyen* d’Averroès au*De generatione et corruptione* , I,
5,” in*La nature et le vide* , pp. 137-64.

**Chase** , Michael, „Philoponus‘ Cosmology in the Arabic
Tradition,“*Recherches de Théologie et Philosophie médiévales* , 79.2
(2012): 271-306 [includes quotations and discussions in Averroes].

**Cordonier** , Valérie, „Le mélange chez Averroès: sources textuelles
et implications théoriques,“ in*Circolazione dei saperi* , pp. 361-76.

**de Souza Pereira** , Rosalie Helena, „The ruler’s Essential Qualities
in Averroes’*Commentary on Plato’s „Republic“* ,“ in*Dialogues on
Plato’s* Politeia*(Republic),* ed. by Noburu Notomi & Luc Brisson
(International Plato Studies 31) (Sankt Augustin: Academia-Verlag,
2013), pp. 371-76.

**-------** ,*Averróis: a arte de governar. Uma leitura aristotelizante
da* República. São Paulo: Perspectiva, 2012, 335 pp., ISBN
9788527309271.

**-------** , „Platão, Al-Fârâbî e Averróis: as qualidades essenciais ao
governante,“*Trans/Form/Ação* , 34.1 (2011): 1-20.

**Fierro** , Maribel, „Alfonso X „the Wise“: the last Almohad calipha,“
in*The Almohad Revolution* , section XIV [2009 original].

**-------** , „Legal doctrine and practice under the Almohads,“ in*The
Almohad Revolution* , section VIII [transl. by Jeremy Rogers of a 2005
Spanish original].

**-------** , „The legal policies of the Almohad caliphs and Ibn
Rushd’s*Bidâyat al-mujtahid,“* in*The Almohad Revolution* , section XII
[1999 original].

**-------** , “Notes on reason, language and conversion in the
thirteenth century in the Iberian peninsula,” in*Synoptikos* , pp.
169-82 [How a Deaf Person is invited to Enter Islam].

**Forte** , Francesca, “Uno strano caso di “translatio studii”. La
“Poetica” di Aristotele dal mondo arabo al mondo latino,” in*L’antichità
classica nel pensiero medievale* , ed. by A. Palazzo (Porto: Fédération
Internationale des Instituts d’Études Médiévales, 2011), pp. 131-47.

**Gaziel** , Ahuva, „Questions of Methodology in Aristotle’s Zoology: A
Medieval Perspective,“*Journal of the History of Biology* , 45.2 (2012):
329-52.

**Giglioni** , Guido, „Phantasms of Reason and Shadows of Matter:
Averroes’s Notion of the Imagination and Its Renaissance Interpreters,“
in*Renaissance Averroism* , pp. 173-93.

**Galluzzo** , Gabriele,*The Medieval Reception of Book Zeta of
Aristotle’s* Metaphysics, vol. I:*Aristotle’s Ontology and the Middle
Ages: The Tradition of* Metaphysics*, Book Zeta* (Studien und Texte zur
Geistsgeschichte des Mittelalters 110). Leiden: Brill, 2013, x-774 pp.,
ISBN 9789004234376 [the sections „Substance in Averroes‘*Long
Commentary* on the Metaphysics, Book VIII,“ pp. 141-233, & „Paul of
Venice As a Reader of Averroes. The Case of Essence and Definition,“ pp.
421-66 are particularly relevant].

**Halper** , Yehuda, “Revision and Standarization of Hebrew
Philosophical Terminology in the Fourteenth Century: The Example of
Averroes’s*Long Commentary on Aristotle’s Metaphysics Δ* ,”*Aleph* ,
13.1 (2013): 95-137.

**-------** , “Prayers to the God of Aristotle’s*Metaphysics* :*tefillot
siyyum* for chapters of Book Delta of Aristotle’s*Metaphysics* ,”*Zutot*
, 8 (2011): 15-29 [in a manuscript of the Hebrew translation of
Averroes’*Long Commentary on the Metaphysics* ].

**Hasnawi** , Ahmad, „L’âge de la démonstration. Logique, science et
histoire: al-Fârâbî, Avicenne, Avempace, Averroès,“ in*Circolazione dei
saperi* , pp. 257-81.

**Herrera** , Max, “Understanding Similitudes in Aquinas with the Help
of Avicenna and Averroes,” in*Universal Representation* , pp. 5-23.

**Holland** , Nicholas, “The Transmutations of a Young Averroist:
Agostino Nifo’s Commentary on the*Destructio Destructionum* of Averroes
and the Nature of Celestial Influences,” in*Renaissance Averroism* , pp.
99-123.

**Hutton** , Sarah, “The Cambridge Platonists and Averroes,”
in*Renaissance Averroism* , pp. 197-211.

**Klima** , Gyula, “Intentional Transfer in Averroes, Indifference of
Nature in Avicenna, and the Representationalism of Aquinas,”
in*Universal Representation* , pp. 45-51.

**Martin** , Craig, “Humanism and the Assessment of Averroes in the
Renaissance,” in*Renaissance Averroism* , pp. 65-79.

**Martínez Lorca** , Andrés,*Averroes. El sabio cordobés que iluminó
Europa* (Córdoba con historia. Enasayo 4). Córdoba: El Páramo, 2010, 133
pp., ISBN 9788492904037.

**Piaia** , Gregorio, « Averroes and Arabic Philosophy in the
Modern*Historia Philosophica* : Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries, »
in*Renaissance Averroism* , pp. 237-53.

**Puig Montada** , Josep, « Averroes y su lectura del Corán,’ in*El
pensamiento político* , pp. 611-18.

**Ramón Guerrero** , Rafael, “Averroes: Explicación aristotélica del
Universo,”*Filosofia Unisionos* , 9.1 (2008): 25-42.

**Taylor** , Richard C., “Themistius and the Development of Averroes’
Noetics,” in*Medieval Perspectives on Aristotle’s De Anima* , ed. by
Russell L. Friedman & Jean-Michel Counet (Philosophes médiévaux 58)
(Louvain-la-Neuve: Éditions de l’Institut Supérieur de Philosophie;
Louvain-Paris-Walpole, MA: Peeters, 2013), pp. 1-38.

**-------** , “Arabic/Islamic Philosophy in Thomas Aquinas’s Conception
of the Beatific Vision in IV*Sent* ., D. 49, Q. 2, A.1,”*The Thomist* ,
76.4 (2012): 509-50.

**--------** , “Aquinas and ‘the Arabs’: Aquinas’s First Critical
Encounter with the Doctrines of Avicenna and Averroes on the Intellect,
In 2 Sent.d. 17, q. 2, a. 1,” in Philosophical Psychology, pp. 141-83
with in Appendix “Thomas Aquinas, In 2 Sent., d. 17, q. 2, a. 1. English
translation by Richard Taylor from a provisional Latin text prepared by
the late P.-M. Gils,” pp. 279-96.

**-------** , “The Agent Intellect as “form for us” and Averroes’s
Critique of al-Fârâbî,” in*Universal Representation* , pp. 25-44.

**Tellkamp** , Jörg Alejandro, “*Vis estimative* and*vis cogitativa* in
Thomas Aqinas’s*Commentary on the Sentences* ,”*The Thomist* , 76.4
(2012): 611-40.

Avicenna

***Avicenna’s Deliverance: Logic*** , transl. & notes by Asad Q. Ahmed
(Studies in Islamic Philosophy). Karachi: Oxford Universiy Press, 2011,
xxxvi-191 pp., ISBN 9780195479508 [as no ed. of the*Najat* is critical
Ahmed checked readings on various editions plus the Oxford Hunt 534 Mss;
there is a review article of this translation by W. Hodges, see below].

**Avicenna / Ibn Sînâ,** ***Al-‘Ibârâ: Avicenna’s Commentary on
Aristotle’s De Interpretatione, Part One and Part Two*** , transl. and
intro. by Allan Bäck (Analytica Liber Conversus). Munich: Philosophia
Verlag, 2013, xxiv& 25-164 pp., ISBN 9783884041061.

**[Avicenna** ],***Avicena esencial. El ser necessario posee la belleza
y el esplendor puros*** , intro. & anthology by Joaquín Lomba
(Esencial). Mataró (Barcelona): Montesinos & Ediciones de Intervención
Cultural, 2009, 225 pp., ISBN 9788496831964.

**[Avicenna],** *Antologyah le-khitve Even Sina* , ed. by Steven Harvey
& Aviva Schussman. Tell Aviv: Tell Aviv University Press, 2009, 435 pp.,
ISBN 9789657241387.

**Aavani** , Gholamreza, “Is Ens per se the definition of substance in
Avicennaa,”*Sophia Perennis* , 1.2 (2009): 5-24.

**Acar** , Rahim, “Talking about God: Avicenna’s Way Out,” in*Philosophy
and the Abrahamic Religions* , pp. 193-206.

**Adamson** , Peter, “From the Necessary Existent to God,”
in*Interpreting Avicenna: Critical Essays* , pp. 170-89.

**Albert** , Edouardo,*Ibn Sina: A Concise Life* . Markfield: Kube
Publishing, 2013, 104 pp., ISBN 9781847740458 [a book for teenagers
15-18].

**Alper** , Ömer Mahir, “The Epistemological Value of Scriptural
Statements in Avicenna: Can Religious Propositions Provide the Premises
of Philosophical Demonstrationsa,” in*Philosophy and the Abrahamic
Religions* , pp. 175-91.

**Bäck** , Allan, “Avicenna’s Theory of Supposition,”*Vivarium* , 51.1-4
(2013): 81-115.

**Belhaj** , Abdessamad, ‘Crossroads of Reflection: Avicenna and ‘Abd
al-Jabbâr on the Widely-transmitted Propositions,” in*More modoque* ,
pp. 285-92.

**Bertolacci** , Amos, “Albert’s Use of Avicenna and Islamic
Philosophy,” in*A Companion to Albert the Great: Theology, Philosophy,
and the Sciences* , ed. by Irven M. Resnick (Brill’s Companions to the
Christian Tradition 38) (Leiden-Boston: Brill, 2013), pp. 601-11.

**-------** , “The Reception of Avicenna in Latin Medieval Culture,”
in*Interpreting Avicenna: Critical Essays* , pp. 242-69.

**-------** , “Averroes against Avicenna on Human Spontaneous
Generation: The Starting-Point of a Lasting Debate,” in*Renaissance
Averroism* , pp. 37-54.

**Black** , Deborah, “Certitude, Justification, and the Principles of
Knowledge in Avicenna’s Epistemology,” in*Interpreting Avicenna:
Critical Essays* , pp. 120-42.

**-------** , “Rational Imagination: Avicenna on the Cogitative Power,”
in*Philosophical Psychology* , pp. 59-81.

**Bloch** , Ernest,*Ibn Sînâ* , Arabic translation of*Avicenna und die
aristotelische Linke [1963]* by Muhammad al-Turkî. Tunis: The Tunisian
Academy “House of Wisdom”, 2012, 164 pp., ISBN 9789973491435.

**Celeyrette** , Jean, “Le vide chez Avicenne,” in*La nature et le vide*
, pp. 101-17.

**Dadashi** , Iraj, “A Presentation of the Theoretical Foundations of
Sena’at (*techne* ) in the Light of the Philosophy of Avicenna,”*Sophia
Perennis* , 2.1 (2010): 43-74 [in Persian].

**Demirli** , Ekrem, “The Influence of Ibn Sina on Sadr al-Din Qunawi
and his Followers,”*Sophia Perennis* , 2.1 (2010): 5-16 [in English].

**Druart** , Thérèse-Anne, “Avicenna’s Metaphysics and Duns
Scotus’*Quaestiones super secundum et tertium De anima* ,”
in*Philosophical Psychology* , pp. 185-204.

**Freudenthal** , Gad, and**Mauro** , Zonta, “The Reception of Avicenna
in Jewish Cultures, East and West,” in*Interpreting Avicenna: Critical
Essays* , pp. 214-41.

**-------** , “Samuel Ibn Tibbon’s Avicennian Theory of an Eternal
World,”*Aleph* , 8 (2008): 41-129.

**Gacek** , Adam, “The Osler Codex of Nasîr al-Dîn al-Tûsî’s Commentary
on Avicenna’s*al-Ishârât wa-al-tanbîhât* ,”*Journal of Islamic
Manuscripts* , 1 (2010): 3-17.

**Gilon** , Odile,*Indifférence de l’essence et métaphysique chez Jean
Duns Scot* . Brussels: Ousia, 2012, 567 pp., ISBN 9782870601648 [the
first chapter deals with the theory of the “indifference” of essence in
Avicenna, pp. 34-83].

**Giolfo** , Manuela E.B. &**Hodges** , Wilfrid, “Syntax and Meaning in
Sîrâfî and Ibn Sînâ,”*Romano-Arabica* , 13 (2013): 97-115.

**Gutas** , Dimitri, “Avicenna’s Philosophical Project,” in*Interpreting
Avicenna: Critical Essays* , pp. 28-47.

-------, « Medical theory and scientific method in the age of Avicenna,
» in*Islamic Medical and Scientific Tradition* , vol. I, pp. 33-47
[reprint from 2003].

**--------** ,*Avicenna e la tradizione aristotelica. Introduzione alla
lettura delle opera filosofiche di Avicenna* , transl. by Marienza
Benedetto (Biblioteca filosofica di Quaestio 6). Bari: Pagina, 2007,
xiv-596 pp., ISBN 9788874700493 [English original 1988].

**Habibi** , Najafquli, “Risalat fi al-Arzagh,”*Sophia Perennis* , 2.4
(2010): 87-101 [in Persian].

**-------** , “Edition of Avicenna’s Sermon on Monotheism and ‘Umar
Kayyâm’s Translation of it,”*Sophia Perennis* , 3.2 (Spring 2011):
83-101 [in Persian; Avicenna’s Arabic text, pp. 89-93; Persian transl.
by ‘Umar Khayyâm, pp. 94-101; Englis abstract p. 61].

**Hackett** , Jeremiah, “Roger Bacon on Animal and Human Knowledge in
the*Perspectiva* : (*Opus maius* , Part Five),” in*Philosophical
Psychology* , pp. 223-41.

**Harvey** , W.Z., “Maimonides’ Avicennism,”*Maimonidean Studies* , 5
(2008): 107-19.

**Hasnawi** , Ahmad, „L’âge de la démonstration. Logique, science et
histoire: al-Fârâbî, Avicenne, Avempace, Averroès,“ in*Circolazione dei
saperi* , pp. 257-81.

**Hasse** , Dag Nikolaus, „Avicenna’s Epistemological Optimism,“
in*Interpreting Avicenna: Critical Essays* , pp. 109-19.

**Herrera** , Max, “Understanding Similitudes in Aquinas with the Help
of Avicenna and Averroes,” in*Universal Representation* , pp. 5-23.

**Hodges** , Wilfrid, “Avicenna’s Deliverance: Logic by Asad Q.
Ahmed,”*Journal of Shi’a Islamic Studies* , 6.2 (2013): 224-31.

**-------** , “Ibn Sina, Frege and the grammar of
meanings,”*Al-Mukhatabat* , 5 (2013): 29-60.

**-------** , Affirmative and negative in Ibn Sina,” in*Insolubles and
Consequences: Essays in honour of Stephen Read* ,” ed. by Catarina
Dutilh Novaes & Ole Thomassen Hjortland (London: College Publications,
2012), pp. 119-34.

**-------** , “Formalizing the relationship between meanings and
syntax,” in*The Oxford Handbook of Compositionality* , ed. by M.
Werning, W. Hinzen & E. Machery (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
20012), pp. 245-61 [also on al-Fârâbî].

**-------** , “Ibn Sînâ and Conflict in Logic,” in*Logic, Mathematics,
Philosophy: Vintage Enthusiasms. Essays in Honour of John L. Bell* , ed.
by David DeVidi, Michael Hallett & Peter Clark (The Western Ontario
Series in Philosophy of Science 75) (Dordrecht, New York: Springer,
2011), pp. 35-67.

**Houser** , R.E., “Avicenna,*Aliqui* , and Thomas Aquinas’s Doctrine of
Creation,”*Recherches de Théologie et Philosophie Médiévales* , 80.1
(2013): 17-55.

-------**,** “Avicenna and Aquinas’s*De principiis naturae* , cc.
1-3,”*The Thomist* , 76.4 (2012): 577-610.

**Iskandar** , Jamil Ibrahim,*Compreender Al-Fârâbî e Avicena*
(Compreender). Petrópolis: Vozes, 2011, 129 pp., ISBN 9788532624604.

**Janssens** , Jules, “Ibn Sînâ on Substance in Chapter Two of
the*Maqûlât* (*Categories* ) of the*Shifâ’* ,” in*More modoque* , pp.
353-60.

**-------** , “The Reception of Ibn Sînâ’s*Physics* in Later Islamic
Thought,”*Ilahiyat Studies* , 1.1 (Winter/Spring 2010): 15-36.

**-------** , “Avicenne,*Canon de la médecine* , trad. Latine de Gérard
de Crémone, 1473” & “Avicenne,” in*Orient-Occident* , pp. 502-505.

**Iskandar** , Jamil Ibrahim, “Avicena (Ibn Sînâ 980-1037) e o Argumento
Metafísico da Unicidade de Deus na Hermenéutica
Alcoránica,”*Trans/Form.Ação* , 35, special issue (2012): 31-42.

**Kadivar** , Mohsen, “Ibn Sina and the Classification of
Philosophy,”*Sophia Perennis* , 1.1 (2009): 106-37 [Persian translation
and Arabic text of*Risâlat Aqsâm al-Hikmat* ].

**Kaukua** , Jari, “Self-awareness in Avicenna, Suhrawardî and Mullâ
Sadrâ,”*Sophia Perennis* , 3.2 (Spring 2011): 5-30.

**Kaya** , M. Cüneyt, “Prophetic Legislation: Avicenna’s View of
Practical Philosophy Revisited,” in*Philosophy and the Abrahamic
Religions* , pp. 207-25.

**Kaya** , Veysel, “An Example of the Mystical Avicennism in Ottoman
Thought: Jamâl al-Khalwatî’s Interpretation of Ibn Sînâ’s*Risâla ilâ Abî
Sa’îd ibn Abî l-Khayr* ,”*Ilahiyat Studies* , 3.2 (Summer/Fall 2012):
173-96 [the attribution to Ibn Sînâ of this*Risâla* is disputed;
includes edition of some passages].

**Khadri** , Gholamhossein &**Kakai** , Mastaneh, “A Comparative Study
of the Ontological and Epistemological Position of the Active Intellect
in Avicenna and Thomas Aquinas,”*Ishraq* , 4 (2013): 493-504.

**Klima** , Gyula, “Intentional Transfer in Averroes, Indifference of
Nature in Avicenna, and the Representationalism of Aquinas,”
in*Universal Representation* , pp. 45-51.

**Lameer** , Joep, “Avicenna’s Concupiscence,”*Arabic Sciences and
Philosophy* , 23.2 (2013): 277-89 [historiography of what is said about
it in his biography].

**-------** , “Towards a New Edition of Avicenna’s*Kitâb al-Ishârât
wa-l-tanbîhât* ,”*Journal of Islamic Manuscripts* 4 (2013): 199-248.

**-------** , “Avicenna on Universals: A Fragment of his Lost*al-Mûjaz*
,”*Philosophia Perennis* , 3.2 (Spring 2011): 31-56 [the fragment was
found in Leiden Mss. Or 652].

**Lánczky** , István, “Avicenna on the Afterlife: An Attempt to Resolve
the Problem of the Bodily Dispositions,” in*More modoque* , pp. 361-76.

**Lerchner** , Mara Lisa, Ibn Sina bzw. Avicennas folgenreiche
Überlegungen zum Existenzmodus der Universalien. Eine philosophische
Untersuchung über das Zusammenspiel von antiker, islamischer und
christlicher Philosophie in Bezug auf die Universalienfrage.
Norderstedt: GRIN, 2012, ii-34 pp., ISBN 9783656291619.

**López-Farjeat** , Luis Xavier, “Avicenna on Musical Perception,”
in*Philosophical Psychology* , pp. 83-110.

**-------** , “Avicenna’s Influence on Aquinas’ Early Doctrine of
Creation in*IN II Sent., D. 1, a. 2* ,”*Recherches de Théologie et
Philosophie médiévales* , 79.2 (2012): 307-337.

**Madelung** , Wilferd, “An Ismaili interpretation of Ibn Sînâ’s*Qasîdat
al-Nafs* ,” in his*Studies in Medieval Shi’ism* , section XIV (pp.
157-68) [2005 original].

**Mandosio** , Jean-Marc, „Logique et language: la critique d’al-Fârâbî
par Ibn Sînâ,“ in*Ad notitiam ignoti* , pp. 311-34.

**Maróth** , Miklós, “Ibn Sina and the rhetoric demonstration,”
in*Synoptikos* , pp. 85-97.

**McGinnis** , Jon, “Avicenna’s Natural Philosophy,” in*Interpreting
Avicenna: Critical Essays* , pp. 71-90.

**-------** , “Pointers, Guides, Founts and Gifts: The Reception of
Avicennan Physics in the East,”*Oriens* , 41.3-4 (2013): 433-56
[al-Abharî, Mullâ Sadrâ, al-Kâtibî, Fadli Haqq al-Khayrâbâdî].

**-------** , “Making Something out of Nothing: Privation, Possibility,
and Potentiality in Avicenna and Aquinas,”*The Thomist* , 76.4 (2012):
551-75.

**-------** , “New Light on Avicenna: Optics and its Role in Avicennan
Theories of Vision, Cognition and Emanation,” in*Philosophical
Psychology* , pp. 41-57.

**-------** , “Old Complexes and New Possibilities: Ibn Sînâ’s Modal
Metaphysics in Context,”*Journal of Islamic Philosophy* , 7 (2011):
3-31.

**Menn** , Stephen, “Avicenna’s Metaphysics,” in*Interpreting Avicenna:
Critical Essays* , pp. 143-69.

**Modanlou** , H.D., “Avicenna (AD 980 to 1037) and the care of the new
born infant and breastfeeding,”*Journal of Perinatology* , 28.1 (2008):
3-6.

**Mostafavi** , Seyed Hasan, “A Problem in Avicenna’s View on the
Origination of the Soul and a Reply to it,”*Sophia Perennis* , 2.4
(2010): 19-29 [in English].

**Mousavian** , Seyyed Hossein, “Points in Logic by Ibn Sînâ: Critical
Edition,”*Sophia Perennis* , 1.2 (2009): 131-42 [in Persian].

**Movahed** , Zia, “A Critical Examination of Ibn Sina’s Theory of the
Conditional Syllogism,”*Sophia Perennis* , 1.1 (2009): 5-21 [in
English].

**Musallam** , Basim, « The human embryo in Arabic scientific and
religious thought, » in*Islamic Medical and Scientific Tradition* , vol.
II, pp. 317-31 [Avicenna & Ibn Qayyim, reprint from 1990].

**Nony** , Sylvie, “Two Arabic theories of impetus,” in*Islamic Medical
and Scientific Tradition* , vol. III, pp. 3-32 [transl. from French by
P. Pormann; the other theory is by Abû ‚l-Barakât; reprint from 2009].

**O’Reilly** , Francisco, “La*causa essendi* como verdadera causa
metafísica en el*Avicenna Latinus* ,”*Patristica et Mediaevalia* , 32
(2011): 87-98.

**-------** ,*Avicena y la propuesta de une antropología
aristotélico-platónica. Introducción a los textos* (Cuadernos de Anuario
filosófico. Serie universitaria 218). Mutilva Baja (Navarra): Servicio
de Publicaciones de la Universidad de Navarra, 2010, 113 pp.

**Palangi** , Monireh, “A Study on the Universal with Special Reference
to Some of Ibn Sina’s Works,”*Sophia Perennis* , 2.3 (2010): 21-61 [in
Persian].

**Perler** , Dominik, “Why is the Sheep Afraid of the Wolfa Medieval
Debates on Animal Passions,” in*Emotion and Cognitive Life in Medieval
and Early Modern Philosophy* , ed. by Martin Pickavé & Lisa Shapiro
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012), pp. 32-52.

**Poncela González** , Ángel, “Objetividad y Verdad: La interpretación
posibilista del*ens commune* de Avicena realizada por Francisco Suárez,”
in*El pensamineto politico* , pp. 587-97.

**Pormann** , Peter E., “Avicenna on Medical Practice, Epistemology, and
the Physiology of the Inner senses,” in*Interpreting Avicenna: Critical
Essays* , pp. 91-108.

**-------** , “The dispute between the philarabic and philhellenic
physicians and the forgotten heritage of Arabic medicine (La querelle
des médecins arabistes et hellénistes et l’héritage oublié),” in*Islamic
Medical and Scientific Tradition* , vol. II, pp. 283-316 [transl. From
French by the author, reprint from 2004].

**Rahman** , Shahid &**Salloum** , Zaynab, „Quantification, unité et
identité dans la philosophie d’Ibn Sînâ,“*La Périodisation* , pp. 51-61.

**Rakhimov** , Mukhsin, “The Position of the Human in Avicenna’s
Mysticism,” in*Proceedings: The XXII World Congress* , vol. 14: Medieval
Philosophy, pp. 87-96.

**Rashed** , Roshdi, „Metaphysics and mathematics in classical Islamic
culture: Avicenna and his successors,“ in*Islamic Medical and Scientific
Tradition* , vol. I, pp. 92-106 [reprint from 2002].

**Reisman** , David C., “The Life and Times of Avicenna: Patronage and
Learning in Medieval Islam,” in*Interpreting Avicenna: Critical Essays*
, pp. 7-27.

**Richardson** , Kara, “Avicenna’s Conception of the Efficient
Cause,”*British Journal for the History of Philosophy* , 21.2 (2013):
220-39.

**Schoeler** , Gregor, „The ‚Poetic Syllogism‘ Revisited,“*Oriens* ,
41.1-2 (2013): 1-26.

**Shihadeh** , Ayman, „A Post-Gazâlian Critic of Avicenna: Ibn Ghaylân
al-Balkhî on the Materia Medica of the*Canon of Medicine* ,“*Journal of
Islamic Studies* , 24.2 (2013): 135-74.

**Street** , Tony, “Avicenna on the Syllogism,” in*Interpreting
Avicenna: Critical Essays* , pp. 48-70.

**Tartler** , Grete, “The Psychology of Prayer in Ibn Sînâ’s (d. 1037)
Epistles on Pilgrimage and Prayer:*Risâla fî ma’nâ l-ziyârati wa
kayfiyyati ta’tîrihâ* and*Risâla fî mâhiyyati l-salwa*
,”*Romano-arabica* , 13 (2013): 353-60.

**-------** , “Sounds and Silence in Ibn Sînâ’s*Rasâ’il al-mashriqiyya*
,”*Romano-arabica* , 12 (2012): 261-66.

**Taylor** , Richard C., “Arabic/Islamic Philosophy in Thomas Aquinas’s
Conception of the Beatific Vision in IV*Sent* ., D. 49, Q. 2, A.1,”*The
Thomist* , 76.4 (2012): 509-50.

**-------** , “Aquinas and ‘the Arabs’: Aquinas’s First Critical
Encounter with the Doctrines of Avicenna and Averroes on the Intellect,
In 2 Sent.d. 17, q. 2, a. 1,” in*Philosophical Psychology* , pp. 141-83
with in Appendix “Thomas Aquinas, In 2 Sent., d. 17, q. 2, a. 1. English
translation by Richard Taylor from a provisional Latin text prepared by
the late P.-M. Gils,” pp. 279-96.

**Tellkamp** , Jörg Alejandro, “*Vis estimative* and*vis cogoitativa* in
Thomas Aqinas’s*Commentary on the Sentences* ,”*The Thomist* , 76.4
(2012): 611-40.

**-------** , “Albert the Great on Perception and Non-conceptual
Content,” in*Philosophical Psychology* , pp. 205-21.

**Thom** , P., “Syllogisms about Possibility and Necessity in Avicenna
and Tusi,” in*Insolubles and Consequences: Essays in Honour of Stepehn
Read* , ed. by C. Dutilh Novaes & O. Hjortland (Milton Keynes: College
Publications, 2012), pp. 239-48.

**Veliu** , Galip, “Ibn Sina’s Commentary on Surat al-Ikhlas: An
Analysis of an Original Manuscript,”*al-Shajarah* , 16.2 (2011): 253-72.

**Weill-Parot** , Nicolas, “Pietro d’Albano et l’occulte dans la nature:
Galien, Avicenne, Albert le Grand et la*differentia* 71 du*Conciliator*
,” in*Médecine, astrologie et magie entre Moyen Âge et Renaissance:
autour de Pietro d’Abano* , ed. by Jean-Patrice Boudet, Frank Collard &
Nicolas Weill-Parot (Florence: SISMEL, 2013), pp. 21-38.

**-------** , “Retour sur “l’horreur du vide”: les origines de la
“nature universelle” dans la physique médiévale et ses significations
(XIIIe-XIVe siècles),” in*La nature et le vide* , pp. 15-38.

**Wisnovsky** , Robert, “Avicenna’s Islamic Reception,” in*Interpreting
Avicenna: Critical Essays* , pp. 190-213.

**-------** , “Avicennism and Exegetical Practice in the Early
Commentaries on the*Ishârât* ,”*Oriens* , 41.3-4 (2013): 349-78 [Fakhr
al-Dîn al-Râzî, al-Tûsî, and*tahqîq* notion].

Baghdadi Philosophers

**Adamson** , Peter, “Knowledge of universals and particulars in the
Baghdad School,” in*Islamic Medical and Scientific Tradition* , vol. I,
pp. 68-91 [reprint from 2007].

al-Bîrûnî

**Larcher** , Pierre, “La “langue de l’Inde” vue par al-Bîrûnî: un
miroir de l’arabea,”*Romano-Arabica* , 13 (2013): 187-209.

**Samian** , A.L., “Al-Biruni’s “One and Many”: Saying the Same in
Different Ways,” in*Sharing Poetic Expressions* , pp. 149-60.

al-Fârâbî

**al-Fârâbî** , Abû Nasr,*Die Prinzipien der Ansichten der Bewohner der
vortrefflichen Stadt. Mabâdi’ aârâ’ ahl al-madîna al-fâdila* , transl.
by Cleophea Ferrari (Reclam-Bibliothek 18663). Stuttgart: Reclam, 2009,
162 pp., ISBN 9783150186633.

***Alfârâbî’s philosophische Abhandlungen*** , transl. by Friedrich
Dieterici. Hildesheim: Olms, 2011, xlvii-223 pp., ISBN 9783487144467
[reprint of Leiden, 1892].

“Alfarabi’s*Book of Rhetoric* : An Arabic-English Translation of
Alfarabi’s Commentary on Aristotle’s*Rhetoric* ,” by Lahcen E.
Ezzaher,*Rhetorica: A Journal of the History of Rhetoric* , 26.4 (2008):
347-91 [translation of the short commentary].

**Arfa Mensia** , Moqdâd,*Al-Fârâbî, Falsafat al-dîn wa ‘ulûm al-‘islâm*
. Beirut: Dâr al-‘islâmî, 237 pp., ISBN 9789959295699.

**Benmakhlouf** , Ali, “Les*Catégories* , al-Fârâbî, Averroès,” in*La
Périodisation* , pp. 25-33.

**Butterworth** , Charles E., “How to Read Alfarabi,” in*More modoque* ,
pp. 333-42.

**de Souza Pereira** , Rosalie Helena, „Platão, Al-Fârâbî e Averróis: as
qualidades essenciais ao governante,“*Trans/Form/Ação* , 34.1 (2011):
1-20.

**Druart** , Thérèse-Anne, “Al-Fârâbî: An Arabic Account of the Origin
of Language and of Philosophical Vocabulary,”*Proceedings of the
American Catholic Philosophical Association* , 84 (2010): 1-17.

**Flóra Kis** , Anna, “Theory of Research: al-Fârâbî’s Commentary on
Aristotle’s*Topics* ,” in*More modoque* , pp. 343-52.

**Genequand** , Charles, “Le Platon d’al-Fârâbî,” in*Lire les dialogues,
mais lesquels et dans quel ordrea Définitions du corpus et
interprétations de Platon* , ed. by Anne Balansard & Isabelle Koch
(Academia Philosophical Studies 44) (Sankt Augustin: Academia Verlag,
2013), pp. 105-15.

**Hamdani** , Abbas, “The Ikhwân al-Safâ’: Between al-Kindî and
al-Fârâbî,”*Ishraq* , 4 (2013): 32-45 [abridged Russian transl. from an
article published in*Fortresses of the Intellect* , ed. by de Unzaga,
London, 2011, pp. 189-212].

**Hankey** , Wayne, „Philo’s Moses and his Pagan, Christian, and Islamic
Successors,“ in*Philosophy and the Abrahamic Religions* , pp. 3-16.

**Hasnawi** , Ahmad, „L’objet du*De interpretatione* d’Aristote selon
al-Fârâbî,“ in*Ad notitiam ignoti* , pp. 259-84.

**-------** , „L’âge de la démonstration. Logique, science et histoire:
al-Fârâbî, Avicenne, Avempace, Averroès,“ in*Circolazione dei saperi* ,
pp. 257-81.

**Iskandar** , Jamil Ibrahim,*Compreender Al-Fârâbî e Avicena*
(Compreender). Petrópolis: Vozes, 2011, 129 pp., ISBN 9788532624604.

**Kleven** , Terence J., „Al-Fârâbî’s*Five Aphorisms on Logic* ,“
in*Circolazione dei saperi* , pp. 291-308.

**Maftouni** , Nadia, „Correlation Between Art and Religion in Fârâbî’s
Philosophy,“*Sophia Perennis* , 3.2 (Spring 2011): 41-56 [in Persain,
English abstract p. 59].

**Mandosio** , Jean-Marc, „La place de la logique et de ses subdivisions
dans l’*Énumération des sciences* d’al-Fârâbî et chez Dominicus
Gundissalinus,“ in*Ad notitiam ignoti* , pp. 285-310.

**-------** , „Logique et language: la critique d’al-Fârâbî par Ibn
Sînâ,“ in*Ad notitiam ignoti* , pp. 311-34.

**Montgomery** , James E., “Leo Strauss and the Alethiometer,”
in*Renaissance Averroism* , pp. 285-320 [mainly on al-Fârâbî].

**Neria** , Chaim Meir, „Al-Fârâbî’s Lost Commentary on the Ethics: New
Textual Evidence,“*Arabic Sciences and Philosophy* , 23.1 (2013): 69-99
[Includes edition of two newly discovered quotations in Hebrew and their
English translation].

**Nysanbaev** , A. N., „The development of Farabi Studies in Kazakhstan:
Problems and Perspectives,“*Voprosy Filosofii* , 5 (2011): 119-29 [in
Russian].

**Robinson** , Jasmes T., „Samuel Ibn Tibbon’s*Perush ha-Millot
ha-Zarot* and al-Fârâbî’s*Eisagoge* and*Categories* ,“*Aleph* , 9.1
(2009): 41-76*.*

**Schoeler** , Gregor, „The ‚Poetic Syllogism‘ Revisited,“*Oriens* ,
41.1-2 (2013): 1-26.

**Steiris** , Georgios, „Politique, religion et hérésie dans le dialogue
anonyme protobyzantin*„Peri Politikès Epistèmès* “ et chez
al-Fârâbî,“*Byzantinische Forschungen* , 31 (2013): 121-41.

**Taylor** , Richard C., “Arabic/Islamic Philosophy in Thomas Aquinas’s
Conception of the Beatific Vision in IV*Sent* ., D. 49, Q. 2, A.1,”*The
Thomist* , 76.4 (2012): 509-50.

**--------** , “The Agent Intellect as “form for us” and Averroes’s
Critique of al-Fârâbî,” in*Universal Representation* , pp. 25-44.

**Vallat** , Philippe, “Abû Nasr al-Fârâbî. Un philosophe en terre
d’Islam,” in*Orient-Occident* , pp. 500-501.

**Woerther** , Frédérique, “Les traces du Grand commentaire d’al-Fârâbî
à la*Rhétorique* d’Aristote dans la traduction arabo-latine de
la*Rhétorique* par Hermann l’Allemand,”*Bulletin de Philosophie
médiévale* , 54 (2012): 137-54.

**-------** , “L’interprétation de l’*êthos* aristotélicien par
al-Fârâbî,”*Rhetorica: A Journal of the History of Rhetoric* , 26.4
(2008): 392-416 [based on*Didascalia* ].

**Zonta** , Mauro, „Three New Fragments of a*Paraphrase of Aristotle’s
Topics* ascribed to Themistius in Hebrew Quotations of al-Fârâbî’s ‚Long
Coimmentary‘ on the*Topics* , Book VIII,“ in*Ad notitiam ignoti* , pp.
217-24.

Fayd Kâshânî

**Toussi** , Sayyed Khalil, “Mullâ Muhsin Fayd Kâshânî: a Philosopher or
an*Akhbârîa* ,”*Ishraq* , 4 (2013): 473-84.

Hunayn ibn Ishâq

**Hoyland** , Robert G**.,** “Theomnestus of Nicopolis, Hunayn ibn
Ishâq, and the beginnings of Islamic veterinary science,” in*Islamic
Medical and Scientific Tradition* , vol. II, pp. 385-405 [reprint from
2004].

**Osman** , Ghada, “”The Sheikh of the Translators”: The Translation
methodology of Hunayn ibn Ishaq,”*Translation and Interpretating
Studies* , 7.2 (2012): 161-75.

Ibn ‘Adî

« Yahyâ ibn ‘Adî*On the Four Scientific Questions Concerning the Three
Kinds of Existence* , » Editio princeps and translation by Stephen Menn
& Robert Wisnovsky,*MIDEO* , 29 (2012) [in fact 2013]: 73-96.

**Abbas** , Nadine, « Les aspects philosophiques dans le traité sur la
Continence de Yahyâ Ben ‘Adî, »*al-Machriq* , 87.2 (2013): 635-53 [in
Arabic].

**-------** , « Le concept de la Divinité chez Yahyâ b. ‘Adî dans son
livre « La réfutation d’al-Warrâq » et son « Traité des existants,
»*al-Machriq* , 87.1 (2013): 85-105 [in Arabic].

**Adamson** , Peter &**Wisnovsky** , Robert, « Yahya Ibn ‘Adî on the
Location of God, »*Oxford Studies in Medieval Philosophy* , 1 (2013):
205-38 [inludes ed. and transl. of a brief commentary on*Physics* VIII,
10, 267b6-9].

**Griffith** , Sidney H., « Commending Virtue and a Humane Polity in
10th Century Baghdad : The Vision of Yahyâ ibn ‘Adî, »*Islamochristiana*
, 38 (2012): 77-100.

**Platti** , Emilio, « Towards an Interpretation of Yahyâ ‘ibn ‘Adî’s
Terminology in his Theological Treatises, »*MIDEO* , 29 (2012) [in fact
2013]: 61-71.

**Wisnovsky** , Robert, « Yahyâ’ b. ‘Adî’s Discussion of the Prolegomena
to the Study of a Philosophical Text, » in*Law and Tradition* , pp.
187-201[includes ed. and transl. of this text].

Ibn al-‘Arif

**Shafik** , Ahmed, « Filosofía y mística de Ibn al’Arif : Su*Miftah
al-sa’ada* , »*Anales del Seminario de Historia de la Filosofía* , 29.2
(2012) : 433-48.

Ibn Bâjjah (Avempace)

**Caroti** , Stefano, “De Pierre de Padoue à Augustinus Niphus: la
discussion sur le vide dans quelques auteurs italiens (XIVe-XVIe
siècle),” in*La nature et le vide* , pp. 379-400.

**Geoffroy** , Marc, “L’Exposition de la*Jonction de l’Intellect avec
l’homme (ittisâl al-‘aql bi-l-insân)* d’Avempace dans le Compendium
d’Averroès sur l’âme*(Djawâmi’* ou*Mukhtasar al-nafs)* . Présentation et
traduction annotée,” in*Synoptikos* , pp. 129-153.

**Hasnawi** , Ahmad, „L’âge de la démonstration. Logique, science et
histoire: al-Fârâbî, Avicenne, Avempace, Averroès,“ in*Circolazione dei
saperi* , pp. 257-81.

**Lomba Fuentes** , Joaquín, “Le sens du*Kitâb al-nafs* dans la pensée
et l’oeuvre d’Ibn Bâjja,” in*Synoptikos* , pp. 113-28.

**Mazet** , Edmond, “Le vide dans les*Quaestiones de motu* de Richard
Kilvington,” in*La nature et le vide* , pp. 229-46.

**Taylor** , Richard C., “Arabic/Islamic Philosophy in Thomas Aquinas’s
Conception of the Beatific Vision in IV*Sent* ., D. 49, Q. 2, A.1,”*The
Thomist* , 76.4 (2012): 509-50.

Ibn al-Haytham

**El-Bizri** , Nader, “Ibn al-Haytham et le problème de la
couleur,”*Oriens-Occidens* , 7 (2009) [in fact 2012]: 201-26.

**-------** , “La perception de la profondeur: Alhazen, Berkeley et
Merleau-Ponty,”*Oriens-Occidens* , 5 (2004): 171-84.

**Federici Vescovini** , Graziella, “All’origine della ‘perspectiva
artificialis’: la piramida visiva di Ibn al-Haytham al-Hasan (Alhazen) e
Leon Battista Alberti,” in*Circolazione dei saperi* , pp. 111-23.

**Houzel** , Christian, “The new astronomy of Ibn al-Haytahm,”
in*Islamic Medical and Scientific Tradition* , vol. III, pp. 165-206
[reprint from 2009].

**Ibrahim** , Bilal, „Fakhr ad-Dîn ar-Râzî, Ibn al-Haytam and
Aristotelian Science: Essentialism versus Phenomenalism in
Post-Classical Islamic Thought,“*Oriens* , 41.3-4 (2013): 379-431.

**Mattila** , Janne, „The Philosophical Lives of Ibn al-Haytham and Ibn
Ridwân: Autobiography as an expression of the philosophical way of
life,“ in*Travelling through Time* , pp. 325-40.

Ibn Kammûna

**Fierro** , Maribel, “Notes on reason, language and conversion in the
thirteenth century in the Iberian peninsula,” in*Synoptikos* , pp.
169-82.

**Lameer** , Joep, “Ibn Kammûna’s Commentary on Suhrawardî’s*Talwîhât* .
Three Editions,”*Journal of Islamic Manuscripts* , 3.2 (2012): 154-84.

**Walbridge** , John, « Illuminationists, Place and the Void, » in*La
nature et le vide* , pp. 119-35.

Ibn Khaldûn

**Diez** , Martino, “Les antiquités gréco-romaines entre al-Makîn ibn
al-‘Amîd et Ibn Khaldûn,”*Studia graeco-arabica* , 3 (2013): 121-40.

**Kizilkaya** , Necmettin, “Reading the History of Islamic Law from Ibn
Khaldun’s Perspective: Ibn Khaldun’s Impact on the Historiography of
Islamic Law within the Modern Era,”*Belleten* , 76 n. 277 (2012): 741-74
[in Turkish].

**Korkut** , Senol, “Ibn Khaldûn’s Critique of the Theory of al-Siyasah
al-Madaniyyah,”*Asian Journal of Social Science* , 36.3-4 (2008):
547-70.

**Shihadeh** , Ayman, „The Argument from Ignorance and its Critics in
Medieval Arabic Thought,“ in*Arabic Sciences and Philosophy* , 23
(2013): 171-220.

**Shosh** , Ben-Ari, “Language, Civilisation and Globalisation in the
14*th* Century: Historical Periodicity and the Evolution of Language at
Ibn Khaldûn,”*Acta Orientalia* , 62.2 (2009): 219-30.

**Vivanco Saavedra** , Luis, “La noción de “velo de los sentidos” en el
primer libro de la*Introducción a la historia universal* de Ibn
Jaldûn,”*Ilu* , 15 (2010): 171-92.

Ibn Masarra

**Ebstein** , Michael,*Mysticism and Philosophy in al-Andalus : Ibn
Masarra, Ibn al-‘Arabî and the Ismâ’îlî Tradition* (Philosophy, Theology
and Science). Leiden-Boston : Brill, 2013, 300 pp., ISBN 9789004255364 &
e-bk 9789004255371.

Ibn al-Muqaffa’

**Kristo-Nagy** , Istvan, “Who shall educate whoma The official and the
sincere views of Ibn al-Muqaffa’ about intellectual hierarchy,”
in*Synoptikos* , pp. 279-93.

**Kristo-Nagy** , Istvan, “The Light and Darkness in the Work of Ibn
Al-Muqaffa,’*Acta Orientalia* , 61.3 (2008): 265-93.

**Troupeau** , Gérard, “The Logic of Ibn al-Muqaffa’ and the Origins of
Arabic Grammar,” in*Early Islamic Grammatical Tradition* , pp. 27-35
[transl by Philip Simpson from 1981 French original].

Ibn Ridwân

**Mattila** , Janne, „The Philosophical Lives of Ibn al-Haytham and Ibn
Ridwân: Autobiography as an expression of the philosophical way of
life,“ in*Travelling through Time* , pp. 325-40.

Ibn Tufayl

**de Callataÿ** , Godefroid, “Did the Ikwân al-Safâ’ inspire Ibn Tufayl
to his*Hayy Ibn Yaqdhân* a,”*Ishraq* , 4 (2013): 82-89.

**Idris** , Murad, “Ibn Tufayl’s Critique of Politics,”*Journal of
Islamic Philosophy* , 7 (2011): 67-101.

**Lea** , David, « The Philosophers of Al Andalus and European
Modernity, » in*Migrating Texts & Traditions* , ed. by William Sweet
(Ottawa: University of Ottawa Press, 2012), pp. 251-66.

Ibn Tumlûs

**Schoeler** , Gregor, „The ‚Poetic Syllogism‘ Revisited,“*Oriens* ,
41.1-2 (2013): 1-26.

Ibn Zur’a

**Bertolacci** , Amos, “Albertus Magnus and ‘Avenzoreth’ (Ibn Zur’a, D.
1008): Legend or Realitya,” in*The Medieval Legends of Philosophers and
Scholars* (Micrologus 21) (Florence: SISMEL, 2013), pp. 369-96.

**Troupeau** , Gérard, “Epître du philosophe ‘Isâ Ibn Zur’a à un ami
musulman,” in*Synoptikos* , pp. 73-83 [includes a translation].

Ikhwân as-Safâ’

**Al-Sha’ar** , Nuka, “Between Love and Social Aspiration: The Influence
of Sufî and Greek Concepts of Love on the Socio-Political Thought of the
Ikhwân al-Safâ’, Miskawayh, and al-Tawhîdî,” in*Sources and Approaches*
, pp. 25-39.

**Baffioni** , Carmela, “The Terms*Ibdâ’, al-Mubda’* , and*al-Mubda’ât*
in the*Rasâ’il* Ikhwân al-Safâ’: The Origin of the World and*Ibdâ’* ,”
in*More modoque* , pp. 293-312.

**-------** , “The Role of the Divine Imperative (*amr* ) in the Ikhwân
al-Safâ’ and Related Works,”*Ishraq* , 4 (2013): 46-70.

**-------** , “Nâsir-i-Khosrow, translator of the Ikhwân al-Safâ’a,”
in*Sources and Approahes* , pp. 319-31.

**-------** , “The “Language of the Prophet” in the Ikhwân al-Safâ’*,* ”
in*Al-Kitâb* , pp. 357-70.

**Cordonnier** , Rémy, “Influences directes et indirectes de
l’Encyclopédie des Ikhwân al-Safâ’ dans l’Occident chrétien,”*Le Muséon*
, 125.3-4 (2012): 421-66.

**de Callataÿ** , Godefroid, “The Two Islands Allegory in the*Rasâ’il
Ikhwân al-Safâ’* : a walk through philosophical metaphors and literary
motifs,”*Ishraq* , 4 (2013): 71-81.

**-------** , “Did the Ikwân al-Safâ’ inspire Ibn Tufayl to his*Hayy Ibn
Yaqdhân* a,”*Ishraq* , 4 (2013): 82-89.

**-------** , “Sacredness and Esotericism in the*Rasâ’il Ikhwân
al-Safâ’* ,” in*Al-Kitâb* , pp. 389-401.

**de Unzaga** , Omar Ali, “The Conversation between Moses and God
(*munâdjât Mûsâ* ) in the Epistles of the Pure Brethren (*Rasâ’il Ikhwân
al-Safâ’* ),” in*Al-Kitâb* , pp. 371-87.

**Gobillot** , Geneviève, “L’éthique des Ikhwân al-Safâ’ dans son
rapport au Coran,” in*Islam: Identité et altérité* , pp. 197-245.

**Hamdani** , Abbas, “The Ikhwân al-Safâ’: Between al-Kindî and
al-Fârâbî,”*Ishraq* , 4 (2013): 32-45 [abridged Russian transl. from an
article published in*Fortresses of the Intellect* , ed. by de Unzaga,
London, 2011, pp. 189-212].

**Hovhannisyan** , Mikayel, “Divine and Earthy Cities in the*Rasâil*
Ikhwân al-Safâ’: The Essence of the Ikhwân al-Safâ’s Social
Philosophy,”*Journal of Islamic Philosophy* , 7 (2011): 53-65.

**Krinis** , Ehud, “*Al-Risâla al-jâmi’a* and its Judeo-Arabic
Manuscript,” in*Islam : Identité et altérité* , pp. 311-29.

**Nazariev** , Ramazan, “A Comparative Analysis of the Teachings on
Micro- and Macrocosm in the Thought of the Ikhwân al-Safâ’ and Nikolay
Berdyayev,”*Ishraq* , 4 (2013): 120-34 [in Russian; English summary
623].

**Shiloah** , Amnon, “Jewish and Muslim traditions of music therapy,”
in*Islamic Medical and Scientific Tradition* , vol. II, pp. 240-51
[reprint from 2000].

**Velayati** , Ali Akbar, “The Types of State According to the “Brethern
of Purity,”*Ishraq* , 4 (2013): 112-19 [in Russian, English summary
622-23].

al-Jâhiz

**Behzadi** , L., “Between Theology, Philosophy and Aesthetics. Al-Jâhiz
on Arabic Language,” in Centre and Periphery Within the Borders of
Islam. Proceedings of the 23rd Congress of L’Union Européenne des
Arabisants et Islamisants, ed. by Giuseppe Contu (OLA 207)
(Louvain-Paris-Walpole, MA: Peeters, 2012), pp. 307-12.

**Geries** , Ibrahim, “Vers une nouvelle lecture de la*Risâla* attribuée
à Sahl b. Hârûn par al-Jâhiz,”*Arabica* , 60.1-2 (2013): 58-105 [A.
argues it’s by al-Jâhiz himself].

**Günther** , Sebastian, “Advice for Teachers: The 9*th* Century Muslim
Scholars Ibn Sahnûn and al-Jâhiz on Pedagogy and Didactics,”
in*Education and Learning* , pp. 53-92 [2005 original].

**Montgomery** , James E.,*Al-Jâhiz: In Praise of Books* (Edinburgh
Studies in Classical Arabic Literature). Edinburgh: Edinburgh University
Press, 2013, 592 pp., ISBN 978074868332.

**Regourd** , Anne, “Gâhiziana. Addition à l’essai d’inventaire de
l’oeuvre gâhizienne: le*Kitâb al-Fityân* retrouvéa 1,”*Arabica* , 60.1-2
(2013): 106-30.

Kâshânî

**Mousavian** , Seyyed Hossein &**Anvari** , Saeed, “Analysis and
Critical Edition of Fayd Kâshânî’s*Al-Akhjâr al-shihâd* ,”*Sophia
Perennis* , 3.1 (2011): 101-27 [in Persian but ed. of the Arabic text
pp. 116-27].

al-Kâtibî

**Schmidtke** , Sabine, “Two Commentaries on Najm al-Dîn
al-Kâtibî’s*al-Shamsiyya* , Copied in the Hand of David b. Joshua
Maimonides (fl. ca. 1335-1410 CE),” in*Law and Tradition* , pp. 203-26.

al-Khafrî

**al-Khafrî** ,*Rasâ’il fî ithbât wâjib al-wujûd bi-al-dhat wa fî
al-ilâhiyyât* , ed. by Firouzeh Saatchian. Tehran: Kitabkhanah, 2012.

**Saatchian** , Firouzeh, Gottes Wesen—Gottes Wirken. Ontologie und
Kosmologie im Denken von Shams-al-Dîn Muhammad al-Khafrî (gest.
942/1535). Eine philosophische Analyse nach seinen Schriften al-Risâla
fî ithbât wâjib al-wujûd bi-l-dât wa-sifâtihî und al-Risâla fî
l-ilâhiyyât (Islamkundliche Untersuchungen 305). Berlin: Klaus Verlag,
2011, 236 pp. + 142 pp. for the Arabic edition, ISBN 9783879974016.

al-Khalwatî

**Kaya** , Veysel, “An Example of the Mystical Avicennism in Ottoman
Thought: Jamâl al-Khalwatî’s Interpretation of Ibn Sînâ’s*Risâla ilâ Abî
Sa’îd ibn Abî l-Khayr* ,”*Ilahiyat Studies* , 3.2 (Summer/Fall 2012):
173-96 [the attribution to Ibn Sînâ of this*Risâla* is disputed;
includes edition of some passages].

al-Khûnajî

[al-Khûnajî, Afdal al-Dîn],*Kashf al-Asrâr ‘an Ghawâmid al-Afkâr* , ed.
by K. El-Rouayheb. Tehran: Iranian Institute of philosophy, 2010.

al-Kindî

**Adamson** , Peter, “Abû Ma’shar, al-Kindî and the philosophical
defense of astrology,” in*Islamic Medical and Scientific Tradition* ,
vol. III, pp. 243-64 [reprint from 2002].

**-------** , „Vision, light, and color in al-Kindî, Ptolemy and the
ancient commentators,“ in*Islamic Medical and Scientific Tradition* ,
vol. IV, pp. 17-42 [reprint from 2006].

**Daiber** , Hans, „Erkenntnistheoretische Grundlagen der Wetterprognose
bei den Arabern. Das Beispiel von Kindî, dem „Philosophen der Araber“
(9. Jh. n. Chr.),“ in*Die mantischen Künste und die Epistemologie
prognostischer Wissenschaften im Mittelalter* , ed. by Alexander Fidora
with Katrin Bauer (Beihefte zum Archiv für Kulturgeschichte 74)
(Cologne-Weimar-Vienna: Böhlau, 2013), pp. 151-65.

**Gutas** , Dimitri, „Geometry and the rebirth of philosophy in Arabic
with al-Kindî,“ in*Islamic Medical and Scientific Tradition* , vol. IV,
pp. 3-16 [reprint from 2004].

**Hamdani** , Abbas, “The Ikhwân al-Safâ’: Between al-Kindî and
al-Fârâbî,”*Ishraq* , 4 (2013): 32-45 [abridged Russian transl. from an
article published in*Fortresses of the Intellect* , ed. by de Unzaga,
London, 2011, pp. 189-212].

**Shiloah** , Amnon, “Jewish and Muslim traditions of music therapy,”
in*Islamic Medical and Scientific Tradition* , vol. II, pp. 240-51
[reprint from 2000].

al-Kirmânî

***Râhat al-‘aql*** , Selected Chapters, annotated Russian translation
by Andrey Amirnov of 1.6-7. 2.1 & 7; 3.1, 4.5 & 7, 5.2, 7.9-10 &
12-13,*Ishraq* , 4 (2013): 219-61.

**Eshots** , Yanis, “Hamîd al-Dîn al-Kirmânî’s Teaching on Nature and
Parallels to it in the Thought of Mullâ Sadrâ,”*Ishraq* , 4 (2013):
262-71.

**Smirnov** , Andrey, “The Main Features of the Philosophic Teachings of
Hamîd al-Dîn al-Kirmânî,”*Ishraq* , 4 (2013): 204-18 [in Russian;
English summary 625-6].

al-Lawkarî

**Marcotte,** Roxanne D., “L’eschatologie d’Abû al-‘Abbâs al-Lawkarî
(mort après 503/1109): le*Bayân al-Haqq* et le*Sharh-e Qasîda-ye Asrâr
al-Hikma* ,”*MIDEO* , 29 (2012) [in fact 2013]: 1-25.

Liber de causis

**Baneu** , Alexandra &**Calma** , Dragos, “Notes sur un commentaire
inédit au*Liber de causis* (Ausburg, Staats-und Stadtbibliothek, 4o Cod
68),”*Bulletin de Philosophie médiévale* , 54 (2012): 277-96.

**Calma** , Dragos, “Du néoplatonisme au réalisme et retour, parcours
latins du*Liber de causis* au XIIIe-XVIe siècles,”*Bulletin de
Philosophie médiévale* , 54 (2012):217-76.

**Carron-Faivre** , Delphine, “Guillaume de Leus, Commentateur du*Liber
de causis* ,”*Bulletin de Philosophie médiévale* , 54 (2012): 297-331.

**Dinca** , Adinel-Ciprian &**Baumgarten** , Alexander, “Hic liber est
incorrectissime impressus. A Preliminary Discussion of the Liber De
causis in Mediaeval Transylvania,”*Chôra* , 9-10 (2011-12): 491-98.

Liber de compositione alchemiae

**Al-Hassan** , Ahmad Y., “The Arabic original of*Liber de compositione
alchemiae* : The Epistle of Maryânus, the hermit and philosopher, to
Prince Khâlid bin Yazîd,” in*Islamic Medical and Scientific Tradition* ,
vol. III, pp. 345-62 [reprint from 2004].

Miskawayh

**Al-Sha’ar** , Nuka, “Between Love and Social Aspiration: The Influence
of Sufî and Greek Concepts of Love on the Socio-Political Thought of the
Ikhwân al-Safâ’, Miskawayh, and al-Tawhîdî,” in*Sources and Approaches*
, pp. 25-39.

**Arkoun** , Mohammed,*La question éthique et juridique dans la pensée
islamique* (Études musulmanes). Paris: Vrin, 2010, 202 pp., ISBN
9782711623013 [originally intended to be a new preface to the reprint of
Miskawayh’s*Traité d’Éthique* ].

**Spallino** , Patrizia, « Du livre de la médecine spirituelle: l’âme et
l’éthique chez Miskawayh, »*Mediaeval Sophia* , 9.1 (2011) : 21-31.

Mullâ Sadrâ al-Shirâzî

**Akbarian** , Reza, “The Relationship between Theory and Practice in
Mulla Sadra’s Philosophy,”*Sophia Perennis* , 3.1 (2011): 5-28 [in
Persian].

**Alexandrin** , Elizabeth R., “Al-Mu’ayyad’s Concept of the*Qa’im* : A
Commentary on the*Khuthat al-Bayân* a,”*Ishraq* , 4 (1203): 294-303.

**Dinani** , Gholamhossein Ibrahimi, “Three Philosophical Problems: From
Nasir al-Din Tusi to Mulla Sadra,”*Ishraq* , 4 (2013): 379-93 [in
Russian; English summary 627].

**Eshots** , Yanis, “Hamîd al-Dîn al-Kirmânî’s Teaching on Nature and
Parallels to it in the Thought of Mullâ Sadrâ,”*Ishraq* , 4 (2013):
262-71.

**Fathtaheri** , Ali, “Leibniz’s Monad and Mulla Sadra’s Hierarchy of
Being: A Comparative Study,” in*Proceedings: The XXII World Congress* ,
vol. 8: Comparative Philosophy, pp. 93-100.

**Jambet** , Christian, “L’exégèse du verset du Trône par Mullâ Sadrâ
Shîrâzî,” in*Islam: Identité et altérité* , pp. 263-310.

**Kamal** , Muhammad,*From Essence to Being. The Philosophy of Mulla
Sadra and Martin Heidegger* . London: ICAS Press, 2010, 207 pp., ISBN
9781904063377.

**Kaukua** , Jari, “Self-awareness in Avicenna, Suhrawardî and Mullâ
Sadrâ,”*Sophia Perennis* , 3.2 (Spring 2011): 5-30.

**Momeni** , Naser, “Mullâ Sadrâ’s Approach to Suhrawardî’s Philosophy
of Illumination,”*Sophia Perennis* , 3.2 (Spring 2011): 57-82 [in
Persian, English abstract p. 60].

**Rizvi** , Sajjad H., “Philosophy as a Way of Life in the World of
Islam: Applying Hadot to the Study of Mulla Sadra Shirazi (d.
1635),”*Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies* ,” 75.1
(2012): 33-45.

**Sheykh** , Rezaee Hossein &**Hashemi** , Mohammad Mansur, “Knowledge
as a Mode of Being: Mulla Sadra’s Theory of Knowledge,”*Sophia Perennis*
, 1.4 (2009): 19-42 [in English].

***Soul from the Perspective of Mulla Sadra’s Philosophy*** , ed. by
Seyed Ghahreman Safavi (Comparative Studies on Islamic and
Western-Eastern Philosophy & Mysticism). London: London Academy of
Iranian Studies, 2011, 246 pp., ISBN 9780955229862.

**Gacek** , Adam, “The Osler Codex of Naîr al-Dîn al-Ûsî’s Commentary on
Avicenna’s*al-Ishârât wa-al-tanbîhât* ,”*Journal of Islamic Manuscripts*
, 1 (2010): 3-17.

al-Nasafî

**Madelung** , Wilferd, “*Kawn al-‘Âlam* : the Cosmogony of the
Ismâ’îlî*dâ’î* Muhammad b. Ahmad al-Nasafî,” in his*Studies in Medieval
Shi’ism* , section XVI (pp. 23-31) [2010 original in*Ismaili and Fatimid
Studies* , pp. 22-31].

Nâsir-i Khusraw

**Nâsir-I Khusraw** , “The*Rawshanâ’î-nâma* : A Fragment,” annotated
Russian translation by N.I. Prigarina & M.A. Shakarbekova of the intro.
and 1*st* chapter,*Ishraq* , 4 (2013): 333-44.

**De Smet** , Daniel, “Was Nâsir-e Khusraw a Great Poet and Only a Minor
Philosophera Some Critical Reflections on his Doctrine of the Soul,”
in*Ismaili and Fatimid Studies* , pp. 101-30.

**Dinorshoev** , Muso, “Nâsir-I Khusraw’s Treatise*Zâd al-Musâfirîn*
,”*Ishraq* , 4 (2013): 326-32 [in Russian; English summary 626].

**Hunzai** , Faquir Muhammad, “Salient Aspects of the Doctrine of the
Qâ’im according to Nâsir-i Khusraw,”*Ishraq* , 4 (2013): 304-25.

al-Qûnawî

**Shaker** , Anthony F., Thinking in the Language of Reality: Sadr
al-Dîn Qûnavî (1207-74 CE) and the Mystical Philosophy of Reason. No
city: Xlibris, 2012, 402 pp., ISBN 978149718030.

al-Râzî, Abû Bakr

**Álvarez Millán** , Cristina, “Practice versus theory: tenth-century
case histories from the Islamic Middle East,” in*Islamic Medical and
Scientific Tradition* , vol. I, pp. 283-98 [reprint from 2000].

**Dodikhudoev** , Khayolbek, “The Polemic between the Two
Razis,”*Ishraq* , 4 (2013): 140-61[in Russian; English summary 624].

**Escobar Gómez** , Santiago, “Los conceptos de tiempo y espacio en Ibn
Hazm de Córdoba en su relación con Abû Bakr Al-Râzî y Newton,” in*El
pensamiento politico* , pp. 419-22.

**Iskandar** , Albert Zaki, “Ar-Râzî, the clinical physician (*Ar-Râzî
at-Tabîb al-Iklînîkî* ),” in*Islamic Medical and Scientific Tradition* ,
vol. I, pp. 207-53 [translated from 1962 Arabic original].

**Janssens** , Jules, „Rhazes,*Livre de médecine pour Mansour* , 1483,“
& „Abû Bakr al-Râzî,“ in*Orient-Occident* , pp. 496-99.

**Porman** n, Peter E., „Ar-Râzî on the benefits of sex: a clinician
caught between philosophy and medicine,“ in*Islamic Medical and
Scientific Tradition* , vol. II, pp. 134-45 [reprint from 2007].

**Zaki** , Mahmoud, “Early Arabic Bookmaking Techniques as Described by
al-Râzî in His recently rediscovered*Zînat al-katabah* ,”*Journal of
Islasmic Manuscripts* , 2.2 (2011): 223-34.

al-Sijistânî

**Madelung** , Wilferd, “Abû Ya’qûb al-Sijistânî and metempsychosis,” in
his*Studies in Medieval Shi’ism* , section VIII (pp. 131-43) [1990
original].

**-------** , “Abû Ya’qûb al-Sijistânî and the seven faculties of the
intellect,” in his*Studies in Medieval Shi’ism* , section IX (pp. 85-89)
[1996 original].

**Mujtahidi** , Karim, “A Philosophical Analysis of Sijistani’s Kashf
al-Mahjûb,”*Ishraq* , 4 (2013): 199-203 [in Russian; English summary
625].

**Poonawala** , Ismail K., “Al-Sijistânî and His*Kitâb al-Maqâlîd
al-Malakûtiyya* ,”*Ishraq* , 4 (2013): 162-85.

**Walker** , Paul E., “An Ismâ’îlî Answer to the Problem of Worshipping
the Unknowable, Neoplatonic God,”*Ishraq* , 4 (2013): 186-98.

al-Suhrawardî

**Alikhani** , Babak, “Hirqalaya according to Suhrawardi,”*Philosophia
Perennis* , 2.3 (2010): 87-104 [in Persian].

**-------** , “The Seven Paths in the Hikmat al-Ishraq of
Suhrawardi,”*Sophia Perennis* , 1.2 (2009): 59-70 [in Persian].

**Bostani** , Ahmad, “Ideal Ruler and the Imaginal World in Suhrawardi’s
Illuminationist Political Doctrine,”*Sophia Perennis* , 2.4 (2010): 5-31
[in Persian].

**Fallahi** , Asadollah, “Suhrawardi’s Theory of “Batti Affirmation” and
its Consequences,”*Sophia Perennis* , 2.4 (2010): 49-71 [in Persian].

**Hatem** , Jad, “Suhrawardi et l’esprit de prophétie,”*Ishraq* , 4
(2013): 432-47.

**Kamalizadeh** , Tahereh, “The Philosophical Foundations of Beauty and
Love in Suhrawardi’s Treatise on the Reality of Love,”*Sophia Perennis*
, 2.2 (2010): 29-44 [in Persian].

**Kaukua** , Jari, “Suhrawardî’s Knowledge as Presence in Context,”
in*Travelling through Time* , pp. 309-24.

-------, “Self-awareness in Avicenna, Suhrawardî and Mullâ
Sadrâ,”*Sophia Perennis* , 3.2 (Spring 2011): 5-30.

**Kuhkan** , Reza, “The Relationship between Salman al-Farisi and
Suhrawardi according to Corbin,”*Sophia Perennis* , 2.2 (2010): 45-62
[in Persian].

**Lameer** , Joep, “Ibn Kammûna’s Commentary on Suhrawardî’s*Talwîhât* .
Three Editions,”*Journal of Islamic Manuscripts* , 3.2 (2012): 154-84.

**Momeni** , Naser, “Mullâ Sadrâ’s Approach to Suhrawardî’s Philosophy
of Illumination,”*Sophia Perennis* , 3.2 (Spring 2011): 57-82 [in
Persian, English abstract p. 60].

**Movahed** , Zia, “Suhrawardi on Syllogisms,”*Sophia Perennis* , 2.4
(2010): 5-18 [in English].

**Walbridge** , John, « Illuminationists, Place and the Void, » in*La
nature et le vide* , pp. 119-35.

al-Taftâzânî

**Madelung** , Wilferd, « At-Taftâzânî und die Philosophie, » in
his*Studies in Medieval Muslim Thought* , XIII, pp. 227-36 [2005
original].

al-Tawhîdî

**Al-Sha’ar** , Nuka, “Between Love and Social Aspiration: The Influence
of Sufî and Greek Concepts of Love on the Socio-Political Thought of the
Ikhwân al-Safâ’, Miskawayh, and al-Tawhîdî,” in*Sources and Approaches*
, pp. 25-39.

**Urvoy** , Marie-Thérèse, « Réflexions sur l’*adab* : le
genre*mufâdala* et la question des nuances, » in*Synoptikos* , pp.
515-26

al-Tûsî

**Dinani** , Gholamhossein Ibrahimi, “Three Philosophical Problems: From
Nasir al-Din Tusi to Mulla Sadra,”*Ishraq* , 4 (2013): 379-93 [in
Russian; English summary 627].

**Fatoorchi** , Pirooz, “On Intellectual Skepticism: A Selection of
Skeptical Arguments and Tûsî’s Criticisms, with Some Comparative
Notes,”*Philosophy East and West* , 63.2 (2013): 213-50.

**Gacek** , Adam, “The Osler Codex of Nasîr al-Dîn al-Tûsî’s Commentary
on Avicenna’s*al-Ishârât wa-al-tanbîhât* ,”*Journal of Islamic
Manuscripts* , 1 (2010): 3-17.

**Lameer** , Joep, “Tûsî’s Criticism of Abharî’s Account of*Tasdîq*
,”*Farhang* , 20, nn. 61-62 (2006): 85-94.

**Landolt** , “Khwâja Nasîr al-Dîn al-Tûsî (597/1201-672/1274),
Ismâ’ilism, and*Ishrâqî* philosophy,”*Ishraq* , 4 (2013): 360-78.

**Madelung** , Wilferd, “To see all things through the sight of God:
Nasîr al-Dîn al-Tûsî’s attitude to Sufism,” in his*Studies in Medieval
Muslim Thought* , XI 1-11 [2000 original].

**-------** , “Nasîr al-Dîn Tûsî’s ethics between philosophy, Shi’ism,
and Sufism,” in his*Studies in Medieval Muslim Thought* , XII 85-101
[1985 original].

**Rzaqulizade** , Solmaz, “Some Aspects of Nasir al-Din Tusi’s Life and
Work,”*Ishraq* , 4 (2013): 394-414 [in Russian; English summary 628].

**Thom** , P., “Syllogisms about Possibility and Necessity in Avicenna
and Tusi,” in*Insolubles and Consequences: Essays in Honour of Stephen
Read* , ed. by C. Dutilh Novaes & O. Hjortland (Milton Keynes: College
Publications, 2012), pp. 239-48.

Modern and Current Scholars

**Adoricio** , Chiara, « The Debate between Salomon Munk and Heinrich
Ritter on Medieval Jewish and Arabic History of Philosophy, »*European
Journal of Jewish Studies* , 6.1 (2012) : 169-82.

**Amir-Moezzi** , Mohammad Ali, « Souvenir et réflexions, » and «
Bibliographie de Guy Monnot » in*Islam : Identité et altérité* , pp.
5-16 [coversation with Guy Monnot] and pp. 17-25.

**Armour** , Leslie, « Putting Islam and ‘The West’ Together Again : The
Philosophy of M.M. Sharif, » » in*Migrating Texts & Traditions* , ed. by
William Sweet (Ottawa : University of Ottawa Press, 2012), pp. 61-78.

**Borrmans** , Maurice, « Massignon, l’Algérie et les Algériens, »
in*Islam: Identité et altérité* , pp. 113-39.

**Dubois** , Olivier, « Contribution à une bibliographie de Mohammed
Arkoun 1, »*Arabica* , 60.5 (2013) : 473-515.

**Jung** , Dietrich, « Islamic Studies and Religious Reform. Ignaz
Goldziher—A Crossroads of Judaism, Christianity and Islam, »*Der Islam*
, 90.1 (2013) : 108-26.

**Marín** , Manuela, “Sobre la autoridad religiosa del sultán de
Marruecos. Un encuentro (a distancia) entre el mariscal Lyautey y Miguel
Asín Palacios,” in*Synoptikos* , pp. 651-63.

**Monnot** , Guy, “La communauté musulmane selon Fazlur Rahman,”
in*Synoptikos* , pp. 229-43.

**Montgomery** , James E., “Leo Strauss and the Alethiometer,”
in*Renaissance Averroism* , pp. 285-320 [mainly on al-Fârâbî].

**Panjwani** , Farid, “Fazlur Rahman and the Search for Authentic
Islamic Education: A Critical Appreciation,”*Curriculum Inquiry* , 42.1
(2012): 33-55.

**Platti** , Emilio, « Entre théologie et philosophie: des Arabes
chrétiens dans l’œuvre de Shlomo Pines (1908-1990), » in*Sources and
Approaches* , pp. 101-12.

**Siddiqui** , Atif Suhail, “Response to Modernity: A Comparative Study
of Fazlur Rahman and Seyyed Hossein Nasr,”*Hamdard Islamicus* , 36.1
(2013): 7-36.

**Street** , T., “Rescher on Arabic Logic,” in*Reading Rescher* , ed. by
R. Almeder (Frankfurt: Ontos, 2008), pp. 309-24.

**Urvoy** , Dominique, “Bibliographie de D. Urvoy,” in*Synoptikos* , pp.
13-27.

**Tayob** , Abdulkader, “Al Fârûqî between the History of Religions and
Islamic Theology,”*Numen* , 60.2-3 (2013): 230-50.

**Walker** , Paul E., “Biography” & “Publications” of P. Walker
in*Ismaili and Fatimid Studies* , pp. vii-viii & ix-xix.

**Watt** , John W., « Von Alexandrien nach Baghdad. Ein erneuter Besuch
bei Max Meyerhof, » in*Origenes und sein Erbe in Orient und Okzident* ,
ed. by Alfons Furst (Adamantiana 1) (Münster: Aschendorff, 2011), pp.
213-26.

Section II. Kalâm

General Studies

**Akasoy** , Anna, “Paganism and Islam: Medieval Arabic Literature on
Religions in West Africa,” in*Paganism in the Middle Ages: Threat and
Fascination* , ed. by Carlos Steel, John Marenbon & Werner Verbeke
(Mediaevalia Lovaniensia, series I/Studia 43) (Louvain: Leuven
University Press, 2012), pp. 207-38.

**Alami** , Ahmed &**Badoual** , Guillaume,*La pensée philosophique dans
l’islam classique: Anthologie thématique* . Casablanca: Afrique Orient,
2012, 590 pp., ISBN 9789981257771 [I. Place of Philosophy: 1. Philosophy
as a controversial science; 2. Logic as a universal instrument; 3.
Reason and revealed law; 4. Proofs for the existence of God; II.
Ontology and metaphysics: 5, Thing, essence, existence; 6. The meaning
of being; 7. Status of the universal; 8. Doctrines about the intellect;
9. The question of causation: contingency and necessity; III. God and
human destiny: 10. The issue of free choice; 11. Good and evil: the
issue of divine justice; 12. Human and divine love; 13. Power and
rulership; French translations of brief but well-chosen passages with
the original Arabic texts at the end of each chapter. Covers some 25
philosophers and mutakllimûn].

**Al-Salimi** , Abdulrahman, “Early Ibâdî Theological Arguments on Atoms
and Accidents,”*Arabic Sciences and Philosophy* , 23.1 (2013): 117-34.

**Ansari** , Hassan &**Schmidtke** , Sabine, “Between Aleppo and Sa’ada:
The Zaydî Reception of the Imâmî Scholar Ibn al-Bitrîq
al-Hillî,”*Journal of Islamic Manuscripts* , 4.2 (2013): 158-98.

**Aradi** , Naomi, “The Origins of the*Kalâm* Model of Discussion on the
Concept of*Tawhîd* ,”*Arabic Sciences and Philosophy* , 23.1 (2013):
135-66.

**Audebert** , Claude, “I’djâz et sacralisation. La*Risâla* d’al-Shâfi’î
à travers le prisme de l’*i’djâz* ,” in*Al-Kitâb* , pp. 295-319.

**Bar-Asher** , Meir Michael, “La place du judaïsme et des juifs dans le
shî’isme duodécimain,” in *Islam : Identité et altérité* , pp. 57-82.

**Belhaj** , Abdessamad, “Rhétorique arabe et théologie: quelques lieux
communs,” in*Sources and Approaches* , pp. 397-404.

**Brown** , Jonathan A.C., “Faithful Dissenters: Sunni Skepticism about
the Miracles of Saints,”*Journal of Sufi Studies* , 1.2 (2012): 123-68.

**Cortese** , Delia, “Voices of the Silent Majority: The Transmission of
Sunnî Learning in Fâtimî Egypt,”*Jerusalem Studies in Arabic and Islam*
, 39 (2012): 345-66.

**Côté** , Antoine, “Aquinas, the Kalâm, and Skepticism about Sense
Perception,” in*Skepticism, Causality, and Skepticism about Causality* ,
ed. by Gyula Klima & Alexander W. Hall (Proceedings of the Society for
Medieval Logic and Metaphysics 10) (Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge
Scholars Publisher, 2012), pp. 35-46.

**Demichelis** , Marco, “The Mihna. Deconstruction and Reconsideration
of the Mu’tazilite Role in the ‘Inquisition’,”*Annali di Scienze
Religiose* , 5 (2012): 257-86.

**De Smet** , Daniel, “The Druze*Epistles of Wisdom* and Early
Isma’ilism: A ‘Neo-Carmathian’ Revolt against the Fatimids,”*Ishraq* , 4
(2013): 272-85.

**-------** , “La prédication chiite ismaélienne en Égypte fatimide: ses
aspects ésotériques et exotériques,” in*Islam: Identité et altérité* ,
pp. 141-61[al-Mu’ayyad].

**Di Branco** , Marco, “Ismailiti a Bisanzio. Immagini e
presenze,”*Studia graeco-arabica* , 3 (2013): 105-20.

**Feldman** , Noah, « The Ethical Literature : Religion and Political
Authority as Brothers, »*Journal of Persianate Studies* , 5.2 (2012) :
95-127.

**Griffith** , Sidney H., “When Did the Bible Become an Arabic
Scripturea,”*Intellectual History of the Islamicate World* , 1.1-2
(2013): 7-23.

**-------** , “The Melkites and the Muslims: The Qur’ân, Christology,
and Arab Orthodoxy,”*Al-Qantara* , 33.2 (2012): 413-43.

**Hawting** , Gerald. R., “The Development of the Doctirne of the
Infallibility (*‘isma* ) of Prophets and the Interpretation of Qur’ân
8:67-69,”*Jerusalem Studies in Arabic and Islam* , 39 (2012): 141-63.

**Hollmann** , Joshua, “For the Peace of Constantinople: Nicholas of
Cusa’s*De pace fidei* and the*polis* as Nexus of Christian-Muslim
Dialogue,” in*Philosophy and the Abrahamic Religions* , pp. 297-312.

**Madelung** , Wilferd, “The late Mu’tazila and determinism: the
philosophers’ trap,” in his*Studies in Medieval Muslim Thought* , II
245-57 [1991 original].

**-------** , “Abu l-Mu’în al-Nasafî and Ash’arî theology,” in
his*Studies in Medieval Muslim Thought* , VII 318-30 [2000 original].

**-------** ,*Studies in Medieval Shi’ism* : I. ‘Abd Allâh b. ‘Abbâs and
Shi’ite Law, 1998 original; II. Shi’ism in the age of the rightly-guided
caliphs, 2001; III. Zu einigen Werken des Imams Abû Tâlib an-Nâtiq bi
l-Haqq, 1986; IV. Imam al-Qâsim ibn Ibrahîm and Mu’tazilism, 1989; V.
Al-Qâsim ibn Ibrâhîm and Christian theology, 1991; VI. Zaydî attitudes
to Sufism; VII. Das Imamat in der frühen ismailitischen Lehre, 1961;
VIII. Abû Ya’qûb al-Sijistânî and metempsychosis, 1990; IX. Abû Ya’qûb
al-Sijistânî and the seven faculties of the Intellect, 1996; X. The
Fatimids and the Qarmatîs of Bahrayn, 1996; XI. Hamdân Qarmat and the
Dâ’î Abû ‘Alî, 1997; XII. The religious policy of the Fatimids toward
their Sunnî subjects in the Maghrib, 1999; XIII. A treatise on the
Imamate of the Fatimid caliph al-Mansûr bi-Allâh, 2003; XIV. An Ismaili
interpretation of Ibn Sînâ’s*Qasîdat al-Nafs* , 2005; XV. Shahriyâr b.
al-Hasan: a Persian Ismâ’îlî*dâ’î* of the Fatimid age, 2007; XVI.*Kawn
al-‘Âlam* : the Cosmogony of the Ismâ’îlî*dâ’î* Muhammad b. Ahmad
al-Nasafî, 2010.

**Musallam** , Basim, « The human embryo in Arabic scientific and
religious thought, » in*Islamic Medical and Scientific Tradition* , vol.
II, pp. 317-31 [Avicenna & Ibn Qayyim, reprint from 1990].

**Osman** , Amr, “’Adâlat al-Sahâba: The Construction of a Religious
Doctrine,”*Arabica* , 60.3-4 (2013): 272-305.

**Platti** Emilio, « Entre théologie et philosophie : des Arabes
chrétiens dans l’œuvre de Shlomo Pines (1908-1990), » in*Sources and
Approaches* , pp. 101-12.

**-------** , “Des Arabes chrétiens et le Coran. Pérennité d’une
polémique,” in*Al-Kitâb* , pp. 333-45.

**Rashed** , Marwan, „Nouveaux fragments anti-procliens de Philopon en
version arabe et le problème des origines de la théorie de
l‘“instauration“ (*Hudûth* ),“ in*Circolazione dei saperi* , pp. 323-60.

**Redissi** , Hamadi, “Les majlis interreligieux en islam,”
in*Synoptikos* , pp. 295-307.

**Savage-Smith** , Emily, „Attitudes towards dissection in medieval
Islam,“ in*Islamic Medical and Scientific Tradition* , vol. I, pp.
299-342 [reprint from 1995].

**Schmidtke** , Sabine &**Adang** , Camilla, „Mu’tazilî Discussions of
the Abrogation of the Torah: Ibn Hallâd (4th/10th Century) and His
Commentators,“*Arabica* , 60.6 (2013): 701-42.

**Shihadeh** , Ayman, „The Argument from Ignorance and its Critics in
Medieval Arabic Thought,“ in*Arabic Sciences and Philosophy* , 23.2
(2013): 171-220 [‚Abd al-Jabbâr, al-Malâhimî, al-Juwaynî, Fakhr al-Dîn
al-Râzî, Ibn Khaldûn].

**Urvoy** , Dominique, „La question de l’aide de Dieu dans le*jihâd* ,“
in*Islam : Identité et altérité* , pp. 405-10.

**Walbiner** , Carsten-Michael, “Eine christlich-arabische (Um-)Deutung
der muslimischen*Basmala* ,” in*Synoptikos* , pp. 567-72 [includes
edition].

‘Abd Allâh ibn Ibâd

**Madelung** , Wilferd, “’Abd Allâh ibn Ibâd and the origins of the
Ibâdiyya,” in his*Studies in Medieval Muslim Thought* , V-51-57 [2006
original].

**-------** , “’Abd Allâh ibn Ibâd’s “second letter to ‘Abd al-Malik”,”
in his*Studies in Medieval Muslim Thought* , VI 1-8 [2012 original].

‘Abd al-Jabbâr

**Belhaj** , Abdessamad, ‘Crossroads of Reflection: Avicenna and ‘Abd
al-Jabbâr on the Widely-transmitted Propositions,” in*More modoque* ,
pp. 285-92.

**Ibrahim** , Mohd Radhi, “Immediate Knowledge According to al-Qâdî ‘Abd
al-Jabbâr,”*Arabic Sciences and Philosophy* , 23.1 (2013): 101-15.

**Shihadeh** , Ayman, „The Argument from Ignorance and its Critics in
Medieval Arabic Thought,“ in*Arabic Sciences and Philosophy* , 23.2
(2013): 171-220.

al-Antâkî

**Wakelnig** , Elvira, « Al-Antâkî’s Use of the Lost Arabic Version of
Philoponus’*Contra Proclum* , »*Arabic Sciences and Philosophy* , 23.2
(2013) : 291-37.

Bahâ’uddîne

**Hatem** , Jad, “Dieu et son Dieu: l’interprétation d’un article du
symbole de Nicée par Bahâ’uddîne,”*Ishraq* , 4 (2013): 286-93.

al-Basrî, Abû l-Husayn

**Ansari** , Hassan &**Schmidtke** , Sabine, “The Mu’tazilî and Zaydî
Reception of Abû ‘l-Husayn al-Basrî’s*Kitâb al-Mu’tamad fi ‘Usûl
al-fiqh* : A Bibliographical Note,”*Islamic Law & Society* , 20.1-2
(2013): 90-109.

**Madelung** , Wilferd, “Abû l-Hussayn al-Basrî’s proof for the
existence of God,” in his*Studies in Medieval Muslim Thought* , III
273-80 [2006 original].

al-Ghazâlî

***Il Radd Psudo-Ghazâliano: Paternità, Contenuti, Traduzione*** , ed.
by Ines Peta, Forword by Samir Khalil Samir (Machina Philosophorum).
Palermo: Officina di Studi Medievali, 2013, 376 pp., ISBN 9788864850825.

**Aavani** , Shahin, “The Alchemy of Ethics in al-Ghazali,”*Sophia
Perennis* , 1.2 (2009): 25-42 [in Persian].

***Abû Hâmid al-Ghazâlî*** ,***Acts of a Congress at Bayt al-Hikmat
(Tunis), 17-29 May 2011*** , 2 vol. Tunis: Tunisian Academy “Bayt
al-Hikmat”, 2012, vol. 1: 415 pp. & vol. 2: pp. 421-870, ISBN vol. 1:
9789973491398 & vol. 2: 9789973491404 [in Arabic, except for 3 papers in
French].

**Albert** , Edouardo,*Imam al-Ghazali: A Concise Life* . Markfield, UK:
Kube Publishing, 2012, 82 pp., ISBN 9781847740304.

**Ali** , Zain,*Faith, Philosophy and the Reflective Muslim* (Palgrave
Frontiers in Philosophy of Religion). New York: Palgrave Macmillan,
2013, x-176 pp., ISBN 9781137286352 [confronts al-Ghazali’s views to
those of William James].

**Birgül** , Mehmet Fatih, “Discussion of Causality Based on the
Conceptions of Nature of Ibn Rushd and al-Ghazâlî,”*Ilahiyat Studies* ,
1.2 (Summer/Fall 2010): 241-63.

**Boubakrine** , Tayeb Chouiref, “Philosophes, théologiens et soufis:
Quelles modalités pour une revivification de la connaissancea,” in*Abû
Hâmid al-Ghazâlî* (Tunis: Tunisian Academy, 2012), vol. 2, pp. 818-805
(sic).

**Campanini** , Massimo, “I bei nomi di Dio. Teologia e filosofia in
al-Ghazâlî,”*Rivista di Storia della Filosofia* , 61.1 (2006): 55-66.

**Davari** , Ardahani Reza, “Al-Ghazali and Philosophy,”*Sophia
Perennis* , 1.3 (2009): 87-100 [in Persian].

**El-Amrani-Jamal** , Abdelali, “Une notice biographique d’al-Ghazâlî
signifiant sa modernité chez un historiographe marocain de la première
moitié du XXe siècle, ‘Abbâs Ibn Ibrâhîm,” in*Abû Hâmid al-Ghazâlî*
(Tunis: Tunisian Academy, 2012), vol. 2, pp. 780-770 (sic).

**Geoffroy** , Éric, “Pourquoi al-Ghazâlî a-t-il été rangé parmi les
“soufis extremistes” par certainsa,” in*Abû Hâmid al-Ghazâlî* (Tunis:
Tunisian Academy, 2012), vol. 2, pp. 660-650 (sic).

**Goodman** , Lenn E., “Al-Ghazâlî and Hume on Causality,”*Ishraq* , 4
(2013): 448-72.

**Griffel** , Frank, “The Western Reception of al-Ghazâlî’s Cosmology
from the Middle Ages to the 21*st* Century,”*Dîvân, Journal of
Interdisciplinary Studies* , 16.30 (2011.1): 33-62 [in Turkish].

**Günaydin** , Yusuf Turan, “Al-Ghazâlî’s Translations in Turkish: A
Bibliographical Sketch of the Ottoman and Post-1928 Periods,”*Dîvân,
Journal of Interdisciplinary Studies* , 16.30 (2011.1): 63-90 [in
Turkish].

**Iskenderoglu** , Muammer, “Ghazâlî and Bonaventure on the Criticism of
Philosophical Knowledge,” in*Philosophy and the Abrahamic Religions* ,
pp. 239-51.

**Karbasizadeh** , Amir Ehsan, “A Ghazalian Predicament: Epistemology
and Metaphysics of Causation in the Works of Ghazali,”*Sophia Perennis*
, 1.4 (2009): 43-70 [in English].

**Kukkonen** , Taneli, “On Adding to the Names: The Camel’s Smile,”
in*Travelling through Time* , pp. 341-58.

**Michot** , Yahya M., “An Important Reader of al-Ghazâlî: Ibn
Taymiyya,”*The Muslim World* , 103.1 (2013): 131-60.

**Mohaqqiq** , Damad Seyyed Mostafa, “Misdirection and Approval
according to al-Ghazali and the Shiite Jurisprudents,”*Sophia Perennis*
, 1.2 (2009): 111-30 [in Persian].

**Moosa** , Ebrahim, “Abû Hâmid al-Ghazâlî (d. 505/1111),” in*Islamic
Legal Thought* , pp. 261-93 [includes translation of passages].

**Movahhed** , Seyyed Zia, “Al-Ghazali’s Two Types of Proof Refuting the
Necessity of Causality,”*Sophia Perennis* , 125-35 [in Persian].

**Pazouki** , Shahram, “Ghazali’s Revival of the Religious Sciences and
the Necessity of Reviving it in our Times,”*Sophia Perennis* , 1.4
(2009): 37-49 [in Persian].

**Pearce** , S. J., ““The Types of Wisdom Are Two in Number”: Judah ibn
Tibbon’s Quotation from the*Ihyâ ‘ulûm al-Dîn* ,”*Medieval Encounters* ,
19.1-2 (2013): 137-66.

**Pisani** , Emmanuel, “Chronique al-Ghazâlî pour le neuf-centième
anniversaire de sa mort,”*Revue Thomiste* , 112.2 (2012): 347-74.

**Poursina** , Zahra, “Triplet Usages of ‘al-aql’ (reason) in
al-Ghazali,”*Sophia Perennis* , 1.3 (2009): 67-86 [in Persian].

**Rahimian** , Saeed, “The Rules and Method of Tawil in
al-Ghazali,”*Sophia Perennis* , 1.2 (2009): 25-42 [in Persian].

**Ramón Guerrero** , Rafael, “La tolerancia en los limites de la razón.
Algazel ante el pensamiento en el Islam,” in*Tolerancia: Teoría y
práctica en la edad media. Actas del Coloquio de Mendoza (15-18 de junio
de 2011* ), ed. by Rubén Peretó Rivas (Fédération Internationale des
Instituts d’Études Médiévales: Textes et Études du Moyen Âge 64). Porto:
FIDEM, 2012, pp. 263-83.

**Said** , Yazeed, “Knowledge as*Fiqh* in the Political Theology of
al-Ghazâlî,” in*Philosophy and the Abrahamic Religions,* pp. 227-38.

**Setia** , ‘Adî, “Al-Ghazâlî on the Proprieties of Earning and Living:
Insights and Excerpts from his*Kitâb al-kasb wal-ma’âsh* for Reviving
Economies for Communities,”*Islamic Sciences* , 11.1 (Summer 2013);
19-62.

**Shaharir** , b.M.Z., “Al-Ghazali’s Causality Principle Compared with
the Causality Principles in Modern Theories of Physics,”*Islamic
Quarterly* , 57.2 (2013): 117-30.

**Treiger** , Alexander, “Al-Ghazâlî’s Classifications of the Sciences
and Description of the Highest Theoretical Science,”*Dîvân, Journal of
Interdisciplinary Studies* , 16.30 (2011.1): 1-32.

**Urvoy** , Dominique, “Philosophie, révélation et mystique dans
l’oeuvre d’al-Ghazâlî,” in*Orient-Occident* , pp. 506-507.

**Yusuf Sani** , Seyyed Mahmud, “Two Refutations of Philosophy
(*falsafah* ): The Incoherence of the Philosophers (*Tahafut
al-falasifah* ) and the Gift of the Theologians (*Tuhfat
al-Mutakallimin* ),”*Sophia Perennis* , 1.3 (2009): 137-56 [Ibn
al-Malahimi; in Persian].

al-Hasan al-Basrî

**Sliti** , Abdullah, “A Translation of Al-Hasan al-Basrî’s*Treatise on
Free Will and Divine Determination* ,”*Islamic Quarterly* , 56.4 (2012):
373-90.

al-Hillî

**Ansari** , Hassan &**Schmidtke** , Sabine, “Between Aleppo and Sa’ada:
The Zaydî Reception of the Imâmî Scholar Ibn al-Bitrîq
al-Hillî,”*Journal of Islamic Manuscripts* , 4.2 (2013): 158-98.

Ibn Abî Jumhûr

**Schmidtke** , Sabine, “Ibn Abî Jumhûr al-Ahsâ’î and his*Sharkh al-Bâb
al-hâdî ‘ashar* ,” in*Islam: Identité et altérité* , pp. 367-82.

Ibn Fûrak

**Gimaret** , Daniel, “Avant Abû Ja’far al-Tûsî, un autre plagiaire de
Rummânî: Ibn Fûraka,” in*Islam: Identité et altérité* , pp. 191-95.

Ibn Hanbal

**Spectorsky** , Susan A., “Ahmad b. Hanbal (d. 243/855),” in*Islamic
Legal Thought* , pp. 85-105 [includes translation of passages].

Ibn Hazm

**Adang** , Camilla, “Shurayh al-Ru’aynî and the Transmission of the
Works of Ibn Hazm,” in*Ibn Hazm* , pp. 513-37.

**Alami** , Ahmed, “Unité et complémentarité des sciences selon Ibn
Hazm,” in*La Périodisation* , pp. 1-13.

**Ansari** , Hassan, “Ibn Hazm selon certains savants shî’ites,” in*Ibn
Hazm* , pp. 645-61.

**Behloul** , “The Testimony of Reason and the Historical Reality: Ibn
Hazm’s Refutation of Christianity,” in*Ibn Hazm* , pp. 457-83.

**Carmona González** , Alfonso, “La doctrine sur l’exercice de la
justice: Un exemple du désaccord entre Ibn Hazm et les mâlikites,”
in*Ibn Hazm* , pp. 161-77.

**Chipman** , Leigh, “Ibn Hazm—Bibliography of Secondary Sources,”
in*Ibn Hazm* , pp. 761-87.

**Escobar Gómez** , Santiago, “Los conceptos de tiempo y espacio en Ibn
Hazm de Córdoba en su relación con Abû Bakr Al-Râzî y Newton,” in*El
pensamiento politico* , pp. 419-22.

**Fierro** , Maribel, “Ibn Hazm and the Jewish*zindîq* ,” in*Ibn Hazm* ,
pp. 497-509.

**--------** , “Notes on reason, language and conversion in the
thirteenth century in the Iberian peninsula,” in*Synoptikos* , pp.
169-82.

**García Sanjuán** , Alejandro, “Ibn Hazm and the Territory of Huelva:
Personal and Family Relationships,” in*Ibn Hazm* , pp. 51-67.

**Holtzman** , Livnat, “Elements of Acceptance and Rejection in Ibn
Qayyim al-Jawziyya’s Systematic Reading of Ibn Hazm,” in*Ibn Hazm* , pp.
601-44.

**Kaddouri** , Samir, “Ibn Hazm al-Qurtubî (d. 456/1064),” in*Islamic
Legal Thought* , pp. 211-38.

**-------,** “Refutations of Ibn Hazm by Mâlikî Authors from al-Andalus
and North-Africa,” in*Ibn Hazm* , pp. 539-99.

**Kologlu** , Orhan S., “*Kumûn, Istihâla,* and*Khalq* : Three Concepts
in Ibn Hazm’s Cosmology,”*Ilahiyat Studies* , 2.1 (Winter/Spring 2011):
83-109.

**Lameer** , Joep, “Ibn Hazm’s Logical Pedigree,” in*Ibn Hazm* , pp.
417-28.

**Lange** , Christian, “Ibn Hazm on Sins and Salvation,” in*Ibn Hazm* ,
pp. 429-53.

**Martinez-Gros** , Gabriel, “Ibn Hazm on History: A Few Remarks,”
in*Ibn Hazm* , pp. 87-94.

**Molina** , Luis, “The Reception of Ibn Hazm in Arabic Chronicles,”
in*Ibn Hazm* , pp. 663-80.

**Ortega Muñoz** , Juan Fernando, “La fundamentación sagrada del poder
civil en Abenhazam,” in*El pensamiento politico* , pp. 569-76.

**Peña** , Salvador, “Which Curiositya Ibn Hazm’s Suspicion of
Grammarians,” in*Ibn Hazm* , pp. 233-50.

**Puerta Vílchez** , Jose Miguel, “Abû Muhammad ‘Alî Ibn Hazm: A
Biographical Sketch,” in*Ibn Hazm* , pp. 3-24.

**-------** , “Art and Aesthetics in the Work of Ibn Hazm of Cordoba,”
in*Ibn Hazm* , pp. 253-372.

**-------** , “Inventory of Ibn Hazm’s Works,” in*Ibn Hazm* , pp.
683-760.

**Ramón Guerrero** , Rafael, “De Bagdad a Córdoba. Sobre las fuentas de
la lógica de Ibn Hazm,” in*Circolazione dei saperi* , pp. 309-20.

**-------** , “Aristotle and Ibn Hazm. On the Logic of the*Taqrîb* ,”
in*Ibn Hazm* , pp. 403-16.

**-------** , “Ibn Hazm de Córdoba y el*Peri hermeneias* de
Aristóteles,” in*Synoptikos* , pp. 99-112.

**Sabra** , Adam, “Ibn Hazm’s Literalism: A Critique of Islamic Legal
Theory,” in*Ibn Hazm* , pp. 97-160.

**-------** , “The Beginning of Logic in Al-Andalus: Ibn Hazm of
Cordoba,”*Revista de Hispanismo Filosofico* , 15 (2010): 31-42.

**Schmidtke** , Sabine, “Ibn Hazm’s Sources on Ash’arism and
Mu’tazilism,” in*Ibn Hazm* , pp. 375-401 [includes Arabic edition of Ibn
Hazm’s quotations from*Kitâb al-Simnânî* ].

**Serrano** , Delfina, “Claim (Da’wâ) or Complaint (Shakwâ)a Ibn Hazm
and Qâdî ‘Iyâd’s Doctrines on Accusations of Rape,” in*Ibn Hazm* , pp.
179-203.

**Soravia** , Bruna, “A Portrait of the*‘alîm* as a Young Man: The
Formative Years of Ibn Hazm, 404/1013-420/1029,” in*Ibn Hazm* , pp.
25-49.

**Urvoy** , Dominique, “Le sens de la polémique anti-biblique chez Ibn
Hazm,” in*Ibn Hazm* , pp. 485-96.

**Versteegh** , Kees, “Ibn Madâ’ as a Zâhirî Grammarian,” in*Ibn Hazm* ,
pp. 207-31.

**Wasserstein** , David J., “Ibn Hazm and al-Andalus,” in*Ibn Hazm* ,
pp. 69-85.

Ibn Kathîr

**Mirza** , Younus Y., “Ishmael as Abraham’s Sacrifice: Ibn Taymiyya and
Ibn Kathîr on the Intended Victim,”*Islam and Christian-Muslim
Relations* , 24.3 (2013): 277-98.

Ibn al-Malâhimî

**Madelung** , Wilferd, “Ibn al-Malâhimî’s refutation of the
philosophers,” in his*Studies in Medieval Muslim Thought* , IV 331-36
[2007 original].

**Yusuf Sani** , Seyyed Mahmud, “Two Refutations of Philosophy
(*falsafah* ): The Incoherence of the Philosophers (*Tahafut
al-falasifah* ) and the Gift of the Theologians (*Tuhfat
al-Mutakallimin* ),”*Sophia Perennis* , 1.3 (2009): 137-56 [in Persian].

Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyya

**Holtzman** , Livnat, “Elements of Acceptance and Rejection in Ibn
Qayyim al-Jawziyya’s Systematic Reading of Ibn Hazm,” in*Ibn Hazm* , pp.
601-44.

Ibn Rushd al-Ghadd (1058-1126)

**Serrano** , Delfina, “aEs perfecta la fe sin el conocimiento de la
ciencia de los fundamentos de la religiona Ibn Rushd al-Ghadd y los
limites del*kalâm* ,” in*Synoptikos* , pp. 329-41.

Ibn Saba’

**Anthony** , Sean W.,*The Caliph and the Heretic: Ibn Saba’ and the
Origins of Shî’ism* (Islamic History and Civilization, Studies and Texts
91). Leiden-Boston: Brill, 2012, xiv-354 pp., ISBN 9789004209305
(hardback), 978900421606 8 (e-book).

Ibn Taymiyyah

**Berbary** , Georges, “L’initiateur de la pensée fondamentaliste ‘Ibn
Taymiyya (1263-1328) et son attitude à l’égard des
chrétiens,”*al-Machriq* , 38.2 (2013): 353-95 [in Arabic].

**Michot** , Yahya M., “An Important Reader of al-Ghazâlî: Ibn
Taymiyya,”*The Muslim World* , 103.1 (2013): 131-60.

**Mirza** , Younus Y., “Ishmael as Abraham’s Sacrifice: Ibn Taymiyya and
Ibn Kathîr on the Intended Victim,”*Islam and Christian-Muslim
Relations* , 24.3 (2013): 277-98.

**Rayan** , Sobhi, “Translation and interpretation of Ibn Taymiyya’s
logical definition,”*British Journal for the History of Philosophy* ,
19.6 (2011): 1047-65.

**-------** , “Nominal Definition in the Writings of Ibn
Taymiyya,”*International Studies in the Philosophy of Science* , 23.2
(2009): 123-41.

Ibrâhim al-Hâmidî

**Kikuchi** , Tatsuya, “The Resurrection of Ismâ’îlî Myth in Twelfth
Century Yemen,”*Ishraq* , 4 (2013): 345-59.

al-Jinnî

**Basal** , N., “Medieval Jewish and Muslim Cultures: An Anonymous
Judeo-Arabic Adaptation of Ibn Jinnî’s*al-Luma’* ,”*Jerusalem Studies in
Arabic and Islam* , 37 (2010): 223-64.

al-Juwaynî

**Shihadeh** , Ayman, „The Argument from Ignorance and its Critics in
Medieval Arabic Thought,“ in*Arabic Sciences and Philosophy* , 23
(2013): 171-220.

**Thomas** , David, „Christianity in Islamic Theology: The Case of
al-Juwaynî,“ in*Mission in Dialogue: Essays in Honour of Michael L.
Fitzgerald* , ed. by Catarina Belo & Jean-Jacques Pérennès (Les Cahiers
du MIDEO 5) (Louvain-Paris: Peeters, 2012), pp. 211-21.

al-Kindî (‚Abd al-Masîh ibn Ishâq)

**Hundhammer** , Marianus, „Die Trinitätsdiskussion in der Apologie des
‚Abd al-Mas b. Ishâq,“*Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde des
Morgenlandes* , 102 (2012): 81-108.

al-Malâhimî

**Shihadeh** , Ayman, „The Argument from Ignorance and its Critics in
Medieval Arabic Thought,“ in*Arabic Sciences and Philosophy* , 23
(2013): 171-220.

al-Rassâs

**Thiele** , Jan,*Theologie in der jemenitischen Zaydiyya. Die
Naturphilosophischen Überlegungen des al-Hasan ar-Rassâs* (Islamic
Philosophy, Theology and Science 86). Leiden-Boston: Brill, 2013,
xiv-224 pp., ISBN 9789004251267 & e-ISBN 251274.

al-Râzî, Abû Hâtim

**A’awani** , Gholamreza, “Abû Hâtim al-Râzî and His A’lâm
al-Nubuwwa,”*Ishraq* , 4 (2013): 135-39 [Russian summary of the intro.
to his and Salâh al-Sâwî’s revised edition of this text, 1st ed. 1977;
2nd 2002].

**Dodikhudoev** , Khayolbek, “The Polemic between the Two
Razis,”*Ishraq* , 4 (2013): 140-61[in Russian; Englihs summary 624].

al-Râzî, Fakhr al-Dîn

**Baffioni** , Carmela, “Un’argomentazione sillogistica nell’embriologia
delle*Mabâhith al-mashriqiyya* di Fakhr al-Dîn al-Râzî,” in*Circolazione
dei saperi* , pp. 283-90.

**Ibrahim** , Bilal, „Fakhr ad-Dîn ar-Râzî, Ibn al-Haytam and
Aristotelian Science: Essentialism versus Phenomenalism in
Post-Classical Islamic Thought,“*Oriens* , 41.3-4 (2013): 379-431.

**Rifai** , Fariduddin Attar, “Metaphysics of Goodness according to
Anselm of Canterbury and Fakhr al-Dîn al-Râzî,” in*Philosophy and the
Abrahamic Religions* , pp. 157-74.

**Shihadeh** , Ayman, „The Argument from Ignorance and its Critics in
Medieval Arabic Thought,“ in*Arabic Sciences and Philosophy* , 23
(2013): 171-220.

al-Shahrastânî

**Badakhchani** , Seyyed Jalal, „Shahrastânî’s Account of Hasan-i
Sabbâh’s Doctrine of*Ta’lîm* ,“ in*Islam : Identité et altérité* , pp.
27-55 [with ed. & transl.].

**Öztürk** , Mustafa, „The Different Stances of al-Shahrastânî: A Study
of the Sectarian Identity of Abû l-Fath al-Shahrastânî in relation to
His Qur’anic Commentary*Mafâtîh al-asrâr* ,“*Ilahiyat Studies* , 1.2
(Summer/Fall 2010): 195-239.

**van Ess** , Josef, „Das Geburtsjahr des Shahrastânî,“*Der Islam* ,
89.1-2 (No. 2012): 111-17.

Sufyân al-Tawrî

**Gilliot** , Claude, „Sufyân al-Tawrî (m. 161/778). Quelques notes sur
son mode d’enseignement et la transmission de son savoir,“ in*Islam:
Identité et altérité* , pp. 169-89.

al-Tabarânî

*Kitâb al-Ma’ârif by Abû Sa’id Maymûn b. Qâsim al-Tabarânî* , critical
ed. with an intro. by Meir M. Bar-Asher & Aryeh Kofsky (OLA 209).
Louvain: Peeters, 2012, x-198 pp., ISBN 9789042925106.

al-Zamakhsharî

**Madelung** , Wilferd, “The theology of al-Zamakhsharî,” in his*Studies
in Medieval Muslim Thought* , I 485-95 [1986 original].

Yahyâ ibn ‘Adî, see Falsafa, Ibn ‘Adî


