(2002-2004)
===========

I would like to thank all those who have been kind enough to tell me
about their publications and in particular Dr. Frank Griffel from Yale
University. He told me not only about his own publications but also
about all interesting publications in his field and in German. Thanks
are also due to my Assistant Ms. Arianne Dempsey for her technical help.

Section I. Falsafa

a. Collective Works

Across the Mediterranean Frontiers: Trade, Politics and Religion,
650-1450, ed. by Dionisius A. Agius & Ian Richard Netton (International
Medieval Research, 1).Turnhout: Brepols, 1997, xiv-422 pp., ISBN
2-503-50600-3.

Aristotele e i suoi esegeti neoplatonici: Logica e ontologia nelle
interpretazioni greche e arabe. Atti del convegno internazionale, Roma,
19-20 ottobre 2001, ed. by Vincenza Celluprica & Cristina D’Ancona with
Riccardo Chiaradonna. Naples: Bibliopolis, 2004, xxi-282 pp., ISBN
88-7088-461-9.

Averroes (1126-1198) oder der Triumph des Rationalismus. Internationales
Symposium anlässlich des 800. Todestages des islamischen Philosophen.
Heidelberg, 7.-11. Oktober 1998*,* ed. by Raif Georges Khoury.
Heidelberg: Universitätsverlag C. Winter, 2002, 390 pp., ISBN
3-8253-1265-8.

Averroes y los averroísmos. Actas del III Congreso Nacional de Filosofía
Medieval. Saragossa: Sociedad de Filosofía Medieval, 1999, 501 pp., ISBN
84-89513-84-8.

Before and After Avicenna: Proceedings of the First Conference of the
Avicenna Study Group, ed. by David C. Reisman with Ahmed H. Al-Rahim
(Islamic Philosophy, Theology and Science: Texts and Studies, 52).
Leiden: Brill, 2003, xx-302 pp., ISBN 90-04-12978-2.

The Cambridge Companion to Arabic Philosophy, ed. by Peter Adamson &
Richard C. Taylor. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004,
xviii-448 pp., ISBN 0521-81743-9 (cloth) & 0-521-52069-X (paper).

The Cambridge Companion to Medieval Jewish Philosophy, ed. by Daniel H.
Frank & Oliver Leaman. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003,
xxiv-483 pp., ISBN 0-521-65574-9.

A Companion to Philosophy in the Middle Ages, ed. by Jorge J.E. Gracia &
Timothy B. Noone (Blackwell Companions to Philosophy). Oxford: Blackwell
Publishing, 2003, ISBN 0-631-21672-3.

Interpreting Avicenna: Science and Philosophy in Medieval Islam.
Proceedings of the Second Conference of the Avicenna Study Group, ed. by
Jon McGinnis with David C. Reisman (Islamic Philosophy, Theology and
Science. Texts and Studies, LVI). Leiden/ Boston: Brill, 2004, xviii-262
pp., ISBN 90-04-13960-5.

Metaphysics in the Twelfth Century: On the Relationship among
Philosophy, Science And Theology, ed. by Matthias Lutz-Bachmann,
Alexander Fidora & Andrea

Niederberger (Fédération Internationale des Instituts d’Etudes
Médiévales; Textes

et Etudes du Moyen Age, 19). Turnhout: Brepols, 2004, xiv-220, ISBN
2-503-

52202-5 [e. Burnett & Averroes, Marler].

Problems in Arabic Philosophy, ed. by Miklós Maróth. Piliscsaba: The
Avicenna

Institute of Middle Eastern Studies, 2003, 150 pp., ISBN 963-86359-24.

b. Special Issues of Journals

*Islamic Philosophy,* The Muslim World, 94, n.1 (January 2004), ed. by
David Burrell, 138 pp.

*Les traductions gréco-arabes et la réception du livre Lambda de la
“Métaphysique”:*

*Études historiques et critiques* , Recherches de Théologie et
Philosophie médiévales, 70,

2 (2003): section spéciale, pp. 359-436 [articles by Thillet, Janssens &
Geoffroy].

*Philosophie arabe,* Philosophie (Paris: Les Editions de Minuit), n. 77
(1er mars

2003), 110 pp.

c. Bibliographies and Chronicles

**Druart** , Thérèse-Anne, “Brief Bibliographical Guide in Medieval
Islamic Philosophy and Theology (1998-2002),” at
http://philosophy.cua.edu/faculty/tad/biblio.cfm.

**Urvoy** , Dominique, “Bulletin de Philosophie arabe et
islamique,”*Revue Thomiste* , 103

(2003): 309-24.

d. Greek and Syriac Sources

**Alexandre d’Aphrodise** ,*Traité De la providence (Περι προνο?ας).
Version arabe de Ab? Bišr Matt? ibn Y?nus* , intr. , ed. and transl. by
Pierre Thillet (Philosophie). Lonrai: Verdier, 2003, 170 & 64 pp., ISBN
2-86432-395-8

**[Aristotle],** *Il Kit?b Aris????l?s al-faylas?f f? l-fir?sa nella
traduzione di HunaynBen Ish?q* , ed. by Antonella Ghersetti (Quaderni di
studi arabi. Studi e testi, 4). Venice: 1999.

***Plotino** , La Discesa dell’anima nei corpi (Enn. IV 8[6]).
Plotiniana Arabica (Pseudo*

*Teologia di Aristotele, Capitoli 1 e 7; “detti del sapiente Greco”],
ed. by Cristina*

D’Ancona. Padova: Il Poligrafo, 2003, 550 pp., ISBN 88-7115-275-1.

***Adamson** , Peter, The Arabic Plotinus: A Philosophical Study of the
‘Theology of*

*Aristotle’. London: Duckworth, 2002, x-240 pp., ISBN 0-7156-3163-2.*

**Aouad** , Maroun &**Rashed** , Marwan, “L’exégèse de la*Rhétorique*
d’Aristote: recherches sur quelques commentateurs grecs, arabes et

byzantins. Deuxième partie,”*Medioevo* , 25 (1999-2000): 551-649 pp.
[the first part was in*Medioevo* , 23 (1997): 43-190].

**Daiber** , Hans, “Der Aristoteleskommentar Alexander von Aphrodisias
(2./3. Jh. N. Chr.) und der samaritanische Gelehrte Levi über die
Ewigkeit der Welt,”*Jerusalem Studies in Arabic and Islam* , 27 (2002):
305-47 [with edition].

**D’Ancona** , Cristina, “Greek into Arabic: Neoplatonism in
Translation,” in*The Cambridge Companion to Arabic Philosophy* , pp.
10-31.

**-------** , “The Timaeus’ Model for Creation and Providence: An
Example of Continuit and Adaptation in Early Arabic Philosophical
Literature,” in*Plato’s* Timaeus *as Cultural*

*Icon* , ed. by Gretchen J. Reydams-Schils. Notre Dame: Indiana:
University of Notre

Dame Press, 2003, pp. 206-37 [mainly on al-Kindi].

**De Smet** , Daniel, “The Influence of the Arabic Pseudo-Empedocles on
Medieval Latin

Philosophy: Myth or Reality?,” in*Across the Mediterranean* , pp.
225-34.

-------,*Empedocles Arabus: Une lecture néoplatonicienne tardive.*
Brussels: Koninklijke Academie voor Wetenschappen. Letteren en Schone
Kunsten, 1998, 257 pp., ISBN 90-6569-684-9.

**Geoffroy** , M. , “Remarques sur la traduction Ust?t du livre Lambda
de la“Métaphysique”, chapitre 6,”*Recherches de Théologie et Philosophie
médiévales* , 70 (2003): 417-36.

**Giannakis** , Elias, “The Quotations from John Philoponus’*De
aeternitate mundi contra Proclum* in al-B?r?n?’s India,”*Zeitschrift für
Geschichte der arabisch-islamischen Wissenschaften* , 15 (2002-2003):
185-95.

**Gutas** , Dimitri,*Greek Philosophers in the Arabic Tradition*
(Variorum Collected Studies

Series). Aldershot: Ashgate, Variorum, 2000, xii-322 pp., ISBN
0-86078-837-7 [1. Pre

Plotinian Philosophy in Arabic (Other than Platonism and
Aristotelianism): A Review of

the Sources; 2. Sayings by Diogenes Preserved in Arabic; 3. Adrastus of
Aphrodisias,

(Pseudo-) Cebes, Democrates ‘Gnomicus’, and Diogenes the Cynic in Arabic
Sources; 4.

Plato’s*Symposium* in the Arabic Tradition; 5. Galen’s*Synopsis* of
Plato’s*Laws* and

F?r?b?’s*Talh??* ; 6. The Spurious and the Authentic in the Arabic Lives
of Aristotle; 7.

The Life, Works,and Sayings of Theophrastus in the Arabic Tradition; 8.
Eudemus in the

Arabic Tradition; 9. Paul the Persian on the Classification of the Parts
of Aristotle’s

Philosophy: A Milestone between Alexandria and Baghdad; 10. The Starting
Point of Philosophical Studies in Alexandrian and Arabic
Aristotelianism; 11. Philoponus and Avicenna on the Separability of the

Intellect: A Case of Orthodox Christian-Muslim Agreement; and 12.*The
Malady of Love* ].

**Hugonnard-Roche** , H., “La constitution de la logique tardo-antique
et l’élaboration

d’une logique “matérielle” en syriaque,” in*Aristotele e i suoi esegeti
neoplatonici* , pp.

55-83.

**Lettinck** , Paul, “Aristotle’s “Physical” Works in the Arabic
World,”*Medioevo* , 27 (2002): 22-52.

**Lyons** , Malcolm C., “Poetic Quotations in the Arabic Version of
Aristotle’s*Rhetoric* ,”

*Arabic Sciences and Philosophy* , 12 (2002): 197-216.

**Martini Bonadeo** , Cecilia, “ΩΣ ΕΡΩΜΕΝΟΝ: alcune interpretazioni
di*Metaph* . Λ 7,” in

*Aristotele e i suoi esegeti* , pp. 213-43.

**Oelsner** , J., “Vom alten Orient zum Islam: Überlegungen zum Ende der
altorientalsichen Kultur,” in*Averroes (1126-1198) oder der Triumph* ,
pp. 87-104.

**Ramón Guerrero** , Rafael, “”Castigos” de Aristóteles en los*‘Uyûn
al-anbâ’* de Ibn Abî

Usaybi’a,”*Revista Española de Filosofía Medieval* , 10 (2003): 139-46.

**Rashed** , Marwan, “Priorité de l’ΕΙΔΟΣ ou du ΓΕΝΟΣ entre Andronicos
et Alexandre:

vestiges arabes et grecs inédits,”*Arabic Sciences and Philosophy* , 14
(2004): 9-63.

**Reisman** , David C., “Plato’s*Republic* in Arabic: A Newly Discovered
Passage,”*Arabic*

*Sciences and Philosophy* , 14 (2004): 263-300.

**Salama Carr** , Myriam, “Translation as Seen by al-J?hiz and Hunayn
ibn Ishaq: Observer

versus Practitioner,” in*Across the Mediterranean* , pp. 385-93.

**Takahashi** , Hidemi, “The Greco-Syriac and Arabic Sources of
Barhebraeus’ Mineralogy

and Meteorology in*Candelabrum of the Sanctuary* , Base II,” *Islamic
Studies* , 41,2

(2002): 215-69.

**Teixidor** , Javier,*Aristote en Syriaque. Paul le Perse, logicien du
VIe siècle* (CNRS philosophie). Paris: CNRS Editions, 2003, 152 pp.,
ISBN 2-271-06161-X.

**Thillet** , P., “Remarques sur le livre Lambda de la
“Métaphysique”,”*Recherches de*

*Théologie et Philosophie médiévales* , 70 (2003): 417-36.

**Yousif** , Ephrem Isa,*La floraison des philosophes syriaques* .
Paris: L’Harmattan, 2003,

332 pp., ISBN 2-7475-4348-X [includes a section on Syriac philosophers
under the

Abbassids though they wrote in Arabic].

**e. Latin and Hebrew Translations and Influences**

**Burnett** , Charles, “Arabic into Latin: The Reception of Arabic
Philosophy into Western Europe,” in*The Cambridge Companion to Arabic
Philosophy* , pp. 370-404.

-------, “The Blend of Latin and Arabic Sources in the Metaphysics of
Adelard of Bath,

Hermann of Carinthia, and Gundisalvus,” in*Metaphysics in the Twelfth
Century* , pp. 41-

65.

-------, “Physics before the*Physics* : Early Translations from Arabic
of the Texts

Concerning Nature in Mss. British Library, Additional 22791 and Cotton
Galba E IV,”

*Medioevo* , 27 (2002): 53-110.

-------, “The Translation of Arabic Science into Latin: A Case of
Alienation of Intellectual Property?,”*Bulletin of the Royal Institute
for Inter-Faith Studies* , 4 (2002): 145-57.

***Dobbs-Weinstein** , Idit, “Gersonides: The Last Explicit Heir of
Averroes,” in Problems in*

*Arabic Philosophy, pp. 69-86.*

**Fernández García** , María Socorro, “La cuestión de la inmortalidad
del alma en el averroísmo paduano. Pietro Pomponazzi,” in*Averroes y los
averroísmos* , pp. 289-99.

**Guldentops** , Guy, “Beyond Averroism and Thomas: Henry Bate on the
Potential and the Agent Intellect,”*Archives d’Histoire doctrinale et
littéraire du moyen âge* , 69 (2002):

115-52.

**Harvey** , Steven, “Islamic Philosophy and Jewish Philosophy,” in*The
Cambridge*

*Companion to Arabic Philosophy* , pp. 349-369.

-------, “Arabic into Hebrew: The Hebrew Translation Movement and the
Influence of

*Averroes upon Medieval Jewish Thought,” in Cambridge Companion to
Medieval Jewish*

*Philosophy, pp. 258-80.*

**Joose** , N. Peter,*A Syriac Encyclopaedia of Aristotelian Philosophy:
Barhebraeus (13* th*c.),* Butyrum sapientiae*, Books of Ethics, Economy
and Politics* , ed. & transl. with intro., commentary and glossaries
(Aristoteles Semitico-Latinus, 16). Leiden/Boston: Brill, 2004, viii-289
pp., ISBN 90-04-14133-2.

**Lohr** , Charles, “The Arabic Background to Ramon Lull’s*Liber chaos*
(ca. 1285),”

*Traditio* , 55 (2000), 159-70.

**Moreno Urbaneja** , Juan Antonio, “Crisis del espíritu agustiniano en
la polémica averroísta del siglo XIII,” in*Averroes y los averoísmos* ,
pp. 327-37.

**Reinhardt** , Elisabeth, “La última discusión de Tomás de Aquino sobre
el

monopsiquismo: el*Compendium theologiae* ,” in *Averroes y los
averroísmos* , pp.

349-58.

**Tolan** , John, “Saracen Philosophers Secretly Deride Islam,”*Medieval
Encounters* , 8

(2002); 184-208 [Ramon Martín, Roger Bacon, Ramon Llull, & Riccoldo da

Montecroce].

**Verdú Berganza** , Ignacio, “El movimiento averroísta y el pensamiento
de Thomas Bradwardine. Dos concepciones del hombre enfrentadas,”
in*Averroes y los averroísmos* , pp. 387-95.

**Ziai** , Hossein, “Recent Trends in Arabic and Persian Philosophy,”
in*The Cambridge*

*Companion to Arabic Philosophy* , pp. 405-25.

**f. General Studies**

**Bakar** , Osman,*Classification of Knowledge in Islam: A Study in
Islamic Philosophies of Science* , Foreword by Seyyed Hossein Nasr.
Cambridge: Islamic Text Society, 1998, xviii-312 pp., ISBN 0-946621-71-3
[reprint of 1992 in Kuala Lumpur; covers al-Farabi, al-Ghazali, and
al-Shirazi].

**Black** , Deborah L., “Psychology: Soul and Intellect,” in*The
Cambridge Companion to*

*Arabic Philosophy* , pp. 308-26.

**Brague** , Rémi, “History of Philosophy as Freedom,”*{EPOCHÉ}* , 7
(2002), 39-50.

**Brentjes** , Sonja, “On the Location of Ancient or ‘Rational’ Sciences
in Muslim

Educational Landscapes (AH 500-1100),”*Bulletin of the Royal Institute
for Inter-*

*Faith Studies* , 4 (2002): 47-71.

**Bu?an** , Daniel, “Arabic Philosophic Terms and Their Translation,”
in*Problems in*

*Arabic Philosophy* , pp. 109-16.

**Buijs** , Joseph A., “Religion and Philosophy in Maimonides, Averroes,
and Aquinas,”

*Medieval Encounters* , 8 (2002): 160-84.

**Butterworth** , Charles E., “Ethical and Political Philosophy,” in*The
Cambridge*

*Companion to Arabic Philosophy* , pp. 266-86.

**Dagli** , Caner, “On Beginning a New System of Islamic
Philosophy,”*The MuslimWorld* ,

94 (2004): 1-27.

**Daiber** , Hans, “’Was heist und zu welchem Ende studiert man
Geschichte der islamischen Philosophie?’—Zur Geschichte einer
vernachlässigten Disziplin,” in

*Problems in Arabic Philosophy* , pp. 1-23.

**Dallal** , Ahmad, “The Adjustment of Science,”*Bulletin of the Royal
Institute fo rInter-*

*Faith Studies* , 4 (2002): 97-107.

**D’Ancona** , Cristina, “La notion de “cause” dans les texts
néoplatoniciens arabes,”

in*Métaphysiques médiévales. Etudes en l’honneur d’André de Muralt* ,
ed. by Curzo Chiesa & Léo Freuler and with a new essay by André de
Muralt (Cahiers de la Revue de Théologie et de Philosophie, 20) (Genève:
Revue de Théologie et de Philosophie, 1999, pp. 47-68.

**Deheidel** , D.A.H., “Sobre el principio de causalidad (*‘ilal* ) en
la gramática árabe,”

*Miscelánea de Estudios Árabes y Hebraicos, sección Árabe-Islam* , 52
(2003): 95-103.

**Druart** , Thérèse-Anne, “Metaphysics,” in*The Cambridge Companion to
Arabic*

*Philosophy* , pp. 327-48.

-------, “Philosophy in Islam,” in*The Cambridge Companion to Medieval
Philosophy* , ed. by A.S. McGrade. Cambridge; Cambridge University
Press, 2003, pp. 97-120.

-------- “Scienza e filosofia,” in*Storia della scienza, vol. III, La
Civiltà islamica* . (Rome:

Enciclopedia Italiana, 2002), pp. 72-76.

**Fakhry** , Majid,*A History of Islamic Philosophy* , 3r ed. New York:
Columbia University

Press, 2004, xxviii-430 pp., ISBN 0-231-13221-2 [changes and updatings
are minimal].

***Kemal** , Salim, The Philosophical Poetics of Alfarabi, Avicenna and
Averroës: The*

*Aristotelian reception. London: RoutledgeCurzon, 2003, vi-362 pp., ISBN
0-7007-1348-*

4.

**Kraemer** , Joel L., “The Islamic Context of Medieval Jewish
Philosophy,” in*Cambridge Companion to…Jewish Philosophy* , pp. 38-68.

**Leaman** , Oliver,*Islamic Aesthetics: An Introduction* . Notre Dame,
IN: University of

Notre Dame Press, 2004, viii-211 pp., ISBN 0-268-03370-6.

**Lomba Fuentes** , Joaquín,*El Ebro: Puente de Europa. Pensamiento
musulmán y Judío* . Saragossa: Mira Editores, 2002, 639 pp., ISBN
84-8465-105-3.

**Maróth** , Miklós, “Logic and Stylistics,” in*Problems in Arabic
Philosophy* , pp. 25-35.

-------, “Greek Logic and Arabic Stylistics,” in*Problems in Arabic
Philosophy* , pp. 87-

107.

-------, “The Changes of Metaphor in Arabic Literature,”*Journal of
Arabic Sciences and Philosophy* , 12 (2002): 241-55.

**McGinnis** , Jon, “The Topology of Time: An Analysis of Medieval
Islamic Accounts of

Discrete and Contiguous Time,”*The Modern Schoolman* , 81 (Nov. 2003):
5-25.

**Michel** , Alain, “Géométrie et philosophie: de Th?bit ibn Qurra à Ibn
al-Haytham. Essay-

Review of R. Rashed,*Les mathématiques infinitésimales* ,” *Arabic
Sciences* *and*

*Philosophy* , 13 (2003): 311-15.

**Rashed** , Marwan, “Natural Philosophy,” in*The Cambridge Companion to
Arabic Philosophy* , pp. 287-307.

**Ramón Guerrero** , Rafael, “El escepticismo en el mundo árabe
medieval,” in*La ética, aliento de lo eterno* (Salamanca: 2003): 319-33.

**Rashed** , R.,*Les mathématiques infinitésimales du IXe au XIe
siècles, vol. IV: Méthodes géométriques, transformations ponctuelles et
philosophie des mathématiques* . London: al-Furq?n Islamic Heritage
Foundation, 2002, xiii-1064-vii pp.

**Raybaud** , Nathalie, “La philosophie arabe: une philosophie du
commentaire?,”*Philosophie* , n.77 (1er mars 2003): 85-110.

***Rubenstein** , Richard E., Aristotle’s Children: How Christians,
Muslims, and Jews*

*Rediscovered Ancient Wisdom and Illuminated the Dark Ages. Orlando:
Harcourt, 2003,*

xii-368 pp., ISBN 0-15-100720-9.

**Saliba** , George, “Islamic Astronomy in Context: Attacks on Astrology
and the Rise of the*Hay’a* Tradition,”*Bulletin of the Royal Institute
for Inter-Faith Studies* , 4 (2002): 25-46.

**Street** , Tony, “Logic,” in*The Cambridge Companion to Arabic
Philosophy* , pp. 247-65.

**Walbridge** , John, “Logic in the Islamic Intellectual Tradition: The
Recent Centuries,”

*Islamic Studies* , 39 (2000): 55-75.

**Walker** , Paul E., “The Ism?’?l?s,” in*The Cambridge Companion to
Arabic Philosophy* , pp. 72-91.

***Wasserstrom** , Steven M., “The Islamic Social and Cultural Context,”
in History of*

*Jewish Philosophy, ed. by Daniel H. frank & Oliver Leaman (Routledge
History of*

World Philosophies, II) (London: Routledge, 1997), pp. 93-114.

**Ab? Ma’shar**

**Hackett** , Jeremiah, “Albumasar (Ab? Ma’shar),” in*A Companion to
Philosophy* , pp. 102-3.

Averroes

**[Averroès (Ibn Rušd)],** Commentaire moyen à la**Rhétorique**
d’Aristote, critical edition of the Arabic text and French transl. by
Maroun Aouad, 3 vol. Paris: Vrin, 2002, Vol. I: Introduction générale et
tables, x-501 pp.; Vol. II: Edition et Traduction, 353 & 352 pp.; Vol.
III: Commentaire du*Commentaire* , vi-450 pp., ISBN 2-7116-1610-X.

**[Averroës],** Middle Commentary on Aristotle’s**De anima** . A
Critical Edition of the

Arabic Text and English Translation, Notes, and Intro. by Alfred L. Ivry
(Graeco-Arabic

Sciences & Philosophy). Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press,
2002, xxxii-281

& 137 pp., ISBN 0-8425-2473-8.

**[Averroes Latinus],** Physica**, VIII, Chs. 78-79 & 86** , by Guy
Guldentops,*Recherches de Théologie et Philosophie médiévales,
Bibliotheca 4* (supplement to) 69 (2002): xix-xxii, plus 1-16.

**[Averroès],** “Sur les prédicats dans les démonstrations; Sur le
livre*De la démonstration*

d’Al-Farabi; Sur la définition du singulier. Opuscules,” transl. by
Stéphane Diebler with

an intro. by Ali Benmakhlouf,*Philosophie* , n. 77 (1er mars 2003):
3-11.

**[Averroès],** Grand Commentaire (Tafs?r) de la**Métaphysique, Livre
Bêta** , Intro. and

transl. by L. Bauloye (Sic et Non). Paris: Vrin, 2002, 336 pp., ISBN
2-7116-1548-0.

***Abed al-Jabiri** , Mohammed, “Ibn Rushd et le dialogue des cultures,”
in Autour*

*d’Averroès: L’héritage andalou(Rencontres d’Averroès) (Marseille:
Editions*

Parenthèses, 2003), pp. 33-41.

**Abi Rached** , N., “Averroès et deux romans du XXe siècle,”
in*Averroes (1126-1198) oder der Triumph* , pp. 359-68.

**Acosta Rodríguez** , Juan, “Averroes en el*De principiis naturae* de
Juan de Sècheville,”

in*Averroes y los averroísmos* , pp. 251-56.

**Aertsen** , Jan A., “Metaphysics: Theology or Universal
Science?,”*Recherches de Théologie et Philosophie médiévales,
Bibliotheca 4* (supplement to) 69 (2002): vii-ix.

***Aertsen** , Jan A., **Steel** , Carlos, & **Arnzen** , Rüdiger, “
Averrois Cordubensis Commentaria*

*Magna in AristotelisPhysica, De caelo etMetaphysica,” Recherches de
Théologie et*

*Philosophie médiévales, Bibliotheca 4(supplement to) 69 (2002): i-vi.*

***Ait El Ferrane** , M., “Averroes bei den heutigen Arabern,” in
Averroes (1126-1198) oder*

*der Triumph, pp. 345-57 [in Arabic].*

**Al-Jemni** , O.M., “L’Epreuve” d’Ibn Rushd vue par ??h? Husayn,”
in*Averroes (1126-1198) oder der Triumph* , pp. 369-77.

**Amerini** , Fabrizio, “Aristotle, Averroes and Thomas Aquinas on the
Nature of Essence,”

*Documenti e Studi* , 14 (2003): 79-122.

**Ayala Martínez** , Jorge M., “¿Fue Averroes un averroísta?,”
in*Averroes y los averroísmos* , pp. 257-66.

***Bauloye** , L., “Note sur la doctrine rushdienne de la substance
d’après le Grand*

*Commentaire de la Métaphysique,” in *Averroes (1126-1198) oder der
Triumph* , pp. 233-*

42.

**Benmakhlouf** , Ali, “Averroès, définition,
démonstration,”*Philosophie* , n. 77 (1er mars 2003): 12-22.

**Blasberg** , Ralf, “El averroísmo según el tratado*De tempore* de
Alberto Magno,” in

*Averroes y los averroísmos* , pp. 267-75.

**Brague** , R., “Avicenne et Averroès,” in*Sur la science divine* , ed.
by J.-C. Bardout & O. Boulnois (Epiméthée). Paris: Presses
Universitaires de France, 2002, pp. 57-82.

**Brasa Díez** , Mariano, “Averroes y Santo Tomás leen a Aristóteles (De
Anima),” in

*Averroes y los averroísmos* , pp. 183-91.

**Brenet** , Jean-Baptiste,*Transferts du sujet. La noétique d’Averroès
selon Jean de Jandun* (Sic et non). Paris: Vrin, 2003, 505 pp., ISBN
2-7116-1653-3.

-------, “Pefection de la philosophie ou philosophe parfait? Jean de
Jandun lecteur

d’Averroès,”*Recherches de Théologie et Philosophie médiévales* , 68
(2001): 310-48.

**Buijs** , Joseph A., “Religion and Philosophy in Maimonides, Averroes,
and Aquinas,”*Medieval Encounters* , 8 (2002): 160-83.

**Corral Lafuente** , José Luis, “La sociedad andalusí en la época de
Averroes,” in*Averroes*

*y los averroismos* , pp. 145-61.

***Cruz Hernández** , Miguel, “Averroes y el sentido del Islam,” in
Averroes y los Averroísmos, pp. 11-28.*

**de Libera** , Alain, “Une figure emblématique de l’héritage oublié,”
in*Autour d’Averroès: L’héritage andalou* (Rencontres d’Averroès)
(Marseille: Editions Parenthèses, 2003), pp. 11-24.

**Di Donato** , Silvia, “Il*Kit?b al-kašf ‘an man?hi?* di Averroè nella
traduzione ebraico-latina di Abraham De Balmes,”*Annali di Ca’ Foscari*
, 41,3 (2002): 5-36.

**Di Giovanni** , Matteo, “La definizione delle sostanze sensibili nel
Commento Grande (Tafs?r) di Averroè a*Metafisica* Z 10,”*Documenti e
Studi* , 14 (2003): 27-63.

**Elamrani-Jamal** , A., “La démonstration du signe (*burh?n al-dal?l* )
selon Ibn Rušd

(Averroès),”*Oriens-Occidens* , n.3 (2000): 41-61.

**El Ghannouchi** , A., “Distinction et relation des discourse
philosophique et religieux chez

Ibn Rushd:*Fa?l al-maq?l* ou la double vérité,” in *Averroes (1126-1198)
oder der*

*Triumph* , pp. 139-45.

**Forcada Nogués** , Miquel, “La ciencia en Averroes,” in*Averroes y los
averroísmos* , pp. 49-102.

**Forment Giralt** , Eudaldo, “La ciencia divina en Averroes y en Santo
Tomás,” in

*Averroes y los averroísmos* , pp. 301-16.

**García Cuadrado** , José Ángel, “La recepción de la doctrina
averroísta del intelecto agente en San Alberto Magno,” in*Averroes y los
averroísmos* , pp. 277-88.

***Geoffroy** , Marc, “Ibn Rušd et la théologie almohadiste. Une version
inconnue du Kit?b*

*al-Kašf ?an man?hi? al-adilla, dans deux manuscripts d’Istanbul,”
*Medioevo* , 27 (2001):*

327-51, plus 4 photos.

**Gracía Marqués** , Alfonso, “Substancia y principio de contradicción
en el commentario de Averroes a*Metafísica* IV, 4,” in*Averroes y los
averroísmos* , pp. 193-204.

**Granada** , Miguel Ángel, “El averroísmo en Europa,” in*Averroes y los
averroísmos* , pp.

163-82.

**Hamze** , M., “Logique et grammaire arabe dans l’œuvre d’Averroès,”
in*Averroes (1126-1198) oder der Triumph* , pp. 157-74.

**Hanafi** , H., “Averroes als Jurist,” in*Averroes (1126-1198) oder der
Triumph* , pp. 183-

211 [in Arabic].

**Hasse** , Dag Nikolaus, “Averroes in the Renaissance,”*Recherches de
Théologie et Philosophie médiévales, Bibliotheca 4* (supplement to) 69
(2002): xv-xviii.

**Hayoun** , M.-R., ‘Vom jüdischen Averroismus zur Haskala: Von
Maimonides und Moses

Narboni zu Salomon Maimon,” in*Averroes (1126-1198) oder der* *Triumph*
, pp. 283-96.

**Horn** , H.-J., “Das Problem der Fünfzahl der Sinne bei Aristoteles
und Matteo da

Gubbio,” in*Averroes (1126-1198) oder der Triumph* , pp.307-16.

**Hugonnard-Roche** , Henry, “Logique et physique: la théorie
aristotélicienne de la

science interprêtée par Averroes,”*Medioevo* , 27 (2002): 141-64.

**Jeamy** , G., “La méthodologie d’Averroès, le Grand Commentateur,”
in*Averroes (1126-1198) oder der Triumph* , pp. 107-16.

**Khoury** , R., “Ibn Rushd et les théologiens arabes chrétiens,”
in*Averroes (1126-1198) oder der Triumph* , pp. 255-81.

**Lambertini** , R., “Zur Frage der Rolle des Averroes in der
praktischen Philosophie des

Spätmittelalters: Vorbemerkung zur Rezeption seines Ethikkommentars,”
in*Averroes*

*(1126-1198) oder der Triumph* , pp. 243-53.

**Leaman** , Oliver, “Averroes’*Commentary on Plato’s Republic* and the
Missing*Politics* , in*Across the Mediterranean* , pp. 195-203.

**Maiza Ozcoidi** , Idoia, “La doctrina de la eternidad del mundo en
el*Tahâfut* de

Averroes,” in*Averroes y los averroísmos* , pp. 20515.

**Marler** , Jack. C., “Averroes: The Platonic Rejection of Textual
Conservatism,” in

*Metaphysics in the Twelfth Century* , pp. 151-60.

***Mazliak** , Paul, Avicenne et Averroès. Médecine et biologie dans la
civilization de*

*l’Islam. Paris: Vuibert-Adapt, 2004, viii-247 pp., ISBN Vuibert
2-7117-5326-3 & Adapt 2-909680-53-3.*

**McAleer** , G., “Was Medical Theory Heterodox in the Latin Middle
Ages? The Plurality

Theses of Paul of Venice and the Medical Authorities, Galen, Haly Abbas
and Averroès,”*Recherches de Théologie et Philosophie médiévales* , 68
(2001): 349-70.

***Missaoui** , S., “La nourriture dans l’œuvre d’Ibn Rušd,” in Averroes
(1126-1198) oder*

*der Triumph, pp. 221-30.*

**Naaman** , J., “Valeur et impact du commentaire d’Aristote par
Averroès,” in*Averroes (1126-1198) oder der Triumph* , pp. 175-82.

***Nassar** , N., “Averroès ou la philosophie encerclée,” in Averroes
(1126-1198) oder der*

*Triumph, pp. 117-38.*

**Ortega Muñoz** , Juan Fernando, “Presencia de Abenhazam en Averroes,”
in*Averroes y los averroísmos* , pp. 487-501.

***Pérez Estévez** , Antonio, “Sustancialidad de la materia en
Averroes,” in Averroes y los averroísmos, pp. 217-29.*

**Puig Montada** , J., “Averroes’ Commentaries on Aristotle: To Explain
and to Interpret, “ in*Il Commento filosofico nell’occidente latino
(secoli XIII-XV). The Philosophical Commentary in the Latin West (13-15*
th*Centuries)* , ed. by Gianfranco Fioravanti, Claudio Leonardi &
Stefano Perfetti (Société Internationale pour l’Etude de la Philosophie
Médiévale, Rencontres de Philosophie Médiévale, 10). Turnhout: Brepols,
2002, pp. 327-58.

--------- “El proyecto vital de Averroes: explicar e interpreter a
Aristóteles,”*Al-Qantara* ,

23 (2002): 11-52.

--------- “Averroes, un pensamiento unitario,” in*Averroes y los
averroísmos* , pp. 29-47.

***Ramón Guerrero** , Rafael, “La transmissión a Europa de Averroes,” in
Averroes y los*

*averroísmos, pp. 103-28.*

**Raña Dafonte** , César, “Averroes según Ángel Amor Ruibal,”
in*Averroes y los averroísmos* , pp. 339-48.

***Roche Arnas** , Pedro, “El gobernante y el gobierno recto en la
Exposición de la*

*“República” de Platónde Averroes,” in *Averroes y los averroísmos* ,
pp. 241-49.*

***Sanagustin** , F., “Le statut de la raison dans le Kit?b al-kulliyy?t
al-?ibb,” in Averroes*

*(1126-1198) oder der Triumph, pp. 147-56.*

**Saranyana** , Josep Ignasi, “Los presupuestos teológicos de Averroes,”
in*Averroes y los averroísmos* , pp. 129-44.

**Soto Bruna** , María Jesús, “Averroes en el*De la Causa, Principio et
Uno* de Giordano

Bruno. El poder de la materia,” in*Averroes y los averroísmos* , pp.
359-69.

***Steel** , Carlos, “Averroes’s Interpretation of the Final Section of
the Physics,” Recherches*

*de Théologie et Philosophie médiévales, Bibliotheca 4(supplement to) 69
(2002): xi-xiv.*

**Stern** , Gregg, “Philosophy in Southern France: Controversy over
Philosophic Study and

the Influence of Averroes upon Jewish Thought,” in*Cambridge* *Companion
to…Jewish*

*Philosophy* , pp. 281-303.

**Taylor** , Richard C., “Averroes: Religious Dialectic and Aristotelian
Philosophical Thought,” in*The Cambridge Companion to Arabic Philosophy*
, pp. 180-200.

-------, “Averroes (Ibn Rushd),” in*A Companion to Philosophy* , pp.
182-95.

**Tellkamp** , Jörg Alejandro, “Averroes y el concepto de ser spiritual
en la teoría del conocimiento del siglo XIII,” in*Averroes y los
averroísmos* , pp. 231-39.

**Trabelsi** , H., “Crise de la pensée sous les Nasrides,” in*Averroes
(1126-1198) oder der Triumph* , pp. 213-220.

**Vivanco Saavedra** , Luis Ignacio, “Averroes e Ibn Jaldún: Referencias
e Influencias,” in*Averroes y los averroísmos* , pp. 397-405.

**Walz** , D., “Aristoteles und Averroes bei Kaiser Friedrich II,”
in*Averroes (1126-1198) oder der Triumph* , pp. 317-30.

**Zanner** , Markus**,** *Konstruktionsmerkmale der Averroes-Rezeption.
Ein*

*religionswissenschaftlicher Beitrag zur Rezeptionsgeschichte des
islamischen*Philosophen Ibn Ruschd* (Regensburger Studies zur Theologie,
61). Frankfurt: Peter*

Lang, 2002, 180 pp.

**Zimmermann** , A., “Averroes im Werk des Magisters Ferrandus de
Hispania,” in*Averroes (1126-1198) oder der Triumph* , pp. 297-306.

**Zonta** , Mauro, “La tradizione giudeo-araba ed ebraica del*De
intellectu* di Alessandro di

Afrodisia e il testo originale del*Commento* di Averroè,” *Annali di*
*Ca’ Foscari* , 40,3

(always 3, sic) (2001), Serie orientale 32, pp. 17-35.

Avicenna

**[Avicenna],** Metafisica: La scienza delle cose divine (al-Il?hiyy?t)
dal Libro della Guarigione (Kit?b al-Šif?’) with Arabic and medieval
Latin text, transl. by Olga Lizzini & Pasquale Porro (Il Pensiero
Occidentale). Milan: Bompiani, 2002, lxiv-1311 pp., ISBN 88-452-9171-5.

**[Avicenna], “Le dieci** questioni**di Avicenna,”** critical Arabic
ed., reprint of Andrea Alpago’s Latin transl., Italian transl. and
intro. by Francesca Lucchetta,*Quaderni di Studi arabi* , 19 (2001):
101-34.

**Acar** , Rahim, “Avicenna’s Position Concerning the Basis of the
Divine Creative Action,”*The Muslim World* , 94 (2004): 65-79.

-------, “Reconsidering Avicenna’s Position on God’s Knowledge of
Particulars,” in*Interpreting Avicenna* , pp. 142-56.

-------, “Intellect versus Active Intellect: Plotinus and Avicenna,”
in*Before and After Avicenna* , pp. 69-67.

**Adamson** , Peter, “Non-Discursive Thought in Avicenna’s Commentary on
the*Theology of Aristotle* ,” in*Interpreting Avicenna* , pp. 87-111.

**Aertsen** , Jan, “’Res’ as Transcendental, its Introduction and
Significance,” in*Le Problème des transcendantaux du XVe au XVIIe
siècle* , ed. by G. Federici Vescovini (Bibliothèque d’Histoire de la
Philosophie) (Paris: Vrin, 2002), pp. 139-56.

**Ahmed** , Asad Q., “Avicenna’s Reception of Aristotelian Modal
Syllogistics: A Study Based on Conversion Rules and the*Barbara*
problematic,” in*Before and After Avicenna* , pp. 3-24.

**al-Akiti** , M. Afifi, “The three Properties of Prophethood in Certain
Works of Avicenna and al-?az?l?,” in*Interpreting Avicenna* , pp.
189-212.

**Alper** , Ömer Mahir, “Avicenna’s Argument for the Existence of God:
Was He Really Influenced by the*Mutakallim?n* ?,” in*Interpreting
Avicenna* , pp. 129-41.

**Al-Rahim** , Ahmed H., “The Twelver-Š??? Reception of Avicenna in the
Mongol Period,” in*Before and After Avicenna* , pp. 219-31.

**Ammar** , Sleim,*Avicenne. La vie et l’œuvre* , 3rd ed. (Quart).
Tunisia: l’Or du Temps, 2003, 135 pp., ISBN 9973-44-008-0.

**Anwar** , Etin, “Ibn S?n?’s Philosophical Theology of Love: a Study of
the Ris?lah f? al-?Ishq,”*Islamic Studies* , 42 (2003): 331-45.

**Ayada** , Souâd,*Avicenne* (Philo-philosophes). Paris: Ellipses, 2002,
80 pp., ISBN 2-7298-0918-X.

**Bäck** , Allan, “Avicenna on Relations and the Bradleyan Regress,”
in*La Tradition médiévale des Catégories (XIIe-Xve siècles)* , ed. by
Joël Biard & Irène Rosier-Catch (Louvain-la-Neuve: Editions de
l’Institut Supérieur de Philosophie; Louvain-Paris: Peeters, 2003), pp.
69-84.

**Banchetti-Robino** , Marina Paola, “Ibn S?n? and Husserl on Intention
and Intentionality,”*Philosophy East & West* , 54 (2004): 71-82.

**Belo** , Catarina, “Ibn S?n? on Chance in the*Physics* of*aš-Šif?’* ,”
in*Interpreting Avicenna* , pp. 25-41.

**Bertolacci** , Amos, “The Reception of Book B (*Beta* ) of
Aristotle’s*Metaphysics* in the*Il?h?y?t* of Avicenna’s*Kit?b aš-Šif?’*
,” in*Interpreting Avicenna* , pp. 157-74.

-------, “La ricezione del libro Γ della*Metafisica* nell’*Il?hiyy?t*
del*Kit?b al-Šif?’* di Avicenna,” in*Aristotele e i suoi esegeti
neoplatonici* , pp. 173-210.

-------, “Some Texts of Aristotle’s*Metaphysics* in the*Il?h?y?t* of
Avicenna’s*Kit?b aš-Šif?’* ,” in*Before and After Avicenna* , pp. 24-47.

-------, “The Structure of metaphysical Science in the*Il?hiyy?t (Divine
Science)* of Avicenna’s*Kit?b al-Šif?’ (Book of the Cure)* ,”*Documenti
e Studi sulla Tradizione filosofica medievale* , 13 (2002): 1-69.

-------, “The Doctrine of Material and Fornal Causality in the
“Il?hiyy?t” of Avicenna’s “Kit?b al-Šif?’”,”*Quaestio* , 2 (2002):
125-54.

**Burrell** , David B., “Avicenna (Ibn S?n?),” in*A Companion to
Philosophy* , pp. 196-208.

**De Libera** , Alain,*L’Art des généralités: Théories de l’abstraction*
. Paris: Aubier, 1999, ch. IV deals with Avicenna, pp. 499-607 with in
appendix translations from Arabic of relevant passages in Alexander of
Aphrodisias and in the Metpahysics of the*Shif?’* by Marc Geoffroy, pp.
637-79, ISBN 2-7007-3355-X.

**Dhanani** , Alnoor, “Rocks in the Heavens?! The Encounter between ‘Abd
al-?abb?r and Ibn S?n?,” in*Before and After Avicenna* , pp. 127-44.

**Gutas** , Dimitri, “Medical Theory and Scientific Method in the Age of
Avicenna,” in*Before and After Avicenna* , pp. 145-62.

**Hall** , Robert E., “Intellect, Soul and Body in Ibn S?n?: Systematic
Synthesis and Development of the Aristotelian, Neoplatonic and Galenic
Theories,” in*Interpreting Avicenna* , pp. 62-86.

**Hasse** , Dag Niklaus,*Avicenna’s De Anima in the Latin West. The
Formation of a Peripatetic Philosophy of the Soul 1160-1300* (Warburg
Institute*.* Studies and Texts). London: The Warburg Institute, 2000,
x-350 pp., ISBN 0-85481-125-7.

**Inati** , Shams C.,*The Problem of Evil: Ibn S?n?’s Theodicy* .
Binghamton: Binghampton University, Global Publications, 2000, xii-215
pp., ISBN 1-566840-06-1.

**Jaffer** , Tariq, “Bodies, Souls and Resurrection in
Avicenna’s*ar-Ris?la al-Adhaw?ya f? amr al-ma??d* ,” in*Before and After
Avicenna* , pp. 163-74.

**Janssens** , Jules, “Bahmany?r ibn Marzub?n: A Faithful Disciple of
Ibn Sina,” in*Before and After Avicenna* , pp.177-97.

-------, “Avicenne et sa “paraphrase-commentaire” du livre Lambda
(“Kit?b al-in??f”),”*Recherches de Théologie et Philosophie médiévales*
, 103 (2003): 401-16.

**Jouanneau** , Anne-Sophie, “Le polissage du miroir de l’âme chez
Avicenne, Al-Ghaz?l? et Ibn ?Arab?,”*Philosophie* , n.77 (1er mars
2003): 69-84.

**Lizzini** , Olga, “The Relation Between Form and Matter: Some Brief
Observations on the ‘Homology Argument’ (*Il?h?y?t* , II.4) and the
Deduction of*Fluxus* ,” in*Interpreting Avicenna* , pp. 175-85.

**Luther** , Irina, “The Conception of the Angle in the Works of Ibn
S?n? and aš-Š?r?z?,” in*Interpreting Avicenna* , pp. 112-25.

**Marcotte** , Roxanne D., “Resurrection (*Ma’?d* ) in the Persian*Hay?t
an-Nuf?s* of Ism?’?l Ibn Muhammad R?z?: The Avicennan Background,”
in*Interpreting Avicenna* , pp. 213-35.

**Mayer** , Toby, “Fahr ad-D?n ar-R?z?’s Critique of Ibn S?n?’s Argument
for the Unity of God in the*Iš?r?t* , and Na??r ad-D?n a?-??s?’s
Defence,” in*Before and After Avicenna* , pp. 199-218.

**McGinnis** , Jon, “On the Moment of Substantial Change: A Vexed
Question in the History of Ideas,” in*Interpreting Avicenna* , pp.
42-61.

-------, “Methodologies in Medieval Islam: Induction and Experimentation
in the Philosophy of Ibn S?n?,”*Journal of the History of Philosophy* ,
41 (2003): 307-27.

**Porro** , Pasquale, “Universaux et*esse essentiae* : Avicenne, Henri
de Gand et le

“troisième Reich”,” in*Le réalisme des universaux* (Cahiers de
Philosophie de

l’Université de Caen, 38-39) (Caen: Presses Universitaires de Caen,
2002), pp. 50.

**Rashed** , M., “Ibn ‘Ad? et Avicenne: sur les types d’existants,”
in*Aristotele e i suoi esegeti neoplatonici* , pp. 107-71.

**Reisman** , David C., “Plato’s*Republic* in Arabic: A Newly Discovered
Passage,”*Arabic Sciences and Philosophy* , 14 (2004): 263-300.

-------, “The Pseudo-Avicennan Corpus, I: methodological
Considerations,” in*Interpreting Avicenna* , pp. 3-21.

-------, “Stealing Avicenna’s Books: A Study of the Historical Sources
for the life and Times of Avicenna,” in*Before and After Avicenna* , pp.
91-126.

-------,*The Making of the Avicennan Tradition: The Transmission,
Contents, and Structure of Ibn S?n?’s* al-Mub?ha??t*(The Discussions)*
(Islamic Philosophy, Theology and Science. Texts and Studies, 49).
Leiden: Brill, 2002, xx-333 pp., ISBN 90-04-12504-3.

-------, “A New Standard for Avicenna Studies,”*Journal of the American
Oriental Society* , 122 (2002): 562-77 [A Review of *Ibn Sînâ, lettre au
vizir Abû Sa’d: Editio princes d’après le manuscript de Bursa* by Yahya
Michot. Beirut: al-Bouraq, 2000].

**Rizvi** , Sajjad, “Process Metaphysics in Islam? Avicenna and Mull?
?adr? on Intensification in Being,” in*Before and After Avicenna* , pp.
233-47.

**Sebti** , Meryem, “La distinction entre intellect pratique et
intellect théorique dans la doctrine de l’âme humaine
d’Avicenne,”*Philosophie* , n.77 (1er mars 2003): 23-44.

-------, “La signification de la définition avicennienne de l’âme comme
“perfection première d’un corps naturel organique” dans le livre I
du*Traité de l’âme* du *Šif?’* ,” *Bulletin d’Études Orientales* , 51
(1999): 299-312.

**Street** , Tony, “An Outline of Avicenna’s Syllogistic,”*Archiv für
Geschichte der*

*Philosophie* , 84 (2002): 129-60.

**Takahashi** , Hidemi, “The Reception of Ibn S?n? in Syriac: The Case
of Gregory Barhebraeus,” in*Before and After Avicenna* , pp. 249-81.

**Udina i Cobo** , Josep Manuel, “Ernst Bloch y el averroísmo de
su*Avicena y la izquierda aristotélica* ,” in*Averroes y los
averroísmos* , pp. 371-85.

**Wisnovsky** , Robert, “Avicenna and the Avicennian Tradition,” in*The
Cambridge Companion to Arabic Philosophy* , pp. 92-136.

-------,*Avicenna’s Metaphysics in Context* . Ithaca, NY: Cornell
University Press, 2003, xii-305 pp., ISBN 0-8014-4178-1.

-------, “Towards a History of Avicenna’s Distinction between Immanent
and Transcendent Causes,” in*Before and After Avicenna* , pp. 49-68.

-------, “Final and Efficient Causality in Avicenna’s Cosmology and
Theology,”*Quaestio* , 2 (2002): 97-123.

Bahmany?r

See Avicenna, Janssens.

al-Dj?hiz

**Marín Guzmán** , R., “Religosidad, tradiciones islámicas
y*mu’tazilismo* en la obra de al-Yahiz,”*Miscelánea de Estudios Árabes y
Hebraicos. Sección Árabe-Islam* , 52 (2003): 125-46.

al-Farabi

**[al-Farabi],** Aphorismes choisis, transl., intro and notes by Soumaya
Mestiri & Guillaume Dye, Commentary by Guillaume Dye (Bibliothèque
Maktaba). Paris: Fayard, 2003, 237 pp., ISBN 2-213-61624-8.

**[al-Farabi],** La Philosophie de Platon, ses parties, l’ordre de ses
parties, du commencement jusqu’à la fin, transl. with notes by Olivier
Sedeyn & Nassim Lévy. Paris: Allia, 2002, 43 pp., ISBN 2-84485-097-9.

**[al-Farabi],** El camino de la felicidad (Kit?b al-tanb?h ?alà sab?l
al-sa??da), transl. and intro. by Rafael Ramón Guerrero. Madrid:
Editorial Trotta, 2002, 82 pp., ISBN 84-8164-540-0.

**“Alfarabi. Epístola sobre los sentidos del término “intelecto”,”**
transl. by Rafael Ramón Guerrero,*Revista Española de Filosofía
Medieval* , 9 (2002): 215-23.

**Alon** , Ilai,*Al-Farabi’s Philosophical Lexicon* . Oxford: E.J.W.
Gibb Memorial Trust, 2002, Vol. I: Arabic Text, cxxxiv-532 pp.; Vol. II:
English Translation, pp. 539-1042, ISBN 0-906094-44-5 (vol.I) &
0-906094-46-1 (vol.II).

**Aouad** , Maroun &**Schoeler** , Gregor, “Le syllogisme poétique selon
al-Farabi: un syllogisme incorrect de la deuxième figure,”*Arabic
Sciences and Philosophy* , 12 (2002): 185-96.

**Black** , Deborah, “Alfarabi (Al-Farabi),” in*A Companion to
Philosophy* , pp. 109-17.

**Brague** , Rémi, “Une note sur les sources philosophiques du
Ps.-F?r?b?,*La quiddité de l’âme* ,”*Arabic Sciences and Philosophy* ,
13 (2003): 239-41.

**Crone** , P., “What was Al-Farabi’s ‘Islamic’ Constitution?,”*Arabica*
, 50 (2003): 306-21.

**Freudenthal** , Gad, “*La quiddité de l’âme* , traité populaire
néoplatonisant faussement attribué à al-Farabi: traduction annotée et
commentée,”*Arabic Sciences and Philosophy* , 13 (2003): 173-237.

**Hankey** , Wayne J., “Political, Psychic, Intellectual, Demonic,
Hierarchical, Cosmic, and Divine Justice in Aquinas, Al-Fârâbî,
Dionysius, and Porphyry,”*Dionysius* , 21 (2003): 197-218.

**Harvey** , Steven, “Did Alfarabi Read Plato’s*Laws* ?,”*Medioevo* , 28
(2003): 51-68.

-------, “Can a Tenth-Century Islamic Aristotelian Help Us Understand
Plato’s*Laws?* ,” in*Plato’s* Laws*: From Theory into Practice.
Proceedings of the VI Symposium Platonicum. Selected Papers* , ed. by
Samuel Scolnicov & Luc Brisson (International Plato Studies, 15). (Sankt
Augustin: Academia Verlag, 2004), pp. 320-330.

-------, “Falaquera’s Alfarabi: An Example of the Judaization of the
Islamic Falâsifah,”*Trumah* , 12 (2002) 97-112.

**Hilal** , Aziz, “F?r?b? et le problème de l’homonymie
accidentelle,”*Studia Islamica* , n.92 (2001): 155-64.

**Lafleur** , Cl. &**Carrier** , J., “Abstraction, separation et
tripartition dela philosophie théorétique: quelques éléments de
l’arrière fond farabien et artien de Thomas d’Aquin, Super Boethium “De
trinitate”, question 5, article 3,”*Recherches de Théologie et
Philosophie médiévales* , 67 (2000): 248-71.

**Najjar** , Fauzi M., “Al-Farabi’s Harmonization of Plato’s and
Aristotle’s Philosophies,”*The Muslim World* , 94 (2004): 29-44.

**O’Meara** , Dominic,*Platonopolis: Platonic Political Philosophy in
Late Antiquity* . Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2003, has a section on
al-Farabi’s*Perfect State* , pp. 185-97, ISBN 0-19-925758-2.

**Ramón Guerrero** , Rafael, “Apuntes biográficos de al-Farabi’ según
sus vidas árabes,”*Anaquel de Estudios Árabes* , 14 (2003): 231-38.

-------, “La*Ética a Nicómaco* en la obra de Alfarabi,” in *Etica y
sociologia. Estudios en memoria del professor José Todolí, O.P.*
(Salamanca: San Esteban, ????): 201-12.

**Reisman** , David C., “Al-Farabi and the Philosophical Curriculum,”
in*The Cambridge Companion to Arabic Philosophy* , pp. 52-71.

**Roman** , André, “Aperçus sur la naissance de la langue à partir
du*Kit?b al-hur?f* d’al-Farabi,”*Studia Islamica* , n.92 (2001): 127-54.

**Terkan** , Fehrullah, “Does Zayd Have the Power*Not* to Travel
Tomorrow? A Preliminary Analysis of al-Farabi’s Discussion on God’s
Knowledge of Future Human Acts,”*The Muslim World* , 94 (2004): 45-64.

**Türker** , Sadik, “The Role of Translations in the Development of
Islamic Thought,”*Kutadgubilig Felsefe* , 3 (2003): 223-36 [in Turkish].

-------, “The Utterances Employed in Logic,”*Kutadgubilig Felsefe* , 2
(2002): 93-178 [in Turkish, intro. and translation].

**Ibn B?jjah (Avempace)**

**[Ibn B?jjah], “Avempace. Tratado de la unión del intelecto con el
hombre,”** intro. and transl. by Joaquin Lomba,*Anaquel de Estudios
Árabes* , 11 (2000): 369-91.

**Azanza Elío** , Ana, “Algunos aspectos de la política de Avempace
en*El régimen del solitario* , circa 1085-1138,” in*Averroes y los
averroísmos* , pp. 407-16.

**Franco** , Abel B., “Avempace, Projectile Motion, and Impetus
Theory,”*Journal of the History of Ideas* , 64 (2003): 521-46.

**Hamid** , Idris Samawi, “Avempace (Ibn B?jjah),” in*A Companion to
Philosophy* , pp. 172-73.

**Matula** , Jozef, “Thomas Aquinas and his Criticism of Avempace’s
Theory of the Intellect,”*Verbum* , VI,1 (2004): 95-107.

**Puig Montada** , Josef, “Philosophy in Andalusia: Ibn B?jja and Ibn
Tufayl,” in*The Cambridge Companion to Arabic Philosophy* , pp. 155-79.

-------, “Avempace’s ?s?????,” in*Problems in Arabic Philosophy* , pp.
51-67.

Ibn al-Haytham

**Lindberg** , David C., “Alhacen (Al-Hasan),” in*A Companion to
Philosophy* , pp. 127-28.

**Ibn Khaldûn**

**[Ibn Khaldûn]** ,*Le Livre des Exemples: I Autobiographie, Muqaddima*
, transl., intro., and notes by Abdesselam Cheddadi (Bibliothèque de la
Pléiade). Paris: Gallimard, 2002, lxi-1559 pp., ISBN 2-07-011425-2.

**Osman** , Ghada, “The Historian of Language: Ibn Khaldun and the
Communicative Learning Approach,”*Middle East Studies Association (MESA)
Bulletin* , 37 (2003): 50-57.

Ibn al-?ayyib

**Ferrari** , C., “Der Duft des Apfels. Ab? l-Fara? ‘Abdall?h Ibn
a?-?ayyib und sein Kommentar zu den*Kategorien* des Aristoteles,”
in*Aristotele e i suoi esegeti neoplatonici* , pp. 85-106.

**Ibn Tufayl**

**Hayoun** , Maurice-Ruben, “Moses Narbonis Kommentar zum Hayy ibn
Yaqzan des ibn Tufayl,” and “Hebrew ed. of Moses Narboni’s*Kommentar zum
Hayy ibn Yaqzan* ,” in*Trumah* , 12 (2002): pp.199-??? and 1\*-.???.

**Puig Montada** , Josef, “Philosophy in Andalusia: Ibn B?jja and Ibn
Tufayl,” in*The Cambridge Companion to Arabic Philosophy* , pp. 155-79.

**Ikhw?n al-?af?’**

**[Ikhw?n al-?af?’], “Ikhwân al-?afâ’: des arts scientifiques et de leur
objectif,”** *Le Muséon* , 116, 1-2 (2003): 231-58 &**“Ikhwân
al-?afâ’:** Sur les limites du savoir humain,” intro. and transl. by G.
de Callataÿ of the*Épître XXVIII* des Frères de la Pureté,*Le Muséon* ,
116, 3-4 (2003): 479-503.

**Mohamed** , Yasien, “The Cosmology of the Ikhw?n al-Saf?, Miskawayh
and al-I?fah?n?,”*Islamic Studies* , 39 (2000): 657-79.

**al-Kind?**

“The Epistle of Ya?qûb ibn Ish?q al-Kind? on The Device for Dispelling
Sorrows,” transl. by Ghada Jayyusi-Lehn,*British Journal of Middle
Eastern Studies* , 29, 2 (2002): 121-35.

**[al-Kindi],** Le moyen de chasser les tristesses et autres textes
éthiques, intro. transl. and notes by Soumaya Mestiri & Guillaume Dye
(Bibliothèque Maktaba). Paris: Fayard, 2004, 129 pp., ISBN 2-213-61840-2
[includes also*Les Paroles de Socrate* ; abstracts from*Les Paroles
d’al-Kind?* ; Épître relative au propos sur l’âme, abrégé du livre
d’Aristote, de Platon et des autres philosophes].

**[al-Kindi],** De radiis. Théorie des arts magiques, transl. from Latin
by Didier Ottaviani. Paris: Editions Allia, 2003, 103 pp., ISBN
2-84485-115-0.

**Adamson** , Peter, “Al-Kind? and the Reception of Greek Philosophy,”
in*The Cambridge Companion to Arabic Philosophy* , pp. 32-51.

-------, “Al-Kind? and the Mu’tazila: Divine attributes, Creation and
Freedom,”*Arabic Sciences and Philosophy* , 13 (2003): 45-77.

-------, “Before Essence and Existence: al-Kind?’s Conception of
Being,”*Journal of the History of Philosophy* , 40 (2002): 297-312.

-------, “Ab? Ma?šar, al-Kind? and the Philosophical Defense of
Astrology,”*Recherches de Théologie et Philosophie médiévales* , 69
(2002): 245-70.

**Jolivet** , Jean, “Alkindi (Al-Kind?),” in*A Companion to Philosophy*
, pp. 129-35.

al-Dj?hiz

**[al-Dj?hiz]** , Le livre des animaux. De l’étonnante sagesse divine
dans sa Création et autres anecdotes, intro. and transl. by Mohamed
Mestiri & commentary by Soumaya Mestiri (Bibliothèque MAKTABA). Paris:
Fayard, 2003, 228 pp., ISBN 2-213-61625-6.

Miskawayh

**Arshad** , Asmaa’ Mohd., “A Comparative Analysis of al-Ghazâlî and
Miskawaih on Child Education,”*Islamic Culture* , 77,4 (2003): 1-30.

**Mulla Sadra**

**See** Avicenna, Rizvi

**[Mulla Sadra],** The Elixir of the Gnostics. A parallel English-Arabic
text, transl., intro., and notes by William C. Chittick (Islamic
Translation Series). Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 2003,
xxxviii-148 & 87 pp., ISBN 0-934893-70-5.

**Fabbri** , Renaud, “The Question of Posthumous Conditions According to
the Metaphysical Doctrines of Mullâ Sadrâ et René Guénon,”*Sophia* , 9,2
(Winter 2003/2004): 135-50.

**Jambet** , Christian,*L’Acte d’être. La philosophie de la révélation
chez Mollâ Sadrâ* (L’espace intérieur). Paris: Fayard, 2002, 447 pp.,
ISBN 2-213-6137-61.

**Kalin** , Ibrahim, “Mulla aadra’s Realist Ontology of the
Intelligibles and Theory of Knowledge,”*The Muslim World* , 94 (2004):
81-106.

-------, “An Annotated Bibliography of the Works of Mulla Sadra with a
Brief Account of His Life,”*Islamic Studies* , 42 (2003): 21-62.

**Massi Dabake** , Maria, “The Soul as*Barzakh* : Substantial Motion and
Mulla aadra’s Theory of Human Becoming,”*The Muslim World* , 94 (2004):
107-30.

**Rizvi** , Sajjad H., “Mysticism and Philosophy: Ibn ‘Araba and Mulla
Sadra,” in*The Cambridge Companion to Arabic Philosophy* , pp. 224-46.

**al-Raza (Aba Bakr)**

Razi’s Traditional Psychology (Abû Bakr Muhammad ibn Zakaraya al-Raza),
transl. by A. J. Arberry. Damascus: IBS, s.d., 110 pp., no ISBN [in fact
a reprint without the intro. of*The Spiritual Physick of Rhazes* .
London: Murray, 1950, same pagination].

**[Razi],** La Médecine spirituelle, intro. and transl. by Rémi Brague
(GF). Paris: Flammarion, 2003, 206 pp., ISBN 2-08-071136-9.

**Druart** , Thérèse-Anne, “Alrazi (Al-Raza),” in*A Companion to
Philosophy* , pp. 136-37.

**Katouzian-Safadi** , Mehrnaz, “Séparation de la médecine et la
pharmacie: plaidoyer d’al-Raza,” in*Science and Technology in the
Islamic World* , ed. by Razaullah Ansari (Turnhout: Brepols, 2002):
217-22.

**Shahrazara (d. ca. 1299)**

**Marcotte** , Roxanne D., “Les facultés internes selon le commentaire
de Shahrazara (m. ca. 1288) du*Hikmat al-ishraq* de Suhravarda (m.
1191),” in*Iran. Questions et connaissances, Vol. II: Périodes médiévale
et moderne* , ed. by Maria Szuppe (Studia Iranica. Cahier 26) (Paris:
Association pour l’Avancement des Études Iraniennes, 2002): 411-25.

**Suhrawarda**

See, Shahrazara, Marcotte.

**Gutas** , Dimitri, “Suhrawarda and Greek Philosophy: Essay-Review of
John Walbridge’s*The Leaven of the Ancients* ,”*Arabic Sciences and
Philosophy* , 13 (2003): 303-09.

**Walbridge** , John, “Suhrawarda and Illuminationism,” in*The Cambridge
Companion to Arabic Philosophy* , pp. 201-23.

--------,*The Leaven of the Ancients. Shurawarda and the Heritage of the
Greeks* . Albany: State University of New York Press, 2000, xviii-305
pp., ISBN 0791443604.

**al-Tasa (Nasar al-Dan)**

See Avicenna, Mayer.

**[Tasa],** Contemplation and Action: The Spiritual Autobiography of a
Muslim Scholar (Sayr wa Sulak), new Arabic ed. and English transl. by
S.J. Badakhchani. London: I.B. Tauris, 1999, xiv-86 & 24 pp., ISBN
1-86064-523-2.

**Vakily** , Abdollah, “Khvajah Nasar al-Dan Tasa’s aghaz va Anjam: An
Introduction and Abridged Translation,”*Islamic Studies* , 40 (2001):
89-103.

**Yahya ibn aAda**

**[Yahya ibn aAda],** The Reformation of Morals. A Parallel
English-Arabic text, transl., and intro. by Sidney H. Griffith (Eastern
Christian Texts). Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University press, 2002,
xlvi-135 pp., ISBN 0-934893-69-1.

**Bualwan** , Kamal, “Introduction of Yahya ibn aAda’s (†974) Conception
of the One in the Treatise on Unity,”*Parole de l’Orient* , 28 (2003):
485-95.

**Lizzini** , Olga “Le Traité de l’Unité de Yahya ibn aAda
(†974),”*Parole de l’Orient* , 28 (2003): 497-529.

**Martini Bonadeo** , Cecilia, “Un commento ad*Alpha Elatton* “sicut
litterae sonant” nella Baadad del X secolo,”*Medioevo* , 38 (2003):
69-96.

**Raad** , Samih, “L’homme parfait dans le “Traité d’éthique” de Yahya
ibn aAda,”*Parole de l’Orient* , 28 (2003): 531-36.

**Ramón Guerrero** , Rafael, “El “Tratado sobre los seres” de Yahya b.
aAda. Ensayo de traducción castellana,”*Anaquel de estudios Árabes* , 12
(2001): 639-49.

**Rashed** , M., see Avicenna.

Section II. Kalam

a. General Studies

**Abrahamov** , Binyamin,*Divine Love in Islamic Mysticism: The
Teachings of al-Ghazâlî and al-Dabbâgh* . London: Routledge, 2003,
xii-190 pp.

-------, “The Creation and Duration of Paradise and Hell in Islamic
Theology,”*Der Islam* , 79 (2002): 87-102.

**Alami** , Ahmed, “L’aš’arisme face à la théorie des
modes,”*Philosophie* , n.77 (1er mars 2003): 45-68.

**Bar-Asher** , M.M., “Sur les éléments chrétiens de la religion
Nusayrite-‘Alawite,”*Journal Asiatique* , 289 (2001): 185-216.

Bar-Asher, M.M. &**Kofsky** , A.,*The Nusayra-‘Alawa Religion: An
Enquiry into its Theology and Liturgy* (Jerusalem Studies in Religion
and Culture, 1). Leiden: Brill, 2002, xii-244 pp., ISBN 90-04-12552-3.

-------, “A Druze-Nusayra Debate in the “Epistles of Wisdom,”*Quaderni
di Studi Arabi* , 17 (1999): 95-103.

-------, “The Theology of*Kitab al-usas* : An Early Pseudepigraphic
Nusayra Work,” *Rivista degli Studi Orientali* , 71 (1997): 55-81.

**Ben-Shammai** , Haggai, “Kalam in Medieval Jewish Philosophy,”
in*History of Jewish Philosophy* , ed. by Daniel H. Frank & Oliver
Leaman (Routledge History of World Philosophies, II) (London: Routledge,
1997), pp. 115-48.

**Dhanani** , Alnoor, “Problems in Eleventh-Century*Kalam*
Physics,”*Bulletin of the Royal Institute for Inter-Faith Studies* , 4
(2002): 73-96.

**Griffith** , Sidney H.,*The Beginnings of Christian Theology in
Arabic: Muslim-Christian Encounters in the Early Islamic Period*
(Variorum Collected Studies Series). Aldershot: Ashgate, 2002, x-326
pp., ISBN 0-86078-889-X [1. Comparative Religion in the Apologetics of
the First Christian Arabic Theologians; 2. Habib ibn Hidmah Abu
Rat’itah, a Christian*mutakallim* of the First Abbasid Century; 3.
‘Ammar al-Basri’s*Kitab al-Burhan* : Christian*Kalam* in the First
Abbasid Century; 4. The Apologetic treatise of Nonnus of Nisibis; 5.
Disputes with Muslims in Syriac Christian Texts: From Patriarch John (d.
648) to Bar Hebraeus (d. 1286); 6. Muslim and Church Councils; the
Apology of Theodore Abu Qurrah; 7. Muhammad and the Monk Bahira:
Reflections on a Syriac and Arabic Text from Early Abbasid Times; 8. The
Kitab Misbah al-Aql of Severus Ibn al-Muqaffa’: A Profile of the
Christian Creed in Arabic in Tenth Century Egypt; 9. The Muslim
Philosopher al-Kindi and his Christian Readers: Three Arab Christian
Texts on “The Dissipation of Sorrows’; 10. From Aramaic to Arabic: The
Languages of the Monasteries of Palestine in the Byzantine and Early
Islamic Periods; and 11. Bashir/Beser: Boon Companion of the Byzantine
Emperor Leo III; The Islamic Recension of his Story in*Leiden Oriental
MS 951 (2)* ].

**Kouloughli** , Djamel E., “L’influence mu’tazilite sur la naissance et
le développement de la rhétorique arabe,”*Arabic Sciences and
Philosophy* , 12 (2002): 217-39.

**Martin** , Richard C. &**Woodward** , Mark R. with**Atmaja** , Dwi
S.,*Defenders of Reason in Islam: Mu’tazilism* from*Medieval School*
to*Modern Symbol* . Oxford: Oneworld, 1997, xvi-251 pp., ISBN
1-85168-147-7.

**Nagel** , Tilman,*Im Offenkundigen das Verborgene. Die Heilszusage des
sunnistischen Islams* (Abhandlungen der Akademie der Wissenschaften in
Göttingen. Philologisch-Historische Klasse; 3. Folge, Bd 244).
Göttingen: Vandenhoek und Ruprecht, 2002, 711 pp.

**Penn** , Michael, “Syriac Sources for the Study of Early
Christian/Muslim Relations,”*Islamochristiana* , 29 (2003): 59-78.

**Schmidtke** , Sabine,*Theologie, Philosophie, und Mystik im
Zwölferschiitischen Islam des 9/15. Jahrhunderts. Die Dedankenwelten des
Ibn Abî aumhûr al-Ahsâ’î (um 838/1434-35-nach 906-1501)* (Islamic
Philosophy, Theology, and Science. Texts and Studies, 39). Leiden:
Brill, 2000.

**Van Ess** , Josef, “Political Ideas in Early Islamic Religious
Thought,”*British Journal of Middle Eastern Studies* , 28 (2001):
151-64.

-------,*Der Fehltritt des Gelehrten. “Die Pest von Emmaus” und ihre
theologischen Nachspiele* (Supplemente zu den Schriften der Heidelberger
Akademie der Wissenschaften, Philosophisch-historische Klasse, Bd 13).
Heidelberg: Universitätsverlag C. Winter, 2001, 453 pp.

**Williams** , Wesley, “Aspects of the Creed of Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal: A
Study of Anthropomorphism in Early Islamic Discourse,”*International
Journal of Middle East Studies* , 34 (2002): 441-63.

**Wisnovsky** , Robert, “One Aspect of the Avicennian Turn in Sunna
Theology,”*Arabic Sciences and Philosophy* , 14 (2004): 65-100.

**Aba Hasham**

**Alami** , Ahmed,*L’ontologie modale. Étude de la théorie des modes
d’Aba Hašim al-aubba’I* (Études musulmanes, XXXVI). Paris: Vrin, 2001,
244 pp., ISBN 2-7116-1435-2.

**al-Dhahaba**

**Gilliot** , Claude, “Al-Dhahaba contre la pensée spéculative,”
in*Problems in Arabic Philosophy* , pp. 117-50.

**al-Djabbar**

See, Avicenna, Dhanani.

**Vasalou** , Sophia, “Equal before the Law: The Evilness of Human and
Divine Lies. ‘Abd al-aabbar’s Rational Ethics,”*Arabic Sciences and
Philosophy* , 13 (2003): 243-68.

**Fakhr al-Dan al-Raza**

**Kafrawi** , Shalahudin, “The Notion of Necessary Being in Fakhr al-Dan
al-Raza’s Philosophical Theology,”*Islam and Christian-Muslim Relations*
, 15 (2004): 125-33.

al-Ghazala

**[al-Ghazzali],** On Listening to Music, transl. from Persian [from
the*Alchemy of Happiness* ] by Muhammad Nur Abdus Salam & Intro. by
Laleh Bakhtiar (Great Books of the Islamic World). Chicago: distributed
by KAZI, 2002, 32 pp., ISBN 1-57644-690-6 [many typos].

On the Boundaries of Theological Tolerance in Islam: Aba Hamid
al-Ghazala’s**Faysal al-Tafriqa** , transl. by Sherman A. Jackson
(Studies in Islamic Philosophy). Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002,
xvi-156 pp., ISBN 0-19-579791-4.

**[al-Ghazâlî],** La déliverance de l’erreur (Al-munqidh min al-dalâl),
Intro. & transl. with notes by Hassan Boutaleb. Beirut: Albouraq, 2002,
102 pp., ISBN 2-84161-176-0.

**[al-Ghazâlî], Le livre de l’Unicité divine et de la remise confiante
en Dieu (** Kitâb at-tawhîd wa at-tawakkul**)** , transl. intro.and
notes by Hassan Boutaleb. Beirut: Albouraq, 2002, 199 pp., ISBN
2-84161-195-7.

**[al-Ghazâlî], Griffel** , Frank,*Über Rechtgläubigkeit und religiöse
Toleranz. Eine Übersetzung der Schrift Das Kriterium der Unterscheidung
zwischen Islam und Gottlosigkeit (Faysal at-tafriqa bayna l’Islâm
wa-z-zandaqa)* . Zurich: Spur Verlag, 1998, 110 pp.

**Akdogan** , Cemil, “Ghazala, Descartes, and Hume: The Genealogy of
Some philosophical Ideas,”*Islamic Studies* , 42 (2003): 487-502.

**al-Akiti** , M. Afifi, “The three Properties of Prophethood in Certain
Works of Avicenna and al-aazala,” in*Interpreting Avicenna* , pp.
189-212.

**Bargeron** , Carol L., “Sufism’s Role in al-Ghazala’s First Crisis of
Knowledge,”*Medieval Encounters* , 9 (2003): 32-78.

**Binti Sa’ari** , Che Zarrina, “Al-Ghazâlî’s*al-Risâlah al-Ladunniyyah*
and its influence on Malay Muslim Thought,”*Islamic Culture* , 76
(2002): 37-64.

**Daccache** , Salim, “L’ascèse (az-zuhd) d’après Ibn al-‘Ibrî et
al-aazâlî,”*Al-Machriq* , 77 (2003): 339-58 [in Arabic].

**Dallal** , Ahmad, “Ghazala and the Perils of Interpretation,”*Journal
of the American Oriental Society* , 122 (2002): 773-87 [A Review of
Richard Frank,*Al-Ghazala and the Ashaarite School* . Durham: Duke
University Press, 1994].

**Druart** , Thérèse-Anne, “Algazali (Al-Ghazala),” in*A Companion to
Philosophy* , pp. 118-26.

**Eran** , Amira, “Al-Ghazali and Maimonides on the World to Come and
Spiritual Pleasures,”*Jewish Studies Quarterly* , 8 (2001): 137-66.

**Gianotti** , Timothy J.,*Al-Ghazala’s Unspeakable Doctrine of the
Soul: Unveiling the Esoteric Psychology and Eschatology of the* Ihya’
(Brill Studies in Intellectual History). Leiden: Brill, 2001, xii-205
pp.

**Götz** , Ignacio, “The Quest for Certainty: Al-Ghazali and
Descartes,”*jpr Journal of Philosophical Research* , 28 (2003): 1-22.

**Griffel** , Frank, “Al-aazala’s Concept of Prophecy: The Introduction
of Avicennan Psychology into Ashaarite Theology,”*Arabic Sciences and
Philosophy* , 14 (2004): 101-44.

-------, “Toleration and Exclusion: al-Shâfi’î and al-Ghazâlî on the
Treatment of Apostates,”*Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African
Studies* , 64 (2001): 339-54.

**Highland** , James, “Guidance, Tolerance, and the Reverent Mindset in
the Thought of al-Ghazzali and Symeon,”*The Muslim World* , 94 (2004):
259-73.

**Jackson** , Sherman,*On the Boundaries of Theological Tolerance in
Islam: Abû Hâmid al-Ghazâlî’s Faysal al-Tafriqa bayna al-Islâm wa
al-zandaqa* (Studies in Islamic Philosophy, 1). Karachi: Oxford
University Press, 2002.

**Janssens** , Jules, “Al-Ghazzala and His Use of Avicennian Texts,”
in*Problems in Arabic Philosophy* , pp. 37-49.

-------, “Le*Mi’yar al-ailm fa fann al-mantaq* d’al-Ghazzala: sources
avicenniennes et farabiennes,” *Archives d’Histoire doctrinale et
littéraire du moyen âge* , 69 (2002): 39-66.

**Kemal** , Salim, “Al-Ghazala, Metaphor and Logic,” in*Across the
Mediterranean* , pp. 205-23.

**Lizzini** , Olga, “Occasionalismo e causalità filosofica: la
discussione della causalità in al-aazala,”*Quaestio* , 2 (2002): 155-83.

**Marmura** , Michael E., “Al-Ghazala,” in*The Cambridge Companion to
Arabic Philosophy* , pp. 137-54.

**Menn** , Stephen, “The*Discourse on the Method* and the Tradition of
Intellectual Autobiography,” in*Hellenistic and Early Modern Philosophy*
, ed. by Jon Miller & Brad Inwood. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2003, pp. 141-91 [focuses on al-Ghazali as influenced by Galen].

**Mitha** , Farouk,*Al-Ghazâlî and the Ismailis. A Debate on Reason and
Authority in Medieval Islam* (Ismaili Heritage Series, 5). London: I.B.
Tauris, 2001, 128 pp.

**Shukri** , Abdul Salam Muhamad, “Al-Ghazala’s Course in The Munqidh
Min Al-Dalal,”*The Islamic Quarterly* , 47 (2003): 157-72.

**Sinai** , Nicolai,*Menschliche oder göttliche Weisheita Zum Gegensatz
von philosophischem und religiösem Lebensideal bei al-Ghazali und Yehuda
ha-Levi* (Ex oriente lux, 2). Würzburg: Ergon Verlag, 2003, ix-115 pp.

**Wahyudi** , Yudian, “The Epistemology of Al-Munqidh Min Al-Dalal,”*The
Islamic Quarterly* , 47 (2003): 19-33.

**Ibn Hazm**

**Adang** , Camilla, “Ibn Hazm on Homosexuality. A Case-study of Zahira
Legal Methodology,”*Al-Qanaara* , 24 (2003): 5-31.

**Ljamai** , Abdelilah,*Ibn Hazm et la polémique islamo-chrétienne dans
l’histoire de l’islam* (The Medieval and Early Modern Iberian World,
17). Leiden: Brill, 2003, xii-248 pp., ISBN 90-04-12844-1.

**Puig Montada** , Josep, “Reason and Reasoning in Ibn Hazm of Cordova
(d. 1040),”*Studia Islamica* , n.92 (2001): 165-86.

**Ibn Masarra**

**Ramón Guerrero** , Rafael, “Ibn Masarra, gnóstico y místico andalusí,”
in*Las raíces de la cultura europea. Ensayos en homenaje al professor
Joaquín Lomba* , ed. by José Solana Dueso, Elvira Burgos Díaz & Pedro L.
Blasco Aznar (Saragosa: Prensas Universitarias de Zaragoza, 2004), pp.
223-39.

**Ibn Taymiyya**

**[Ibn Taymiyya]** , “A Mamlak Theologian’s Commentary on
Avicenna’s*Risala Adhawiyya* : Being a Translation of a Part of the*Dar’
al-taarud* of Ibn Taymiyya, with Introduction, Annotation, and
Appendices,” by Yahya Michot,*Journal of Islamic Studies* , 14 (2003):
149-203 & 309-63.

**al-Maturada**

**Kutty** , Ahmad, “Kitab al-Tawhad by Aba Mansar al-Maturada. A Report
with Reference to his Role in the Development of Kalam,”*Hamdard
Islamicus* , 26,4 (2003): 51-57.


