(2007-2008)
===========

I cannot thank enough all the scholars who kindly sent me information
abd in particular those who sent me a copy of their publications or
photocopies of tables of contents. I wish also to express my deep
gratitude to my Research Assistants Christophe Helmink and Clare Storck,
who were able to locate unusual books.

a. Collective Works or Collections of Articles

Adaptations and Innovations. Studies on the Interaction between Jewish
and Islamic Thought and Literature from the Early Middle Ages to the
Late Twentieth Century, Dedicated to Professor Joel L. Kraemer, ed. by
Y. Tzvi Langermann & Josef Stern (Collection de la Revue des Études
Juives). Paris-Louvain-Dudley, MA: Peeters, 2007, x-441 pp., ISBN
978-90-429-1944-0.

***The Cambridge Companion to Classical Islamic Theology*** , ed. by Tim
Winter. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2008, xii-337 pp., ISBN
978-0-521-78058-2.

***Christians and Muslims in Dialogue in the Islamic Orient of the
Middle Ages. Christlich-muslimische Gespräche im Mittelalter*** , ed. by
Martin Tamcke (Beiruter Texte und Studien 117). Beirut: Orient Institut;
Würzburg: Ergon Verlag in Komission, 2007, 210 pp., ISBN 9783899136111.

***A Common Rationality: Mu’tazilism in Islam and Judaism*** , ed. by
Camilla Adang, Sabine Schmidtke & David Sklare (Istanbuler Texte und
Studien 15). Würzburg: Ergon Verlag, 2007, 520 pp., ISBN
978-3-89913-587-9.

***Continuity and Change in the Realms of Islam. Studies in Honour of
Professor Urbain Vermeulen*** , ed. by K. D’Hulster & J. Van Steenbergen
(Orientalia Lovaniensia Analecta 171). Leuven-Paris-Dudley, MA: Peeters,
2008, xxxvi-659 pp., ISBN 978-90-429-1991-4.

***A Filosofia árabe e judaica e o ocidente medieval*** , ed. by Luis
Alberto De Boni & Roberto Hofmeister Pich, special issue of*Veritas*
(Porto Allegre), 52.3 (September 2007), 192 pp.

**Frank** , Richard M.,*Classical Islamic Theology: The Ash’arites.
Texts and Studies on the Development and History of Kalâm* , Vol. III,
ed. by Dimitri Gutas (Variorum). Aldershot: Ashgate, 2008, x-428 pp.,
ISBN 978-0-86078-979-6.

***In the Age of al-Fârâbî: Arabic Philosophy in the Fourth/Tenth
Century*** , ed. by Peter Adamson (Warburg Institute Colloquia 12).
London-Turin: The Warburg Institute-Nino Aragno, 2008, xii-302 pp., ISBN
978-0-85481-147-2.

***Islamic Thought in the Middle Ages. Studies in Text, Transmission and
Translation: in Honour of Hans Daiber*** , ed. by Anna Akasoy & Wim
Raven (Islamic Philosophy, Theology and Science 75). Leiden-Boston:
Brill, 2008, xxvi-711 pp., ISBN 978-90-04-16565-6.

Medieval Philosophy and the Classical Tradition in Islam, Judaism and
Christianity, ed. by John Inglis. London: Curzon, 2002, x-317 pp., ISBN
0-7007-1469-3.

Miroir et savoir. La transmission d’un thème platonicien, des
Alexandrins à la philosophie arabo-musulmane. Actes du Colloque
International Tenu à Leuven et Louvain-la-Neuve, les 17 et 18 novembre
2005, ed. by Daniel De Smet, Meryem Sebti, & Godefroid de Gallataÿ
(Ancient and Medieval Philosophy, 38). Louvain: Leuven University Press,
2008, x-304 pp., ISBN 9789058676702.

***Mulla*** ***Sadra & Comparative Philosophy of Causation*** , ed. by
Seyed G. Safavi. London: Institute of Islamic Studies, affiliated to
Islamic Center of England, London Academy of Iranian Studies, 2003, 318
pp., ISBN 964-93465-6-2.

***O ye Gentlemen: Arabic Studies on Science and Literary Culture In
Honour of Remke Kruk*** , ed. by Arnoud Vrolijk & Jan P. Hogendijk
(Islamic Philosophy, Theology and Science 74). Leiden-Boston: Brill,
2007, xxiv-plates-536 pp., ISBN 978-90-04-15794-1.

***The Passions of the Soul in the Metamorphosis of Becoming*** , ed. by
Anna-Teresa Tymieniecka (Islamic Philosophy and Occidental Phenomenology
in Dialogue, 1). Dordrecht/Boston/London: Kluwer, 2003, xliv-245 pp.,
ISBN 1-4020-1491-9.

***The Political Identity of the West*** **:** ***Platonism in the
Dialogue of Cultures*** , ed. by Marcel van Ackeren & Orrin Finn
Summerell. Frankfurt: Peter Lang, 2007, 209 pp., ISBN 3-631-55545-8.

***Redefining Christian Identity: Cultural Interaction in the Middle
East since the Rise of Islam*** , ed. by J.J. van Ginkel, H.L. Murre-van
den Berg & T.M. van Lint (Orientalia Lovaniensia Analecta 134).
Louvain-Paris-Dudley, MA: Peeters, 2005, xvi-420 pp., ISBN
90-429-1418-1.

***Sufism and Theology*** , ed. by Ayman Shihadeh. Edinburgh: Edinburgh
University Press, 2007, vi-201 pp., ISBN 978-0-7486-2605-2.

***The Unity of Science in the Arabic Tradition: Science, Logic,
Epistemology, and their Interaction*** , ed. by Shahid Rahman, Tony
Street & Hassan Tahiri (Logic, Epistemology, and the Unity of Science
11). New York: Springer, 2008, xiv-390 pp., ISBN 978-1-4020-8404-1.

Section I. Falsafa

Special Issue of Journal

***Medioevo. Rivista di storia della filosofia medievale*** , 32 (2007)
is dedicated to Arabo-Islamic Metaphysics and ed. by Cecilia Martini
Bonadeo, 245 pp.

***Topoi*** , 26.2 (2007) is dedicated to Contemporary Islamic
Philosophy in Iran and ed. by Hajj Muhammad Legenhausen, pp. 167-267.

***Veritas*** (Porto Allegre), 52.3 (Sept. 2007) is dedicated to Arabic
and Jewish Philosophy and the Medieval West and ed. by Luis Alberto De
Boni & Roberto Hofmeister Pich, 192 pp.

Bibliographies and Chronicles

Druart, Thérèse-Anne, “Brief Bibliographical Guide in Medieval Islamic
Philosophy and Theology (2006-2007),”
http://philosophy.cua.edu/tad/bibliography%2006-08.cfm.

**Urvoy** , Dominique, “Bulletin de philosophie arabe et
islamique,”*Revue Thomiste* , 107 (2007): 655-67.

Greek, Persian, and Syriac Sources

**Adamson** , Peter, “Platonic Pleasures in Epicurus and al-Râzî,”
in*The Age of al-Fârâbî* , pp. 71-94.

**-------** , “The Theology of Aristotle,” in*Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy* , 2008,
http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/theology-aristotle/.

**-------** , “The Arabic Socrates: The Place of al-Kindi’s Report in
the Tradition,” in*Socrates from Antiquity to the Enlightenment* , ed.
by Michael Trapp (Center for Hellenic Studies, King’s College London,
Publications 9) (Aldershot: Ashgate, 2007), pp. 161-78.

**-------** , “*Porphyrius Arabus* on Nature and Art: 463F Smith in
Context,” in*Studies in Porphyry* , ed. by George Karamanolis & Anne
Sheppard (London: Institute of Classical Studies, 2007): pp.141-63.

**-------** , “Forms of Knowledge in the Arabic Plotinus,” in*Medieval
Philosophy and the Classical Tradition* , pp. 106-25.

**Beulay (†)** , Robert, “Les dimensions philosophiques de l’expérience
spirituelle de Jean de Dalyatha (mystique syrien de l’Est au 8e
siècle),”*Parole de l’Orient* , 33 (2008): 201-07.

**Cottrell** , Emily, “Notes sur quelques-uns des témoignages médiévaux
relatifs à l’*Histoire philosophique (η φιλaσοφος ιστορaα)* de
Porphyre,” in*Islamic Thought* , pp. 523-55.

**Daiber** , Hans, “Al-Fârâbî’s Aristoteles. Grundlagen seiner
Erkenntnislehre,” in*O ye Gentlemen* , pp. 99-112.

**D’Ancona** , Cristina, “Alexander of Aphrodisias,*De unitate* : a
Pseudepigraphical Testimony of the*De unitate et uno* by Dominicus
Gundissalinus,” in*Islamic Thought* , pp. 459-88.

**Di Martino** , Carla, “La perception spirituelle. Perspectives de
recherche pour l’histoire des*Parva naturalia* dans la tradition
arabo-latine,”*A Filosofia árabe* , pp. 21-35.

**Endress** , Gerhard,*Der arabische Aristoteles und sein Leser: Physik
und Theologie im Weltbild Albert des Grossen* (Lectio Albertina 6,
Albertus-Magnus-Institut Bonn). Munster: Aschendorff, 2004, 43 pp., ISBN
3-402-04895-7.

**Fazzo** , Silvia, “Nicolas, l’auteur du*Sommaire de la philosophie
d’Aristote* . Doutes sur son identité, sa datation, son origine,”*Revue
des Études Grecques* , 121 (2008): 99-126.

**Filius** , Lou, “The*Book of Animals* by Aristotle,” in*Islamic
Thought* , pp. 267-73.

**-------** ,“The Arabic transmission of the*Historia Animalium* of
Aristotle,” in*O ye Gentlemen* , pp. 25-33.

**Giannakis** , Elias, “Anaxagoras in the Baghdad*Physics* ,” in*In the
Age of al-Fârâbî* , pp. 35-50.

**Grant** , Edward, “The Fate of Ancient Greek Natural Philosophy in the
Middle Ages: Islam and Western Christianity,”*The Review of Metaphysics*
, 61,3 (March 2008): 503-26 [poorly informed].

**Guldentops** , Guy,**Speer** , Andreas,**Trizio** , Michele,
&**Wirmer** , David, “Philosophische Kommentare im
Mittelalter,”*Algemeine Zeitschrift für Philosophie* , Erster Teil: I.
Einführung—II. Sprachkreise, 32,2 (2007): 157-77 & Zweiter Teil: III.
Platonica—IV, 1-2—Aristotelica arabica et byzantia, 32,3 (2007): 259-90
[for the third part see next section].

**Gutas** , Dimitri, “Arabic Particles and Graeco-Arabic Translations:
On the Uses of*Galex* I,” in*Islamic Thought* , pp. 557-63.

**Hasse** , Dag Nikolaus,*Urzeugung und Weltbild: Aristoteles—Ibn
Rushd—Pasteur* . Hildesheim: Georg Olms, 2006, 40 pp., ISBN
978-3-487-13306-5.

**Hugonnard-Roche** , Henri, “L’oeuvre logique de Barhebraeus,”*Parole
de l’Orient* , 33 (2008): 129-43.

**Jolivet** , Jean, “Diogène le Cynique dans la doxographie arabe,”
in*Exempla docent. Les exemples des philosophes de l’Antiquité à la
Renaissance* , ed. by Thomas Ricklin (Études de Philosophie Médiévale,
92). Paris: Vrin, 2006, pp. 61-73.

**Kukkonen** , Taneli, “Infinite Power and Plenitude: Two Traditions on
the Necessity of the Eternal,” in*Medieval Philosophy and the Classical
Tradition* , pp. 183-201 [Greek, Avicenna and Averroes].

**López-Farjeat** , Luis Xavier, “Determinism and Free Will in Alexander
of Aphrodisias and the Arabic Tradition,”*Proceedings of the American
Catholic Philosophical Association* , 81 (2007): 161-77.

***Miroir et savoir. La transmission d’un thème platonicien, des
Alexandrins à la philosophie arabo-musulmane*** , ed. by Daniel De Smet,
Meryem Sebti, & Godefroid De Gallatäy. Louvain: Universitaire Pers
Leuven, 2007, x-310 pp., ISBN 9789058676702.

**Pessin** , Sarah, “Proclean ‘Remaining’ and Avicenna on Existence as
Accident: Neoplatonic Methodology and a Defense of ‘Pre-Existing’
Essences,” in*Medieval Philosophy and the Classical Tradition* , pp.
151-68.

**Pormann** , Peter E., “Case Notes and Clinicians: Galen’s*Commentary*
on the Hippocratic*Epidemics* in the Arabic Tradition,”*Arabic Sciences
and Philosophy* , 18 (2008): 247-84 [with ed. of Arabic texts].

***Pseudo-Plato*** ,**Bauden** , Frédéric &**Ghersetti** , Antonella,
“L’art de servir son monarque: Le*Kitâb Wasâyâ Aflâtûn al-Hakîm fî
Hidmat al-Mulûk* . Edition critique et traduction,”*Arabica* , 55
(2008): 52-77.

**Puig Montada** , Josep, “Las traducciones árabes del libro*Acerca del
alma* ,”*Revista Española de Filosofía Medieval* , 14 (2007): 129-35.

**Reisman** , David C., “An obscure Neoplatonist of the Fourth/Tenth
Century and the Putative Philoponus Source,” in*In the Age of al-Fârâbî*
, pp. 239-64.

**Richter-Bernburg** , Lutz, “The Library of Alexandria in Post-Fatimid
Fiction and Reality,” in*Continuity and Change* , pp. 537-54.

**Streetman** , W. Craig, “”If it were God who sent them…”. Aristotle
and al-Fârâbî on Prophetic Vision,”*Arabic Sciences and Philosophy* , 18
(2008): 211-46.

**Thillet** , P., “Was the*Vita Plotini* known in Arab Philosophical
Circlesa,” in*Reading Ancient Texts* , Vol. II:*Aristotle and
Neoplatonism. Essays in Honour of Denis O’Brien* , ed. by Suzanne
Stern-Gillet & Kevin Corrigan (Leiden-Boston: Brill, 2007), pp. 199-210.

**Treiger** , Alexander, “The Arabic Version of Pseudo-Dionysius the
Aeropagite’s*Mystical Theology* , Chapter 1: Introduction, Critical
Edition, and Translation,”*Le Muséon* , 120 (2007): 365-93.

**Vagelpohl** , Uwe,*Aristotle’s* Rhetoric*in the East: The Syriac and
Arabic Translation and Commentary Tradition* (Islamic Philosophy,
Theology and Science. Texts and Studies 76). Leiden-Boston: Brill, 2008,
x-347 pp., ISBN 978-90-04-16681-3.

**van Oppenraay** , Aafke M.I., “Zur Überlieferung von Aristoteles*PA*
IV 9, 684b 22 aσπερ ει τις νοησειεν επ’ ευϑειας,” in*Islamic Thought* ,
pp. 403-11.

**-------** ,“Some Recent Findings in Michael Scot’s Arabic-Latin
Translation of Aristotle’s*History of Animals* ,” in*O ye Gentlemen* ,
pp. 35-38.

**Van Reeth** , Jan M. F., “Image et symbole. Le miroir dans la
tradition syriaque,” in*Miroir et savoir* , pp. 101-16.

**Wallach** , John R., “Platonic Laws, ‘Kadi-Justice’ and the Rule of
Law,” in*The Political Identity* , pp. 77-94.

**Zakeri** , Mohsen, “Before Aristotle became Aristotle:
Pseudo-Aristotelian Aphorisms in*Âdâb al-falâsifa* ,” in*Islamic
Thought* , pp. 649-96.

Latin, Hebrew, Syriac, Byzantine, and Modern Translations and Influences

**Akasoy** , Anna &**Fidora** , Alexander, “Ibn Sab’în and Raimundus
Lullus—The Question of the Arabic Sources of Lullus’ Logic Revisited,”
in*Islamic Thought* , pp. 433-58.

**Bataillon** , Luis-Jacques, “Sur Aristote et le
Mont-Saint-Michel,”*Revue des Sciences philosophiques et théologiques* ,
92 (2008): 329-334 [critical review of Gouguenheim’s book, see below].

**Burrell** , David B., “Islamic Philosophical Theology and the
West,”*Islamochristiana* , 33 (2007): 75-90.

**Cavaleiro de Macedo** , Cecilia Cintra, “Neoplatonismo e Aristotelismo
no hilemorfismo universal de Ibn Gabirol (Avicebron),” in*A Filosofia
árabe* , pp. 132-48.

**D’Ancona** , Cristina, “Alexander of Aphrodisias,*De unitate* : a
Pseudepigraphical Testimony of the*De unitate et uno* by Dominicus
Gundissalinus,” in*Islamic Thought* , pp. 459-88.

**Di Martino** , Carla, Ratio Particularis. La Doctrine des Sens
Internes d’Avicenne à Thomas d’Aquin. Contribution à l’étude de la
tradition arabo-latine de la psychologie d’Aristote (Études de
Philosophie Médiévale 94). Paris: Vrin, 2008, 187 pp., ISBN
978-2-7116-1979-5 [Avicenna, Averroes, Albert & Aquinas].

**Endress** , Gerhard,*Der arabische Aristoteles und sein Leser: Physik
und Theologie im Weltbild Albert des Grossen* (Lectio Albertina 6,
Albertus-Magnus-Institut Bonn). Munster: Aschendorff, 2004, 43 pp., ISBN
3-402-04895-7.

**Flasch** , Kurt,*D’Averroès à maître Eckhart: Les sources arabes de la
“mystique” allemande* , followed by*Pourquoi étudions-nous la
philosophie médiévalea* , transl. by Jacob Schmutz (Conférences Pierre
Abélard). Paris: Vrin, 2008, 219 pp., ISBN 978-2-7116-1941-2.

**Fontaine** , Resianne, “Averroes’ Commentary on Aristotle’s*De
Generatione Animalium* and its Use in Two Thirteenth-Century Hebrew
Encyclopedias,” in*Islamic Thought* , pp. 489-502.

**-------** , “Abraham Ibn Daud (Avendauth),” in*Stanford Encyclopedia
of Philosophy* , 2006, http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/abraham-daud/ .

**Gouguenheim** , Sylvain,*Aristote au Mont-Saint-Michel* (L’Univers
Historique). Paris: Seuil, 2008, 280 pp., ISBN 978-2-02-096541-5 [poorly
informed for the Arabic side; critique of the Latin side by
Louis-Jacques Bataillon, see above; explanation of the polemic around
this book by Rémi Brague, “Grec, arabe, européen. A propos d’une
polémique récente,”*Commentaire* (hiver 2008-2009): 1181-90].

**Guldentops** , Guy,**Speer** , Andreas,**Trizio** , Michele,
&**Wirmer** , David, “Philosophische Kommentare im Mittelalter,” Dritter
Teil: IV,3 Aristotelica latina—V Hebraica—VI Ausblick,*Algemeine
Zeitschrift für Philosophie* , 33,1 (2008); 31-57.

**Hasse** , D.N., “Influence of Arabic and Islamic Philosophy on the
Latin West,”*Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy* , 2008,
http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/arabic-islamic-influence/.

**Janssens** , Jules, “The Reception of Avicenna’s*Physics* in the Latin
Middle Ages,” in*O ye Gentlemen* , pp. 55-64.

**Kraemer** , Joel L.,*Maimonides: The Life and World of One of
Civilization’s Greatest Minds* . New Yor: Doubleday, xviii-621 pp., ISBN
978-0-385-51199-5 [much on the Islamic background]..

**Neaimi** , Sadek,*L’Islam au siècle des Lumière. Image de la
civilisation islamique chez les philosophes français du XVIIIe siècle*
(Histoire et Perspectives Méditerranéennes). Paris: L’Harmattan, 2003,
287 pp. ISBN 2-7475-4695-0.

**Pessin** , Sara, “The Influence of Islamic Thought on Maimonides,”
in*Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy* , 2005,
http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/maimonides-islamic/ .

**Pseudo-Avicenna** ,*Liber Celi et mundi* , critical ed. and intro. by
Oliver Gutman (Aristoteles Semitico-latinus 14). Leiden-Boston: Brill,
2003, xlii-281 pp., ISBN 90-04-13228-7.

**Puig Montada** , Josep, “Ramon Llull and the Islamic Culture of the
Mediterranean,” in*Islamic Thought* , pp. 503-19.

**Reynolds** , Philip, “Thomas Aquinas, Muslims, Angels, and Happiness,”
in*Frontiers in the Middle Ages* , ed. by O. Merisalo with P. Pahta
(Textes et Études du Moyen Âge 35). Louvain-la-Neuve: Fédération
Internationale des Instituts d’Études Médiévales, 2006, pp. 87-103.

**Stone** , Gregory B.,*Dante’s Pluralism and the Islamic Philosophy of
Religion* . New York: Palgrave, 2006, 326 pp., ISBN 1-4039-7130-7 [Part
I: Virgil’s Happiness (Dante, al-Farabi, Philosophy), pp. 59-171].

**Teule** , Herman G.B., “The Transmission of Islamic Culture to the
World of Syriac Christianity: Barhebraeus’ Translation of
Avicenna’s*Kitâb al-ishârât wa-l-tanbîhât* . First Soundings,”
in*Redefining Christian Identity* , pp. 167-84.

**van Oppenraay** , Aafke M.I., “Some Recent Findings in Michael Scot’s
Arabic-Latin Translation of Aristotle’s*History of Animals* ,” in*O ye
Gentlemen* , pp. 35-38.

**Zonta** , Mauro, “Influence of Arabic and Islamic Philosophy on Judaic
Throught,” in*Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy* , 2007,
http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/arabic-islamic-judaic/ .

General Studies

**Ali** , Mufti, “A Statistical Portrait of the Resistance to Logic by
Sunni Muslim Scholars. Based on the Works of al-Jalâl al-Dîn al-Suyûtî
(849-909/1448-1505),”*Islamic Law and Society* , 15 (2008): 250-67.

**Araki** , Mohsen, “Causation in Islamic Philosophy: Causality and
Freedom,” in*Mulla Sadra* , pp. 23-49.

**Azadpur** , Mohammad, “Is “Islamic” Philosophy Islamica,” in*Voices of
Islam* , vol. 5,*Voices of Change* , ed. by Omid Safi (Wesport,
Connecticut/London: Praeger, 2007, pp. 23-41.

**Bäck** , Allan, “Islamic Logica,” in*The Unity of Science* , pp.
255-79.

**Baffioni** , Carmela, “L’intelletto nel pensiero islamico: ipostasi,
intelligenza e maestro,” in*I volti della ragione. Del logos greco al
dialogo delle civiltà* , ed. by V. Melchiorre (Milan: Vita e Pensiero,
2008), pp. 149-67.

**-------** , “Cenni per une storia dell’embriologia arabo-islamica,”
in*Storia della medicine. Scienza dell’Uomo. Atti del Convegno
Internazionale* , ed. by L. Melillo (Naples: Università degli Studi di
Napoli “L’Orientale”, 2007), pp. 57-66.

**-------** , “Islam e Occidente nel nome dell’umanesimo,”*A Filosofia
árabe* , pp. 159-69.

**Ben Abdeljelil** , Jameleddine, “Die Frage der Theodizee im Islam:
Mensch Gott Gerechtigkeit,”*Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde des
Morgenlandes* , 97 (2007): 15-20.

**Bhat** , Abdur Rashid, “Free Will and Determinism: An Overview of
Muslim Scholars’ Perspective,”*Journal of Islamic Philosophy* , 2
(2006): 7-24.

**Brague** , Rémi, “La ruse divine (*talattuf* ): Quelques textes
nouveaux,” in*Adaptations and Innovations* , pp. 17-26 [Averroes,
al-Ghazâlî, Ikhwân].

**-------** ,*La loi de Dieu. Histoire philosophique d’une alliance*
(folio essais 504). Paris: Gallimard, 2005, 582 pp., ISBN
978-2-07-035790-1.

**Campanini** , Massimo,*An Introduction to Islamic Philosophy* ,
transl. by Caroline Higgitt. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press,
2008, xiv-186 pp. [English transl. of Italian text published in 2004].

**-------** ,*Introduzione alla filosofia islamica* (Biblioteca di
Cultura Moderna 1169). Roma-Bari: Editori Laterza, 2004, 180 pp, ISBN
88-420-7166-8.

**Carter** , Michael G., “More Infinity, More Lies: History, Truth and
Change in Medieval Islam,” in*Continuity and Change* , pp. 105-115.

**De Smet** , Daniel, “Miroir, savoir et émanation dans l’ismaélisme
fatimide,” in*Miroir et savoir* , pp. 173-87.

**Di Martino** , Carla, Ratio Particularis. La Doctrine des Sens
Internes d’Avicenne à Thomas d’Aquin. Contribution à l’étude de la
tradition arabo-latine de la psychologie d’Aristote (Études de
Philosophie Médiévale 94). Paris: Vrin, 2008, 187 pp., ISBN
978-2-7116-1979-5.

**Eisenstein** , Herbert, “Die arabische Tierkunde—Zoologie oder
Zoographiea,”*Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde des Morgenlandes* , 97
(2007): 147-61.

**Endress** , Gerhard, “The Way to Happiness. Platonism and
Demonstrative Science in Arabic Islamic Philosophy,” in*The Political
Identity* , pp. 27-53.

**Gouttenoire** , Marie-Andrée, “Le plus ancien traité critique sur les
grammairiens d’Abû Hâmid al-Tirmidhî (IIIe/IXe siècle). Une lecture de
la circulation de quelques exemples qui illustrent les fondements de la
tradition grammaticale arabe,”*Annales islamologiques* , 40 (2006): 1-52
[with ed. of the Arabic text].

**Griffith** , Sidney H., “From Patriarch Timothy I to Hunayn ibn Ishâq:
Philosophy and Christian Apology in Abbasid Times; Reason, Ethics and
Public Policy,” in*Christians and Muslims* , pp. 75-98.

**Günther** , S., “Praise to the Book! Al-Jâhiz and Ibn Qutayba on the
Excellence of the Written Word in Medieval Islam,”*Jerusalem Studies in
Arabic and Islam* , 32 (2006): 125-43.

**Hardy** , Paul-A., “Epistemology and Divine Discourse,” in*CC to C I
Theology* , pp. 288-307.

**Heeffer** , A., “A Conceptual Analysis of Early Arabic Algebra,”
in*The Unity of Science* , pp. 89-128.

**Hoyland** , R.G., “Polemon’s Encounter with Hippocrates and the Status
of Islamic Physiognomy,”*Jerusalem Studies in Arabic and Islam* , 32
(2006): 311-26.

**Hozien** , Muhammad, “On Defining the Field: Islamic Philosophy,
Arabic Philosophy, or Muslim Philosophya,”*Journal of Islamic
Philosophy* , 3 (2008): 7-10.

**Inglis** , John, “Introduction: Towards a Balanced Historiography of
Medieval Philosophy,” in*Medieval Philosophy and the Classical
Tradition* , pp. 1-17.

**Ivry** , Alfred, “Arabic and Islamic Psychology of Mind,” in*Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy* , 2008,
http://plato.stanford.edu/entries.arabic-islamic-mind/ .

**Jacquart** , Danielle,*L’épopée de la science arabe* (Découvertes
Gallimard, Sciences et Techniques, 479). Paris: Gallimard, 2005, 128
pp., ISBN 2-07-031827-3.

**Janssens** , Jules, “Some Classics of Islamic Philosophy and Their
Reception in the Western World,” in*Medeniyet ve Klasik* , ed. by Halit
Özkan, Nurullah Ardiç & Alim Arli (Istanbul: Klasik, 2007): 197-212.

**Kaukua** , Jari &**Kukkonen** , Taneli, “Sense-Perception and
Self-Awareness: Before and After Avicenna,” in*Consciousness: From
Perception to Reflection in the History of Philosophy* , ed. by Sara
Heinämaa, Vili Lähteenmäki, & Paulina Remes (Studies in the History of
Philosophy of Mind, 5). Dordrecht: Springer, 2007, pp. 95-119.

**López-Farjeat** , Luis Xavier, “Determinism and Free Will in Alexander
of Aphrodisias and the Arabic Tradition,”*Proceedings of the American
Catholic Philosophical Association* , 81 (2007): 161-77.

**Lory** , Pierre,*Le Rêve et ses interprétations en Islam* (Sciences
des religions). Paris: Albin Michel, 2003, 258 pp., ISBN 2-226-14232-0.

**Madelung** , Wilferd, “Ibn al-Malâhimî’s Refutation of the
Philosophers,” in*A Common Rationality* , pp. 331-36.

**Marmura** , Michael E., “Medieval Islamic Philosophy and the Classical
Tradition,” in*Medieval Philosophy and the Classical Tradition* , pp.
21-34.

**McGinnis** , Jon, “Arabic and Islamic Natural Philosophy and Natural
Science,” in*Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy* , 2006,
http://plato.stanford.edu/entries.arabic-islamic-natural/ .

**Öktem** , Ülker, “Mestcizade’s view of Philosophers and
Philosophy,”*Islamic Quarterly* , 52,1 (2008): 7-16 [Mestcizade is an
Ottoman, d. 1735].

***La Philosophie andalouse. Auteurs et oeuvres*** , ed. by Dominique
Urvoy with R. Brague, M. Cruz Hernández, A. Hilal, J. Lomba, M. Mesbahi
& J. Puig Montada. Casablanca: Fondation du Roi Abdul-Aziz Al Saoud,
2006, 192 pp., ISBN 9954-0-3581-8 [brief Arabic selections, with intro.,
plus brief entries on various Andalusian authors].

**Pormann** , P.E., “Medical Methodology and Hospital Practice: The Case
of Fourth-/Tenth Century Baghdad,” in*In the Age of al-Fârâbî* , pp.
95-118.

**Pormann** , Peter E., &**Savage-Smith** , Emilie,*Medieval Islamic
Medicine* (Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press, 2007, xiv-223
pp., ISBN 978-1-58901-160-1 hb & 978-1-58901-161-8 pb [book review by R.
Kruk,*Bibliotheca Orientalis* , 75 (2008): 262-3].

**Puig Montada** , Josep, “Corrientes del pensamiento en al-Andalús,”*A
Filosofia árabe* , pp. 55-78.

**Ramón Guerrero** , Rafael, “Hombre y muerte en el Islam. O de cómo la
muerte de Sócrates fue objeto de consideración en la civilización
árabe-musulmane,”*A Filosofia árabe* , pp. 36-46.

**Rashed** , Roshdi, “The Philosophy of Mathematics,” in*The Unity of
Science* , pp. 153-82.

**Rizvi** , Sajjad H., “Time and Creation: The Contribution of Some
Safavid Philosophies,”*Revista Portuguesa de Filosofia* , 62 (2006):
713-37.

**Sadeghi** , Ali, “Utopia, the Philosopher, and the*Pir* : A
Comparative Analysis of the Ideas of Plato and Rumi,”*Journal of Islamic
Philosophy* , 2 (2006): 133-55.

**Schöck** , Cornelia, “Name (ism), Derived Name (*ism mushtaqq* ) and
Description (*wasf* ) in Arabic Grammar, Muslim Dialectical Theology and
Arabic Logic,” in*The Unity of Science* , pp. 329-60.

**Straface** , Antonella, “An Esoteric interpretation of the*Basmala* in
the*Kitâb Shajarat al-yaqîn* ,” in*In the Age of al-Fârâbî* , pp.
151-62.

**Street** , Tony, “Arabic and Islamic Philosophy of Language and
Logic,”*The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy,* 2008,
http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/arabic-islamic-language/ .

**Tahiri** , Hassan, “The Birth of Scientific Controversies, The
Dynamics of Arabic Tradition and its Impact on the Development of
Science: Ibn al-Haytham’s Challenge of Ptolemy’s*Almagest* ,” in*The
Unity of Science* , pp. 183-228.

**Teixidor** , Javier,*Hommage à Bagdad:* *Traducteurs et lettrés de
l’époque ‘abbasside* . Paris: CNRS Éditions, 2007, 143 pp., ISBN
978-2-271-06574-2.

**Tillier** , Mathieu, “Un traité politique du IIe/VIIIe siècle.
L’épître de ‘Ubayd Allâh b. al-Hasan al-‘Anbarî au calife
al-Mahdî,”*Annales islamologiques* , 40 (2006): 139-70.

**Yasrebi** , Yahya, “A Critique of Causality in Islamic
Philosophy,”*Topoi* , 26 (2007): 255-65.

**Ziai** , Hossein, “Islamic Philosophy (*falsafa* ),” in*CC to C I
Theology* , pp. 55-76.

al-‘Âmirî

**De Smet** , Daniel, “Une classification ismaélienne des sciences.
L’apport d’Abû Ya’qûb al-Sijistânî à la tradition d’al-Kindî et ses
liens avec Abû ‘l-Hasan al-‘Âmirî,” in*Islamic Thought* , pp. 77-90.

**Wakelnig** , Elvira, “Al-‘Âmirî on Vision and the Visible. Variations
on Traditional Visual Theories,” in*Islamic Thought* , pp. 413-30.

**-------** , “Philosophical Fragments of al-‘Âmirî Preserved Mainly in
al-Tawhîdî, Miskawayh, and in the Texts of the*Siwân al-hikma*
Tradition,” in*In the Age of al-Fârâbî* , pp. 215-38.

**-------** , “Metaphysics in al-‘Âmirî. The Hierarchy of Being and the
Concept of Creation,”*Medioevo* , 32 (2007): 39-59.

Averroes

**Averroes** ,*Über den Intellekt. Auszüge aus seinen drei Kommentaren
zu Aristoteles’* De anima. Arabic, Latin & German, ed., transl., intro.
and notes by David Wirmer (Herder Bibliothek der Philosophie des
Mittelalters, 15). Freiburg: Herder, 2008, 424 pp., ISBN
978-3-451-28699-5.

**Averroès** ,*L’intelligence et la pensée. Grand commentaire sur le
livre III du* De anima*d’Aristote* , transl. and bibliography by Alain
de Libera &**Aristote** ,*De l’âme* , transl., notes and bibliography by
Richard Bodéûs, presentation by Jean-François Mattéi (Le Monde de la
Philosophie). Paris: Flammarion, 2008, xxiv-455 pp., ISBN
978-2-0812-1817-8 [for Averroes’ text the same translation as in 1998,
but minus notes and intro., not same pagination].

**Arnzen** , Rüdiger, “On the Nature and Fate of Chapter V of Ibn
Rushd’s*Epitome* of Aristotle’s*Metaphysics* ,” in*Islamic Thought* ,
pp. 43-58.

**Belo** , Catarina,*O essencial sobre Averroís* (O essencial sobre).
Lisbon: Imprensa Nacional-Casa da Moeda, 2007, 73 pp.

**Benmakhlouf** , Ali,*Le Vocabulaire d’Averroès* (Vocabulaire de…).
Paris: Ellipses, 2007, 68 pp., ISBN 978-2-7298-3322-0.

**Bertolacci** , Amos, “Avicenna and Averroes on the Proof of God’s
Existence and the Subject-Matter of Metaphysics,”*Medioevo* , 32 (2007):
61-97.

**Campanini** , Massimo,*Averroè* (Universale Paperbacks Il Mulino 528).
Bologna: Il Mulino, 2007, 160 pp., ISBN 978-88-15-11884-4.

**-------** , “Edizioni e traduzioni di Averroè tra XIV e XVI secolo,”
in*Lexiques et glossaires philosophiques de la Renaissance* , ed. by
Jacqueline Hamesse & Marta Fattori (Textes et Études du Moyen âge 23)
(Louvain-la-Neuve: Fédération Internationale des Instituts d’Études
Médiévales, 2003), pp. 21-42.

**Canova** , Barbara, “Il Dio artefice,*Sâni’* , e il primo motore di
metafisica nella dottrina teologica d’Averroè,”*Medioevo* , 32 (2007):
119-38.

**-------** , “Le rôle des sources grecques dans le*Kitâb al-kashf ‘an
manâhij al-adilla* d’Averroès,”*Annali di Ca’ Foscari* , 45,3 (2006):
41-63.

**Coccia** , Emanuele,*La trasparenza delle immagini. Averroè e
l’averroismo* , intro. by Giorgio Agamben. Milan: Bruno Mondadori, 2005,
xiv-224 pp., ISBN 88-424-9272-8.

**Conolly** , Brian Francis, “Averroes, Thomas Aquinas and Giles of Rome
on How This Man Understands,”*Vivarium* , 45 (2007): 69-92.

**de Souza Pereira** , Rosalie Helena, “Averróis e a República de
Platão,”*A Filosofia árabe* , pp. 104-116.

**Di Giovanni** , Matteo, “Individuation by Matter in Averroes’
Metaphysics,”*Documenti e Studi* , 18 (2007): 187-210.

**Di Martino** , Carla, Ratio Particularis. La Doctrine des Sens
Internes d’Avicenne à Thomas d’Aquin. Contribution à l’étude de la
tradition arabo-latine de la psychologie d’Aristote (Études de
Philosophie Médiévale 94). Paris: Vrin, 2008, 187 pp., ISBN
978-2-7116-1979-5.

**-------** “Memory and Recollection in Ibn Sînâ’s and Ibn Rushd’s
Philosophical Texts Translated into Latin in the Twelfth and Thirteenth
Centuries: A Perspective on the Doctrine of the Internal Senses in
Arabic Psychological Science,” in*Forming the Mind: Essays on the
Internal Senses and the Mind/Body Problem from Avicenna to the Medical
Enlightenment* , ed. by Henrik Lagerlund (Studies in the History of
Philosophy of Mind, 5) (Dordrecht: Springer, 2007), pp. 17-26.

**Escobar Gómez** , Santiago, “El mal necessario en Averroes,”*Anaquel
de Estudios Árabes* , 14 (2003): 105-08.

**Fontaine** , Resianne, “Averroes’ Commentary on Aristotle’s*De
Generatione Animalium* and its Use in Two Thirteenth-Century Hebrew
Encyclopedias,” in*Islamic Thought* , pp. 489-502.

**Fraenkel** , Carlos, “Philosophy and Exegesis in al-Fârâbî, Averroes,
and Maimonides,”*Laval théologique et philosophique* , 64 (2008):
105-25.

**Griffel** , Frank, “The Relationship between Averroes and al-Ghazâlî
as it presents itself in Averroes’ Early Writings, especially in his
Commentary on al-Ghazâlî’s*al-Mustasfâ* ,” in*Medieval Philosophy and
the Classical Tradition* , pp. 51-63.

**Hasse** , Dag Nikolaus,*Urzeugung und Weltbild: Aristoteles—Ibn
Rushd—Pasteur* . Hildesheim: Georg Olms, 2006, 40 pp., ISBN
978-3-487-13306-5.

**Ivry** , Alfred, “Averroes’ Understanding of the Philosopher’s Role in
Society,” in*Islamic Thought* , pp. 113-22.

**-------** , “The Ontological Entailment of Averroes’ Understanding of
Perception,”*Theories of Perception in Medieval and Early Modern
Philosophy* , ed. by Simo Knuutila & Pekka Kärkkäinen (Studies in the
History of Philosophy of Mind 6). (New York: Springer, 2008), pp. 73-86.

**-------** , “Getting to Know Thee: Conjunction and Conformity in
Averroes’ and Maimonides’ Philosophy,” in*Adaptations and Innovations* ,
pp. 143-56.

**Kogan** , Barry, “Two Gentlemen of Cordova: Averroes and Maimonides on
the Transcendence and Immanence of God,” in*Adaptations and Innovations*
, pp. 157-227.

**Kukkonen** , Taneli, “Infinite Power and Plenitude: Two Traditions on
the Necessity of the Eternal,” in*Medieval Philosophy and the Classical
Tradition* , pp. 183-201.

**Lerner** , Ralph, “The Philosopher as Legislator,” in*Adaptations and
Innovations* , pp. 269-83.

**Lértora Mendoza** , Celina A., “Averroes y Tomás de Aquino sobre el
concepto de ciencia natural,” in*A filosofia árabe* , pp. 149-58.

**Lopez Farjeat** , Luis Xavier, “La influencia de la medicina árabe en
la interpretación de Averroes al*De anima* de Aristóteles,” in*A
Filosofia árabe* , pp. 91-103.

**Al-Maliki** , Hinda,”Ibn Rushd vu par une source historique arabe: Ibn
Abî Usaybi’a,”*Bulletin d’Études Orientales* , 57 (2006-2007): 167-84.

**Wohlman** , Avital,*Contrepoint entre le sens commun et la philosophie
en Islam. Ghazali et Averroès* , transl. by Annie Laurent (Patrimoines
Islam). Paris: Cerf, 2008, 168 pp., ISBN 978-2-204-08370-6.

Avicenna

**Avicenna** ,*Libro della guarigione. Le cose divine* , transl. and
intro. by Amos Bertolacci (Classici del pensiero 53). Turin: UTET, 2007,
848 pp., ISBN 978-88-02-07912-7.

[**Avicenna** ], “Sûras 113 & 114: Commented by Ibn-Sînâ,” transl. by
Joseph Kenny,*Orita* , 35,1-2 (2003): 1-16 [includes Arabic text].

**[Avicenna]** , “A Philosophical Prayer, Risâlat fî al-du’â’,” transl
with notes by Joseph Kenny,*Orita* , 37,1 (2005): 1-10 [includes Arabic
text].

**Pseudo-Avicenna** ,*Liber Celi et mundi* , critical ed. and intro. by
Oliver Gutman (Aristoteles Semitico-latinus 14). Leiden-Boston: Brill,
2003, xlii-281 pp., ISBN 90-04-13228-7.

**Aertsen** , Jan A., “Avicenna’s Doctrine of the Primary Notions and
its Impact on Medieval Philosophy,” in*Islamic Thought* , pp. 21-42.

**Ahmed** , Asad Q., “The*Jiha/Tropos-Mâdda/Hûlê* Distinction in Arabic
Logic and its Significance for Avicenna’s Modals,” in*The Unity of
Science* , pp. 229-53.

**Alper** , Ömer Mahir, “Avicenna on the Ontological Nature of Knowledge
and its Categorical Status,”*Journal of Islamic Philosophy* , 2 (2006):
25-35.

**Aminrazavi** , Mehdi, “Avicenna’s (Ibn Sînâ) Phenomenological Analysis
of How the Soul (*Nafs* ) Knows Itself (*‘ilm al-hûdûrî* ),” in*The
Passions of the Soul* , pp. 91-98.

**Ardeshir** , Mohammad, “Ibn Sînâ’s Philosophy of Mathematics,” in*The
Unity of Science* , pp. 43-61.

**Bäck** , Allan, “Avicenna The Commentator,” in*Medieval Commentaries
on Aristotle’s* Categories, ed. by Lloyd A. Newton (Brill’s Companions
to the Christian Tradition 10) (Leiden-Boston: Brill, 2008), pp. 31-71.

**Bertolacci** , Amos, “On the Manuscripts of the*Ilâhiyyât* of
Avicenna’s*Kitâb al-shifâ* ,” in*Islamic Thought* , pp. 59-75.

**-------** , “”Necessary” as Primary Concept in Avicenna’s
Metaphysics,” in*Conoscenza e contingenza* , ed. by Stefano Perfetti
(Pisa: Edizioni ETS, 2008), pp. 31-50.

**-------** , “Avicenna and Averroes on the Proof of God’s Existence and
the Subject-Matter of Metaphysics,”*Medioevo* , 32 (2007): 61-97.

**Black** , Deborah, “Avicenna on Self-Awareness and Knowing that One
Knows,’ in*The Unity of Science* , pp. 63-87.

**Bloch** , Ernst,*Avicenne et la gauche aristotélicienne* , transl. by
Claude Maillard. Saint-Maurice: Premières Pierres, 2008, 93 pp., ISBN
978-2-913534-08-7 [original German article 1952; this translation based
on revised text 2005].

**Colish** , Marcia L., “Avicenna’s Theory of Efficient Causation and
its Influence on St. Thomas Aquinas,” in her*Studies in Scholasticism*
(Variorum). Aldershot: Ashgate, 2006, section XVI, 1-13 pp. [reprint of
1975].

**D’Ancona** , Cristina, “Degrees of Abstraction in Avicenna: How to
Combine Aristotle’s*De Anima* and the*Enneads* ,” in*Theories of
Perception in Medieval and Early Modern Philosophy* , ed. by Simo
Knuutila & Pekka Kärkkäinen (Studies in the History of Philosophy of
Mind 6). (New York: Springer, 2008), pp. 47-71.

**-------** , “*Ex uno non fit nisi unum* . Storia e preistoria della
doctrina avicenniana della prima intelligenza,” in*Per una storia del
concetto di mente* , vol. 2, ed. by Eugenio Canone (Firenze: L.S.
Olschki, 2007), pp. 29-55.

**Di Martino** , Carla, Ratio Particularis. La Doctrine des Sens
Internes d’Avicenne à Thomas d’Aquin. Contribution à l’étude de la
tradition arabo-latine de la psychologie d’Aristote (Études de
Philosophie Médiévale 94). Paris: Vrin, 2008, 187 pp., ISBN
978-2-7116-1979-5.

**-------** , “Memory and Recollection in Ibn Sînâ’s and Ibn Rushd’s
Philosophical Texts Translated into Latin in the Twelfth and Thirteenth
Centuries: A Perspective on the Doctrine of the Internal Senses in
Arabic Psychological Science,” in*Forming the Mind: Essays on the
Internal Senses and the Mind/Body Problem from Avicenna to the Medical
Enlightenment* , ed. by Henrik Lagerlund (Studies in the History of
Philosophy of Mind 5) (Dordrecht: Springer, 2007), pp. 17-26.

**El-Bizri** , Nader, “Avicenna’s*De Anima* , Between Aristotle and
Husserl,” in*The Passions of the Soul* , pp. 67-89.

**Finianos** , Ghassan,*De l’Existence à la nécessaire existence chez
Avicenne* (Histoire des Pensées). Pessace: Presses Universitaires de
Bordeaux, 2007, 251 pp., ISBN 978-2-86781-438-9.

**Germann** , Nadja, “Logik zwischen ‘Kunst’ und ‘Wissenschaft’:
Avicenna zum Status der Logik in seiner*Isagoge* ,”*Recherches de
Théologie et Philosophie médiévales* , 75 (2008): 1-32.

**Hasnawi** , Ahmad, “Avicenna on the Quantification of the Predicate
(with an Appendix on Ibn Zur’a),” in*The Unity of Science* , pp.
295-328.

**Hoover** , Jon, “Ibn Taymiyya as an Avicennan Theologian,”*Theological
Review (The Near East School of Theology)* , 27,1 (April 2006): 34-46.

**Janssens** , Jules, “Al-Ghazâlî’s*Mîzân al-‘amal* : An Ethical Summa
Based on Ibn Sînâ and al-Râghib al-Isfahânî,” in*Islamic Thought* , pp.
123-37.

-------**,** “The Reception of Avicenna’s*Physics* in the Latin Middle
Ages,” in*O ye Gentlemen* , pp. 55-64.

**-------** , “Bahmanyâr and his Revision of Ibn Sînâ’s Metaphysical
Project,”*Medioevo* , 32 (2007): 99-117.

**Javadi** , Mohsen, “Ibn Sina and the Status of Moral
Sentences,”*Topoi* , 26 (2007): 247-54.

**Kafrawi** , Shalahudin, “What Makes the Efficient Cause Efficenta The
Notion of Will in Ibn Sînâ’s Emanative Scheme,”*Proceedings of the
American Catholic Philosophical Association* , 81 (2007): 179-91.

**Kahya** , Esin, “Ibn Sina’da Kimya,” in*Belleten* , 71, 260 (2007);
19-52.

**-------** , “Ibn Sina’nin Mineroloji Çalismalarî,” in*Belleten* , 69,
254-56 (2005): 801-24.

**Kaukua** , Jari &**Kukkonen** , Taneli, “Sense-Perception and
Self-Awareness: Before and After Avicenna,” in*Consciousness: From
Perception to Reflection in the History of Philosophy* , ed. by Sara
Heinämaa, Vili Lähteenmäki, & Paulina Remes (Studies in the History of
Philosophy of Mind 5). Dordrecht: Springer, 2007, pp. 95-119.

**Khan** , Aisha, Avicenna (Ibn Sina): Muslim Physician and Philosopher
of the Eleventh Century. New York: Rosen Central, 2006, 112 pp. [a
children’s book].

**Kukkonen** , Taneli, “Infinite Power and Plenitude: Two Traditions on
the Necessity of the Eternal,” in*Medieval Philosophy and the Classical
Tradition* , pp. 183-201.

**Lizzini** , Olga, “L’*Epistola sulle divisioni delle scienze
intellettuali* di Avicenna,” in*“Ad ingenii acuitionem”. Studies in
Honour of Alfonso Maierù* , ed. by Stefano Caroti, Ruedi Imbach, Zénon
Kaluza, Giorgio Stabile & Loris Sturlese (Textes et Études du Moyen Âge
38) (Louvain-la-Neuve: Fédération Internationale des Instituts d’Études
Médiévales, 2006), pp. 221-48.

**Marmura** , Michael E., “Some Questions regarding Avicenna’s Theory of
the Temporal Origination of the Human Rational Soul,”*Arabic Sciences
and Philosophy* , 18 (2008): 121-38.

**McGinnis** , Jon, “Avicenna’s Naturalized Epistemology and Scientific
Method,” in*The Unity of Science* , pp. 129-51.

**-------** , “Logic and Science: The Role of Genus and Difference in
Avicenna’s Logic, Science and Natural Philosophy,”*Documenti e Studi* ,
18 (2007): 165-86.

**Michot** , Yahya, “Le Riz trop cuit du Kirmânî. Présentation, édition,
traduction et lexique de l’Épître d’Avicenne contestant l’accusation
d’avoir pastiché le Coran,” in a special number 83 of Archives et
Bibliothèques de Belgique: Mélanges offerts à Hossam Elkhadem par ses
amis et élèves, ed. by Frank Daelemans, Jean-Marie Duvosquel, Robert
Halleux & David Juste (Brussels: 2007): 81-129.

**-------** , “Al-Fârâbî and his Influence on the Early Avicenna: The
Evidence from the*Kitâb al-mabda’ wa’l-ma’âd* ,” in*Proceedings of the
International Al-Fârâbî Symposium, Ankara, October 7-8, 2004* , ed. by
Fehrullah Terkan & Senol Korkut. Ankara: Elis Yayinlari, 2005, pp.
327-40.

**Pessin** , Sarah, “Proclean ‘Remaining’ and Avicenna on Existence as
Accident: Neoplatonic Methodology and a Defense of ‘Pre-Existing’
Essence,” in*Medieval Philosophy and the Classical Tradition* , pp.
151-68.

**Ragep** , F. Jamil &**Ragep** , Sally P., “The Astronomical and
Cosmological Works of Ibn Sînâ: Some Preliminary Remarks,” in*Sciences,
techniques et instruments dans le monde iranien (Xe-XIXe siècle)* , ed.
by N. Pourjavady & Z. Vesel (Tehran: Presses Universitaires d’Iran &
Institut Français de Recherche en Iran, 2004), pp. 3-15.

**Rosheger** , John P., “Is God a “What”a Avicenna, William of Auvergne,
and Aquinas on the Divine Essence,” in*Medieval Philosophy and the
Classical Tradition* , pp. 277-96.

**Rufai** , Saheed Ahmad, “Al-Fârâbî and Ibn Sînâ as Islamic Educational
Thinkers: A Comparative and Contrasting Analysis,”*Islamic Quarterly* ,
52,2 (2008): 85-96.

**Sebti** , Meryem, “Réceptivité et spéculation dans la noétique
d’Avicenne,” in*Miroir et savoir* , pp. 145-71.

**Stone** , Abraham D., “Avicenna’s Theory of Primary Mixture,”*Arabic
Sciences and Philosophy* , 18 (2008): 99-119.

**Templeton** , Kirk, “Avicenna, Aquinas, and the Active
Intellect,”*Journal of Islamic Philosophy* , 3 (2008): 40-67.

**Teske** , Roland, “Some Aspects of Henry of Ghent’s Debt to Avicenna’s
Metaphysics,”*The Modern Schoolman* , 85,1 (Nov. 2007): 51-70.

**Teule** , Herman G.B., “The Transmission of Islamic Culture to the
World of Syriac Christianity: Barhebraeus’ Translation of
Avicenna’s*Kitâb al-ishârât wa-l-tanbîhât* . First Soundings,”
in*Redefining Christian Identity* , pp. 167-84.

**Thom** , Paul, “Logic and Metaphysics in Avicenna’s Modal
Syllogistic,” in*The Unity of Science* , pp. 361-76.

Baghdad Philosophers

**Adamson** , Peter, “Knowledge of Universals and Particulars in the
Baghdad School,”*Documenti e Studi* , 18 (2007): 141-64 [al-Fârâbî,
Yahyâ ibn ‘Adî, Ibn al-Tayyib].

**Giannakis** , Elias, “Anaxagoras in the Baghdad*Physics* ,” in*In the
Age of al-Fârâbî* , pp. 35-50.

**Watt** , John W., “The Strategy of the Baghdad Philosophers. The
Aristotelian Tradition as a Common Motif in Christian and Islamic
Thought,” in*Redefining Christian Identity* , pp. 151-65.

**-------** , “Christianity in the Renaissance of Islam. Abû Bishr
Mattâ, al-Fârâbî and Yahyâ Ibn ‘Adî,” in*Christians and Muslims* , pp.
99-112.

al-Baghdâdî (‘Abd al-Latîf)

**Joosse** , N. Peter, “’Unmasking the Craft’: ‘Abd al-Latîf
al-Baghdâdî’s Views on Alchemy and Alchemists,” in*Islamic Thought* ,
pp. 301-317.

**-------** , “’Pride and Prejudice, Praise and Blame.’ ‘Abd al-Latîf
al-Baghdâdî’s Views on Bad and Good Medical Practitioners,” in*O ye
Gentlemen* , pp. 129-41.

**Kruk** , Remke, “Abd al-Latîf al-Baghdâdî’s*Kitâb al-Hayawân* : A
Chimaeraa,” in*Islamic Thought* , pp. 345-62.

Bahmanyâr

**Janssens** , Jules, “Bahmanyâr and his Revision of Ibn Sînâ’s
Metaphysical Project,”*Medioevo* , 32 (2007): 99-117.

**Sebti** , Meryem, “Intellection, imagination et aperception de soi
dans le Livre du Résultat (*Kitâb al-Tahsîl* ) de Bahmanyâr Ibn
al-Marzûbân,”*Chôra* , 2-4 (2005-06): 189-210.

al-Fârâbî

**al-Fârâbî** ,*L’armonia delle opinioni dei due sapienti il divino
Platone e Aristotele* , intro., Arabic text, transl. and comments by
Cecilia Martini Bonadeo, foreword by Gerhard Endress (Greco, arabo,
latino. Le vie del sapere 3). Pisa: Plus, Pisa University Press, 2008,
xvi-270 pp., ISBN 978-88-8492-547-3.

**[al-Fârâbî** ,*Kitâb al* -Mûsîqî al-kabîr**]** **Neubauer** , Eckhard,
“Addenda et corrigenda to our facsimile editions of the writings on
music by Abû Nasr al-Fârâbî, etc…,”*Zeitschrift für Geschichte der
Arabisch-islamischen Wissenschaften* , 17 (2006-07): 373-76 [the
facsimile was published in Frankfort, 1998, Publications of the
Institute for the History of Arabic-Islamic Science, Series C, Facsimile
ed. 61].

**Al-Fârâbî** ,*De Scientiis secundum versionem Domini Gundisalvi. Über
die Wissenschaften. Die Version des Dominicus Gundissalinus* .
Latin/German, transl. & intro. by Jakob Hans Josef Schneider (Herders
Bibliothek der Philosophie des Mittelalters 9). Freiburg: Herder, 2006,
232 pp., ISBN 978-3-451-28685-8.

**Al-Fârâbî** ,*Über die Wissenschaften. De scientiis. Nach der
lateinischen Übersetzung Gerhards von Cremona* . Latin/German, ed. &
notes by Franz Schupp (Philosophische Bibliothek 568). Hamburg: Felix
Meiner, 2005, lxxxiv-365 pp., ISBN 3-7873-1718-X.

**Al-Fârâbî** ,*Philosopher à Bagdad au Xe siècle* , intro. by Ali
Benmakhlouf, transl. by Stéphane Diebler, glossary by Pauline Koetschet
(Points 578). Paris; Seuil, 2007, 242 pp., ISBN 978-2-02-048161-8
[Arabic text, minus apparatus criticus, and transl. of*Book of Religion*
, transl. of*Necessary Preliminaries to the Study of Philosophy*
,*Treatise on Proportion and Ordering* ,*The Book of Poetics* ,*Treatise
on the Rules for the Poetic Art* ,*Compendium of Plato’s Laws* ].

**Abû Nasr al-Fârâbî** ,*Obras filosóficas y políticas* , intro. and
transl. by Rafael Ramón Guerrero. Madrid: Editorial Trotta-Liberty Fund,
2008, 252 pp., ISBN 978-84-9879-002-3 [in fact exact same text but not
with the same pagination, minus the Arabic text, but plus indices and
bibliography, as in*al-Fârâbî, Obras filosóficas y políticas* , ed. R.
Ramón Guerrero. Madrid: Debate, CSIC, 1992; covers*The Political Regime,
Book of Religion* , and*Aphorisms* ].

**Black** , Deborah L., “Al-Fârâbî on Meno’s Paradox,” in*In the Age of
al-Fârâbî* , pp. 15-34.

**Butterworth** , Charles E., “Alfarabi’s Introductory Sections to*The
Virtuous City* ,” in*Adaptations and Innovations* , pp. 27-49.

**-------** , “Alfarabi’s Plato: A Tale of Two Cities,” in*The Political
Identity* , pp. 55-76.

**Chase** , Michael, “The Medieval Posterity of Simplicius’ Commentary
on the*Categories* : Thomas Aquinas and al-Fârâbî,” in*Medieval
Commentaries on Aristotle’s* Categories, ed. by Lloyd A. Newton (Brill’s
Companions to the Christian Tradition 10) (Leiden-Boston: Brill, 2008),
pp. 9-29.

**Daiber** , Hans, “Al-Fârâbî’s Aristoteles. Grundlagen seiner
Erkenntnislehre,” in*O ye Gentlemen* , pp. 99-112.

**De Smet** , Daniel, “Al-Fârâbî’s Influence on Hamîd al-Dîn
al-Kirmânî’s Theory of Intellect and Soul,” in*In the Age of al-Fârâbî*
, pp. 131-50.

**Druart** , Thérèse-Anne, “Al-Fârâbî (870-950): Une éthique universelle
fondée sur les intelligibles premiers,” in*Droit naturel: relancer
l’histoirea* , ed. by Louis-Léon Christians et alii (Droit et religion
2) (Brussels: Bruylant, 2008), pp. 215-32.

**-------** , “Al-Fârâbî, the Categories, Metaphysics, and*The Book of
Letters* ,”*Medioevo* , 32 (2007): 15-37.

**Fattal** , Michel,*Plotin face à Platon* suivi de Plotin chez Augustin
et Farâbî (Ouverture Philosophique). Paris: L’Harmattan, 2007, 135 pp.,
ISBN 978-2-296-04448-7 [ch. IV: Plotin chez Al-Farâbî. À propos du
traité de*L’Harmonie entre les opinions des deux sages, le divin Platon
et Aristote* d’Al-Farâbî, pp. 89-107 and Annexe: Al-Farâbî et la
question de l’ ‘intellect acquis”, pp. 123-34].

**Fraenkel** , Carlos, “Philosophy and Exegesis in al-Fârâbî, Averroes,
and Maimonides,”*Laval théologique et philosophique* , 64 (2008):
105-25.

**Guidi** , Angela, “L’obscurité intentionnelle du philosophe: thèmes
néoplatoniciens et farabiens chez Maïmonide,”*Revue des Études Juives* ,
166 (2007): 129-45.

**Hammond** , Robert,*The Philosophy of Alfarabi and Its Influence on
Medieval Thought* . aaa: Forgottenbooks, 2008, 92 pp., ISBN
978-1605067001 [in fact a reprint of a 1947 original, based on texts
that turned up not to have been written by al-Fârâbî and so sees much
parallels between al-Fârâbî and Aquinas].

**Heck** , Paul L., “Doubts and Religious Community (*Milla* ) in
al-Fârâbî and the Brethern of Purity,” in*In the Age of al-Fârâbî* , pp.
195-213.

**Kurmangaliyeva** , Galiya K., “The Philosophy of al-Fârâbî: Knowledge
as a Way of Spiritual Development,” in*Proceedings of the International
Al-Fârâbî Symposium, Ankara, October 7-8, 2004* , ed. by Fehrullah
Terkan & Senol Korkut. Ankara: Elis Yayinlari, 2005, pp. 129-39.

**Menn** , Stephen, “Al-Fârâbî’s*Kitâb al-Hurûf* and his Analysis of the
Senses of Being,”*Arabic Sciences and Philosophy* , 18 (2008): 59-97.

**Michot** , Yahya, “Al-Fârâbî and his Influence on the Early Avicenna:
The Evidence from the*Kitâb al-mabda’ wa’l-ma’âd* ,” in*Proceedings of
the International Al-Fârâbî Symposium, Ankara, October 7-8, 2004* , ed.
by Fehrullah Terkan & Senol Korkut. Ankara: Elis Yayinlari, 2005, pp.
327-40.

**Ramón Guerrero** , Rafael, “Apuntes biográficos de al-Fârâbî según sus
vidas árabes,”*Anaquel de Estudios Árabes* , 14 (2003): 231-38.

**Rashed** , Marwan, “Al-Fârâbî’s Lost Treatise*On Changing Beings* and
the Possibility of a Demonstration of the Eternity of the World,”*Arabic
Sciences and Philosophy* , 18 (2008): 19-58.

**Richter-Bernburg** , Lutz, “Abû Bakr al-Râzî and al-Fârâbî on Medicine
and Authority,” in*In the Age of al-Fârâbî* , pp. 119-30.

**Rudolph** , Ulrich, “Reflections on al-Fârâbî’s*Mabâdi’ ârâ’ ahl
al-madîna al-fâdila* ,” in*In the Age of al-Fârâbî* , pp. 1-14.

**-------** , “Al-Fârâbî und die Mu’tazila,” in*A Common Rationality* ,
pp. 59-80.

**Rufai** , Saheed Ahmad, “Al-Fârâbî and Ibn Sînâ as Islamic Educational
Thinkers: A Comparative and Contrasting Analysis,”*Islamic Quarterly* ,
52,2 (2008): 85-96.

**Streetman** , W. Craig, “”If it were God who sent them…”. Aristotle
and al-Fârâbî on Prophetic Vision,”*Arabic Sciences and Philosophy* , 18
(2008): 211-46.

**Thom** , Paul, “Al-Fârâbî on Indefinite and Privative Names,”*Arabic
Sciences and Philosophy* , 18 (2008): 193-209.

**Vallat** , Philippe, “Vrai philosophe et faux prophète selon Fârâbî.
Aspects historique et théoriques de l’art du symbole,” in*Miroir et
savoir* , pp. 117-43.

**Watt** , John W., “Christianity in the Renaissance of Islam. Abû Bishr
Mattâ, al-Fârâbî and Yahyâ Ibn ‘Adî,” in*Christians and Muslims* , pp.
99-112.

Ibn Abî Dunyâ

**Librande** , Léonard, “Ibn Abî Dunyâ: Certainty and Morality,”*Studia
Islamica* , nn. 100/101 (2005): 5-42.

Ibn Abî al-Rabî’

**Maróth** , Miklós, “*Sulûk al-mâlik fî tadbîr al-mamâlik* written by
Ibn abî al-Rabî’,” in*Continuity and Change* , pp. 441-49.

Ibn ‘Adî

**Druart** , Thérèse-Anne, “An Arab Christian Philosophical Defense of
Religious Celibacy against its Islamic Condemnation: Yahyâ ibn ‘Adî,”
in*Chastity: A Study in Perception, Ideals, Opposition* , ed. by Nancy
van Deusen (Presenting the Past. Central Issues in Medieval and Early
Modern Studies across the Disciplines 1). Leiden: Brill, 2008, pp.
77-85.

**Ehrig-Eggert** , Carl, “Yahyâ ibn ‘Adî on Universals and the
Intellect,” in*In the Age of al-Fârâbî* , pp. 51-61.

**Martini Bonadeo** , Cecilia, “The Arabic Aristotle in 10th Century
Baghdâd: The Case of Yahyâ ibn ‘Adî’s Commentary on Metaphysics Alpha
Ellaton,”*A Filosofia árabe* , pp. 7-20.

**Urvoy** , Dominique, “Abû Bakr al-Râzî and Yahyâ ibn ‘Adî,” in*In the
Age of al-Fârâbî* , pp. 63-70.

**Watt** , John W., “Christianity in the Renaissance of Islam. Abû Bishr
Mattâ, al-Fârâbî and Yahyâ Ibn ‘Adî,” in*Christians and Muslims* , pp.
99-112.

Ibn Bâjjah (Avempace)

**Ibn Bâjjah** ,*Kitâb al-hayawân* , ed. by Djawâd al-‘Amâratî. Beirut:
al-Markaz, 2002, 207 pp.

**Ibn Bâyya (Avempace)** ,*Libro sobre el-alma [Kitâb al-nafs]* ,
transl., intro and notes by Joaquín Lomba (Al/Andalus, Textos y
Estudios). Saragosa: Trotta, 2007, 143 pp., ISBN 978-84-8164-947-5
[includes a couple of supplementary pages found only in the Berlin
Mss.].

**Abbès** , Makram, “Gouvernement de soi et des autres chez
Avempace,”*Studia Islamica* , nn. 100/101 (2005): 113-60.

**Lomba Fuentes** , Joaquín, “La ciencia del alma en Ibn Bâyya
(Avempace),” in*A Filosofia* , pp. 79-90.

**-------** , “Algunos aspectos de la relacíon entre Maimónides e Ibn
Bâyya,”*Revista Española de Filosofía Medieval* , 11 (2006): 23-34.

**-------** , “Individuo y sociedad en la política de Ibn Bâyya e Ibn
tufayl,” in*Azahar. Revista de Actualidad Cultural* , n. 1 (2003):
10-14.

**Puig Montada** , Josep, “Ibn Bajja,” in*Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy* , 2007, http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/ibn-bajja .

Ibn Farîghûn

**Biesterfeldt** , Hans Heinrich, “Ibn Farîghûn on Communication,” in*In
the Age of al-Fârâbî* , pp. 265-76.

Ibn Khaldûn

**Karamti** , Yassine, “La magie dans la*Muqadimma* ,”*IBLA* , 70,199
(2007): 25-52 [in Arabic].

**van Berkel** , Maaike, “Ibn Khaldûn, a Critical Historian at Work.
The*Muqaddima* on Secretaries and Secretarial Writing,” in*O ye
Gentlemen* , pp. 247-61.

**van Ditmarsch** , Hans P., “Logical Fragments in Ibn
Khaldûn’s*Muqaddimah* ,” in*The Unity of Science* , pp. 281-94.

Ibn Sab’în

**Akasoy** , Anna Ayse, “Ibn Sab’în’s*Sicilian Questions* : The Text,
its Sources, and their Historical Context,”*al-Qantara* , 39 (2008):
115-46.

**Akasoy** , Anna &**Fidora** , Alexander, “Ibn Sab’în and Raimundus
Lullus—The Question of the Arabic Sources of Lullus’ Logic Revisited,”
in*Islamic Thought* , pp. 433-58.

**Cornell** , Vincent J., “The All-Comprehensive Circle (*al-Ihâta* ):
Soul, Intellect, and the Oneness of Existence in the Doctrine of Ibn
Sab’în,” in*Sufism and Theology* , pp. 31-48.

**Janssens** , Jules, “A Remarkable Thirteenth-Century Compendium of
“Aristotelian” Philosophy: Ibn Sab’în’s*Sicilian Questions* (RE: A Text
and Study by Anna Akasoy),”*Bulletin de Philosophie médiévale* , 49
(2007): 51-66.

Ibn Tufayl

**Deniz** , Gürbüz, “Hayy ibn Yaqzân and its Qur’anic
Foundations,”*Islamic Quarterly* , 52,1 (2008): 29-51.

**Kukkonen** , Taneli, “No Man is an Island: Nature and Neo-Platonic
Ethics in Hayy Ibn Yaqzân,”*Journal of the History of Philosophy* , 46
(2008): 187-204.

**Lomba Fuentes** , Joaquín, “Individuo y sociedad en la política de Ibn
Bâyya e Ibn tufayl,” in*Azahar. Revista de Actualidad Cultural* , n. 1
(2003): 10-14.

Ibn Zur’a

**Hasnawi** , Ahmad, “Avicenna on the Quantification of the Predicate
(with an Appendix on Ibn Zur’a),” in*The Unity of Science* , pp.
295-328.

Ikhwân as-Safâ’

**Baffioni** , Carmela, “The Religious Approach to Natural Sciences: The
Case of Mineralogy in the Ikhwân al-Safâ’ and in Hamîd al-Dîn
al-Kirmânî,” in*Islamic Thought* , pp. 181-94.

**-------** , “The Ikhwan al-Safa’,” in*Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy* , 2008, http://plato.stanford.edu/ikhwan-al-safa .

**-------** , “Further Elements on the Political Commitment of the
Ikhwan al-Safa’,” in*Scritti in onore dei Biancamaria Scarcia Amoretti*
, ed. by D. Bredi, L. Capezzone, W. Dahmash, & L. Rostagno (Rome:
Edizioni Q, 2008), pp. 55-66.

**-------** , “Metaphors of Light and the ‘Verse of Light’ in the
Brethren of Purity,” in*In the Age of al-Fârâbî* , pp. 163-77.

**-------** , “Formules et tableaux ismaéliens des minéraux,”
in*Continuity and Change* , pp. 25-31 [on Epistle 19].

**-------** ,*Appunti per un’epistemologia profetica. L’epistola degli
Ikhwân al-Safâ’ “Sulle cause e gli effetti* (Università degli Studi di
Napoli “L’Orientale”, Dipartimento di Studi e Ricerche su Africa e paesi
Arabi. Naples: Guida, 2005, 266 pp., ISBN 88-6042-144-6.

**de Callataÿ** , Godefroid, “Miroirs et jeux de lumière dans
l’encyclopédie des Frères de la Pureté,” in*Miroir et savoir* , pp.
189-201.

**--------** , “World Cycles and Geological Changes according to the
Brethren of Purity,” in*In the Age of al-Fârâbî* , pp. 179-93.

**Hamdani** , Abbas, “Religious Tolerance in the*Rasâ’il Ikhwân
al-Safâ’* ,” in*Adaptations and Innovations* , pp. 137-42.

**Heck** , Paul L., “Doubts and Religious Community (*Milla* ) in
al-Fârâbî and the Brethern of Purity,” in*In the Age of al-Fârâbî* , pp.
195-213.

**Lohlker** , Rüdiger, “Astrologie, die Lauteren Brüder, Männliches und
Weibliches,”*Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde des Morgenlandes* , 97
(2007): 283-88.

al-Isfizârî

**Reisman** , David C., “An obscure Neoplatonist of the Fourth/Tenth
Century and the Putative Philoponus Source,” in*In the Age of al-Fârâbî*
, pp. 239-64.

al-Jâhiz

**al-Jâhiz** ,*Le livre des animaux. De l’étonnante sagesse divine dans
sa création et autres anecdotes* , intro. and transl. by Mohamed
Mestiri, comments by Soumaya Mestiri (Bibliothèque Maktaba). Paris:
Fayard, 2003, 228 pp., ISBN 2-213-61625-6 [a selection of texts].

**Aarab** , Ahmed,**Provençal** Philippe &**Idaomar** , Mohammed, “La
méthodologie scientifique en matière zoologique de Jâhiz dans la
rédaction de son oeuvre*Kitâb al-Hayawân (Le Livre des Animaux)*
,”*Anaquel de Estudios Árabes* , 14 (2003): 5-19.

**Amoretti Scarcia** , Bianca, “Modelli autorevoli: l’*Epistola* di
al-Jâhiz (m. 869) contro i cristiani. Qualche osservazione,”*Rivista
degli Studi Orientali* , 78 (2005) [in fact 2007]: 63-75.

**Schmitt** , Jens O., “Al-Jâhiz on ‘Abbâsid Caliphs and People in
Basra,” in*Islamic Thought* , pp. 613-37 [with ed. of Arabic text].

al-Jurjânî

**al-Jurjânî** ,*Le Livre des définitions (Kitâbu al-ta’rîfât)* ,
transl., intro., and notes by Maurice Gloton & Foreword by Pierre Lory.
Beirut: Dar Albouraq, 2006, 596 pp., ISBN 2-84161-284-8.

al-Kâtibî

**Hodjati** , Seyyed Mohammad Ali, “Kâtibî on the Rlation of Opposition
of Concepts,”*History and Philosophy of Logic* , 29.3 (2008): 207-21.

al-Kindî

**Abboud** , Tony,*Al-Kindi: The Father of Arab Philosophy* . New York:
Rosen Central, 2006, 112 pp. [a children’s book].

**Adamson** , Peter, “The Arabic Socrates: The Place of al-Kindi’s
Report in the Tradition,” in*Socrates from Antiquity to the
Enlightenment* , ed. by Michael Trapp (Center for Hellenic Studies,
King’s College London, Publications, 9) (Aldershot: Ashgate, 2007), pp.
161-78.

**-------** , “Al-Kindi,” in*Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy* ,
2006, http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/al-kindi/ .

**De Smet** , Daniel, “Une classification ismaélienne des sciences.
L’apport d’Abû Ya’qûb al-Sijistânî à la tradition d’al-Kindî et ses
liens avec Abû ‘l-Hasan al-‘Âmirî,” in*Islamic Thought* , pp. 77-90.

**Janssens** , Jules, “Al-Kindî: The Founder of Philosophical Exegesis
of the Qur’an,”*Journal of Qur’anic Studies* , 9,2 (2007): 1-21.

al-Kirmânî

**Baffioni** , Carmela, “The Religious Approach to Natural Sciences: The
Case of Mineralogy in the Ikhwân al-Safâ’ and in Hamîd al-Dîn
al-Kirmânî,” in*Islamic Thought* , pp. 181-94.

**De Smet** , Daniel, “Al-Fârâbî’s Influence on Hamîd al-Dîn
al-Kirmânî’s Theory of Intellect and Soul,” in*In the Age of al-Fârâbî*
, pp. 131-50.

al-Maqrîzî

**Canova** , Giovanni, “Al-Maqrîsî’s Treatise on Bees,” in*O ye
Gentlemen* , pp. 15-23 [includes translation of ch. 2].

Mullâ Sadrâ

**A’Awani** , Gholam Reza, “Intentionality in Husserl and Mullâ Sadrâ,”
in*The Passions of the Soul* , pp. 101-112.

**Açikgenç** , Alparslan, “The Evolutionary Causal Process. A Textual
Analysis of Sadra’s Physics in the*Asfâr* , the Sixth Art., Ch. 18,”
in*Mulla Sadra* , pp. 249-70.

**Aminrazavi** , Mehdi, “Mullâ Sadrâ’s Divine Occasionalism and David
Hume’s Critique of Causality,”*Journal of Islamic Philosophy* , 3
(2008): 11-21.

**-------** ,“Mulla Sadra and David Hume on Causality and
Occasionalism,” in*Mulla* Sadra, pp. 183-94.

**Arnzen** , Rüdiger, “The Structure of Mullâ Sadrâ’s*al-Hikma
al-muta’âliya fî l-asfâr al-‘aqliyya al-arba’a* and his Concepts of
First Philosophy and Divine Science. An Essay,”*Medioevo* , 32 (2007):
199-239.

**Bonmariage** , Cécile,*Le Réel et les réalités. Mullâ Sadrâ Shîrâzî et
la structure de la réalité* (Éudes Musulmanes 61). Paris: Vrin, 2007,
352 pp., ISBN 978-2-7116-1904-7.

**-------** , “Acts of Men, Acts of God,” in*Mulla Sadra* , pp. 295-307.

**Dagli** , Caner K., “Consciousness and Causation in Mulla Sadra,”
in*Mulla Sadra* , pp. 229-45.

**Eichner** , Heidrun, “Dissolving the Unity of Metaphysics: From Fakhr
al-Dîn al-Râzî to Mullâ Sadrâ al-Shirâzî,”*Medioevo* , 32 (2007):
139-97.

**El-Bizri** , Nader, “Causality and the Question of Being,” in*Mulla
Sadra* , pp. 125-40.

**Eschraghi** , Armin, “’I was a Hidden Treasure’. Some Notes on a
Commentary Ascribed to Mullâ Sadrâ al-Shîrâzî:*Sharh hadîth: ‘Kuntu
kanzan makhfiyyan* ,” in*Islamic Thought* , pp. 91-99.

**Eshots** , Janis, “The Gnostic Element of Sadra’s Doctrine of
Causation,” in*Mulla Sadra* , pp. 73-89.

**Hussain** , Ali, “Causation: A Priori or A Posteriori after Inductiona
From Mulla Sadra to M.B. as-Sadr,” in*Mulla Sadra* , pp. 63-72.

**Jambet** , Christian,*Mort et résurrection en Islam. L’au-delà selon
Mullâ Sadrâ* . Paris: Albin Michel, 2008, 308 pp., ISBN
978-2-226-18270-8.

**Kalin** , Ibrahim, “Why Do Animals Eat Other Animalsa Mullâ Sadra on
Theodicy and the Best Possible Worlds,”*Journal of Islamic Philosophy* ,
2 (2006): 157-82.

**Kennedy-Day** , Kiki, “Suffering in the Afterlife: Its Causes
according to Mulla Sadra,” in*Mulla Sadra* , pp. 215-28.

**Khamenei** , Sayyid Muhammad, “Phenomenology of Soul in Mullâ Sadrâ’s
School,” in*The Passions of the Soul* , pp. 17-29.

**Khatami** , Mahmoud, “Can the Sadrean Notion of Mental Causation
Remedy the Perplexity of the Contemporary Philosophy of Mind on Mental
Causationa,” in*Mulla Sadra* , pp. 197-214.

**Leaman** , Oliver, “Mulla Sadra, Substantial Motion and the Scope of
Mysticism,” in*Mulla Sadra* , pp. 50-62.

***Mulla*** ***Sadra & Comparative Philosophy of Causation*** , ed. by
Seyed G. Safavi. London: Institute of Islamic Studies, affiliated to
Islamic Center of England, London Academy of Iranian Studies, 2003, 318
pp., ISBN 964-93465-6-2.

**Peerwani** , Latimah-Parvin, “Mulla Sadra and the Theory of Causal
Efficacy,” in*Mulla Sadra* , pp. 141-57.

**Rizvi** , Sajjad H., “’Au-delà du miroir’ or Beyond Discourse and
Intuition: Pedagogy and Epistemology in the Philosophy of Mullâ Sadrâ
Shîrâzî [ca. 1571-1635],” in*Miroir et savoir* , pp. 251-71.

**-------** , “Rethinking Causation in the World-process: A Sadrian
Approach, in*Mulla Sadra* , pp. 271-91.

**Rustom** , Mohammed, “Mullâ Sadrâ’s Prolegomenon to the*Mafâtih
al-ghayb* ,”*Journal of Qur’anic Studies* , 9,1 (2007): 128-34.

**Safavi** , Seyed G., “Mulla Sadra on Causation,” in*Mulla Sadra* , pp.
9-19.

**Veliji** , Galip, “Sadra’s Conception of God as the Cause of the World
from a Contemporary Epistemological Perspective,” in*Mulla Sadra* , pp.
308-18.

**Wolf-Gazo** , Ernest, “Sadra and Whitehead: Causality as
Presentational Immediacy,” in*Mulla Sadra* , pp. 161-75.

**Ziai** , Hossein, “Causality in Mulla Sadra’s Philosophical
Text*Al-Ta’liqât ‘alâ Sharh Hikmat al-Ishrâq* ,” in*Mulla Sadra* , pp.
93-106.

**-------** , Selections on the Topic “Causality,” in*Mulla Sadra* , pp.
107-24 [Arabic text].

Râghib al-Isfahâni

**Janssens** , Jules, “Al-Ghazâlî’s*Mîzân al-‘amal* : An Ethical Summa
Based on Ibn Sînâ and al-Râghib al-Isfahânî,” in*Islamic Thought* , pp.
123-37.

al-Râzî

**Adamson** , Peter, “Platonic Pleasures in Epicurus and al-Râzî,” in*In
the Age of al-Fârâbî* , pp. 71-94.

**Alexandrin** , Elizabeth R., “Râzî and his Mediaeval Opponents:
Discussions concerning tanâsukh and the Afterlife,” in Iran, questions
et connaisances. Actes du IVe Congrès Européen des Études Iraniennes,
Paris, 6-10 septembre 1999. Vol. II: Périodes médiévale et moderne, ed.
by Maria Szuppe (Studia Iranica, Cahiers 26) (Paris: Association pour
l’Avancement des Études Iraniennes, 2002), pp. 397-409.

**Pormann** , Peter E., “Al-Râzî 9d. 925) on the Benefits of Sex. A
Clinician Caught between Philosophy and Medicine,” in*O ye Gentlemen* ,
pp. 115-27.

**Richter-Bernburg** , Lutz, “Abû Bakr al-Râzî and al-Fârâbî on Medicine
and Authority,” in*In the Age of al-Fârâbî* , pp. 119-30.

**Urvoy** , Dominique, “Abû Bakr al-Râzî and Yahyâ ibn ‘Adî,” in*In the
Age of al-Fârâbî* , pp. 63-70.

al-Shîrâzî

**Lameer** , J.,*Conception and Belief in Sadr al-Dîn Shîrâzî (ca
1571-1635). Al-risâla fî l-tasawwur wa-l-tasdîq* , intro., transl. and
commentary. Tehran: Iranian Institute of Philosophy, 2006. ISBN
964-8036-28-4 [bookreview by J. Janssens,*Bibliotheca Orientalis* , 65
(2008): 258-62].

al-Sijistânî

**De Smet** , Daniel, “Une classification ismaélienne des sciences.
L’apport d’Abû Ya’qûb al-Sijistânî à la tradition d’al-Kindî et ses
liens avec Abû ‘l-Hasan al-‘Âmirî,” in*Islamic Thought* , pp. 77-90.

al-Suhrawardî

**Landolt** , Hermann, “Les idées platoniciennes et le monde de l’image
dans la pensée du Shaykh al-Ishrâq Yahyâ al-Suhrawardî (ca. 1155-1191),”
in*Miroir et savoir* , pp. 233-50.

**Marcotte** , Roxanne, “Suhrawardi,” in*Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy* , 2007, http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/suhrawardi/ .

**Street** , Tony, “Suhrawardî on Modal Syllogisms,” in*Islamic Thought*
, pp. 163-78.

al-Tâlishî

**Takahashi** , Hidemi, “A Treatise on Meteorology by Muhammad ibn Mûsâ
al-Tâlishî (ms. Daiber Collection ii, 82),” in*Islamic Thought* , pp.
363-401 [includes ed. of Arabic text].

al-Tawhîdî

**Key** , Alexander, “The Applicability of the Term “Humanism” to Abû
Hayyân al-Tawhîdî,”*Studia Islamica* , nn. 100/101 (2005): 71-112.

**Reymond** , Pierre-Louis, “L’intellectuel, le langage et le pouvoir,
ou l’humanisme d’Abû Hayyân al-Tawhîdî: lecture d’une*Nuit* du*Kitâb
al-Imta’ wa-l-Mu’ânasa* ,”*Bulletin d’Études Orientales* , 57
(2006-2007): 75-106.

al-Tirmidhî

**Al-Hakim al-Tirmidhî** ,*Le livre des nuances ou de l’impossibilité de
la synonymie. Kitâb al-furûq wa man’ al-tarâduf* , transl. with notes
and foreword by Geneviève Gobillot. Paris: Geuthner, 2006, pp. 570, ISBN
2-7053-3769-5.

Modern and Current Scholars

[**Daiber** , Hans], “A Bibliography,” in*Islamic Thought* , pp.
xi-xxiv.

[**Kruk** , Remke], “Publications, 1976-2006,” in*O ye Gentlemen* , pp.
xiii-xvii.

**Puig Montada** , Josep, “Al-Afghânî, a Case of Religious
Unbelief,”*Studia Islamica* , nn. 100/101 (2005): 203-20 [on
al-Afghani’s criticism of Renan].

Section II. Kalâm

General Studies

**Abd-Allah** , Umar F., “Theological Dimensions of Islamic Law,” in*CC
to C I Theology* , pp. 237-57.

**Abdel Haleem** , M.A.S., “Qur’an and Hadith,” in*CC to C I Theology* ,
pp. 19-32.

**Abdessamad** , Belhaj, “Les fondements théologiques de la rhétorique
arabe entre Mu’tazilites et Ach’arites,”*Acta Orientalia* , 60,2 (2007):
223-33.

**Abrahamov** , B., “Some Notes on the Notion of*Naskh* in the*Kalâm*
,”*Islamic Thought* , pp. 3-19.

**-------** , “The Attitude of Ja’far al-Sâdiq and ‘Alî al-Ridâ
toward*kalâm* and rational reasoning,”*Jerusalem Studies in Arabic and
Islam* , 31 (2006): 196-208.

**Abû Zayd** , Nasr Hâmid, “La lecture théologique chrétienne du Coran
et son influence sur la naissance de la théologie
musulamne,”*Islamochristiana* , 33 (2007): 1-30 [in Arabic].

**Adang** , Camilla, “A Rare Case of Biblical “Testimonies” to the
Prophet Muhammad in Mu’tazilî Literature: Quotations from Ibn Rabban
al-Tabarî’s*Kitâb al-Dîn wa-l-Dawla* in Abû l-Husayn al-Basrî’s*Ghurar
al-adilla* , as preserved in a work by al-Himmasî al-Râzî,” in*A Common
Rationality* , pp. 297-330 [with Arabic text].

**Ali** , Mufti, “An Unnoticed Treatise against Kalâm—Translation of
al-Khattabi’s (d. 388/988)*al-Ghunyah ‘an al-Kalâm* ,”*Hamdard
Islamicus* , 31,1 (2008): 33-40.

**Amir-Moezzi** , Mohammad Ali,*La religion discrète. Croyances et
pratiques spirituelles dans l’Islam shi’ite* (Textes et Traditions 12).
Paris: Vrin, 2006, 416 pp.

**Amoretti Scarcia** , Bianca, “Modelli autorevoli: l’*Epistola* di
al-Jâhiz (m. 869) contro i cristiani. Qualche osservazione,”*Rivista
degli Studi Orientali* , 78 (2005) [in fact 2007]: 63-75.

**Aydinli** , Usman, “Emergence of the*Qadarî* Notion in Islamic
Thought—Ma’bad al-Juhanî, Ghaylân al-Dimashqî and the Others,”*Hamdard
Islamicus* , 31,2 (2008): 41-55.

**Belo** , Catarina, “Mu’tazilites, al-Ash’arî and Maimonides on Divine
Attributes,” in*A Filosofia árabe* , pp. 117-31.

**Blankinship** , Khalid, “The Early Creed,” in*CC to C I Theology* ,
pp. 33-54.

**Burrell** , David B., “Creation,” in*CC to C I Theology* , pp. 141-60.

**-------** , “Islamic Philosophical Theology and the
West,”*Islamochristiana* , 33 (2007); 75-90.

***The Cambridge Companion to Classical Islamic Theology*** , ed. by Tim
Winter. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2008, xii-337 pp., ISBN
978-0-521-78058-2.

**Chittick** , William C., “Worship,” in*CC to C I Theology* , pp.
218-36.

***Christians and Muslims in Dialogue in the Islamic Orient of the
Middle Ages. Christlich-muslimische Gespräche im Mittelalter*** , ed. by
Martin Tamcke (Beiruter Texte und Studien 117). Beirut: Orient Institut;
Würzburg: Ergon Verlag in Komission, 2007, 210 pp., ISBN 9783899136111.

**Daftary** , Farhad, “Cyclical Time and Sacred History in Medieval
Ismaili Thought,” in*Continuity and Change* , pp. 151-58.

**De Smet** , Daniel, “Scarabées, Scorpions, Cloportes et Corps
Camphrés. Métamorphose, Réincarnation et Génération Spontanée dans
l’Hétérodoxie Chiite,” in*O ye Gentlemen* , pp. 39-54.

**El-Bizri** , Nader, “God: Essence and Attributes,” in*CC to C I
Theology* , pp. 121-40.

**El Shamsy** , Ahmed, “The Social Construction of Orthodoxy,” in*CC to
C I Theology* , pp. 97-117.

**Frank** , Ricahrd M., Classical Islamic Theology: The Ash’arites.

**-------** , “Hearing and saying what was said,” in*Classical Islamic
Theology* , I (pp. 1-14, 1996).

**-------** , “The science of Kalâm,” in*Classical Islamic Theology* ,
II (pp.7-37, 1992).

**-------** , “Moral obligation in classical Muslim theology,”
in*Classical Islamic Theology* , III (pp. 204-23, 1983).

**-------** , “Can God do what is wronga,” in*Classical Islamic
Theology* , IV (pp. 69-79, 1985).

**-------** , “Attribute, attribution, and being: three Islamic views,”
in*Classical Islamic Theology* , V (pp. 258-78, 1982).

**-------** , “Two Islamic views of human agency,” in*Classical Islamic
Theology* , VI (pp. 37-49, 1983.

**-------** , “Knowledge and*taqlîd* : the foundation of religious
belief in classical Ash’arism,” in*Classical Islamic Theology* , VII
(pp. 37-62, 1989).

**-------** , “The non-existent and the possible in classical Ash’arite
teaching,” in*Classical Islamic Theology* , VIII (pp. 1-37, 2000).

**-------** , “The Ash’arite ontology. I: primary entities,”
in*Classical Islamic Theology* , IX (pp. 163-231, 1999).

**-------** , “Bodies and atoms: the Ash’arite analysis,” in*Classical
Islamic Theology* , X (pp. 39-53 & 287-93, 1984).

**-------** , “*Al-Ahkâm* in classical Ash’arite teaching,” in*Classical
Islamic Theology* , XI (pp. 753-77, 2004).

**Ghaneabassiri** , Kambiz, “The Epistemological Foundation of
Conceptions of Justice in Classical*Kalâm* : A Study of ‘Abd
al-Jabbâr’s*al-Mughnî* and Ibn al-Bâqillânî’s*al-Tamhîd* ,”*Journal of
Islamic Studies* , 19 (2008): 71-96].

**Griffith** , Sideny H., “Answering the Call of the Minaret: Christian
Apologetics in the World of Islam,” in*Redefining Christian Identity* ,
pp. 91-126.

**-------** , “From Patriarch Timothy I to Hunayn ibn Ishâq: Philosophy
and Christian Apology in Abbasid Times; Reason, Ethics and Public
Policy,” in*Christians and Muslims* , pp. 75-98.

**Halevi** , Leor, “Christian Impurity versus Economic Necessity; A
Fifteenth-Century Fatwa on European Paper,”*Speculum* , 83 (2008):
917-45.

**Hardy** , Paul-A., “Epistemology and Divine Discourse,” in*CC to C I
Theology* , pp. 288-307.

**Hermansen** , Marcia, “Eschatology,” in*CC to C I Theology* , pp.
308-324.

**Leaman** , Oliver (Part I) &**Rizvi** , Sajjad (Part II), “The
Developed*Kalâm* Tradition,” in*CC to C I Theology* , pp. 77-96.

**Mayer** , “Theology and Sufism,” in*CC to C I Theology* , pp. 258-87.

**Michot** , Yahya, “Revelation,” in*CC to C I Theology* , pp. 180-96.

**Rashed** , Marwan, “New Evidence on the Critique of the Qur’anic
Miracle at the End of the Third/Ninth Century: Qustâ ibn Lûqâ vs. the
Banû al-Munajjim,” in*In the Age of al-Fârâbî* , pp. 277-93.

**Rudolph** , Ulrich, “Al-Fârâbî und die Mu’tazila,” in*A Common
Rationality* , pp. 59-80.

**Schmidtke** , Sabine &**Adang** , Camilla, “Ahmad Mustafâ
Tâshkubrîzâde’s (d. 968/1561) Polemical Tract against
Judaism,”*al-Qantara* , 29 (2008): 79-113.

**Schöck** , Cornelia, “Name (ism), Derived Name (*ism mushtaqq* ) and
Description (*wasf* ) in Arabic Grammar, Muslim Dialectical Theology and
Arabic Logic,” in*The Unity of Science* , pp. 329-60.

**Shihadeh** , Ayman, “The Existence of God,” in*CC to C I Theology* ,
pp. 197-217.

**Skalmowski** , Wojciech, “Remarks on Arabic*zindîq* , ‘Heretic’,”
in*Continuity and Change* , pp. 583-87.

**Sklare** , David, “Levi ben Yefet and his*Kitâb al-Ni’ma* ,” in*A
Common Rationality* , pp. 157-216 [with Arabic edition].

**Stelzer** , Steffen A.J., “Ethics,” in*CC to C I Theology* , pp.
161-79.

**Thomas** , David,*Christian Doctrines in Islamic Theology* (History of
Christian-Muslim Relations 10). Leiden-Boston: Brill, 2008, viii-392
pp., ISBN 978-90-04-16935-7 [includes Arabic texts and translations of
al-Nâshi’, al-Mâturîdî, al-Bâqillânî, and Abd’ al-Jabbâr].

**-------** , “Explanations of the Incarnation in Early ‘Abbasid Islam,”
in*Redefining Christian Identity* , pp. 127-49.

**Vasalou** , Sophia,*Moral Agents and their Deserts: The Character of
Mu’tazilite Ethics* . Princeton-Oxford: Princeton University Press,
2008, xvi-252 pp., ISBN 978-0-691-13145-0 [includes translation of
Mânkdîm Shishdev’s text on*The Promise and the Threat* from*Sharh
al-usûl al-khamsa* ].

**Wisnovsky** , Robert, “One Aspect of the Akbarian Turn in Shî’î
Theology,” in*Sufism and Theology* , pp. 49-62.

‘Abd al-Jabbâr

**Daiber** , Hans, “*Maqâla fî l-radd ‘alâ l-Mujbira* (MS Najaf)
attributed to ‘Abd al-Jabbâr al-Hamadhânî,” in*A Common Rationality* ,
pp. 101-25 [with Arabic edition].

**Frank** , Richard M., “The autonomy of the human agent in the teaching
of ‘Abd al-Jabbâr,” in*Classical Islamic Theology* , XIII (pp. 323-55,
1982).

**Heemskerk** , Margaretha T., “’Abd al-Jabbâr al-Hamadhânî on Body,
Soul and Resurrection,” in*A Common Rationality* , pp. 127-56.

Abu ‘l-Husayn al-Basrî

**Abu l-Husayn al-Basrî** ,*Tasaffuh al-adilla. The Extant Parts* , ed.
and intro. by Wilferd Madelung and Sabine Schmidtke (Abhandlungen für
die Kunde des Morgenlandes, LVII, 4). Wiesbaden; Harrassowitz, 2006,
xxiv-145 pp., ISBN 13: 978-3447053921.

**Adang** , Camilla, “A Rare Case of Biblical “Testimonies” to the
Prophet Muhammad in Mu’tazilî Literature: Quotations from Ibn Rabban
al-Tabarî’s*Kitâb al-Dîn wa-l-Dawla* in Abu l-Husayn al-Basrî’s*Ghurar
al-adilla* , as preserved un a work by al-Himmasî al-Râzî,” in*A Common
Rationality* , pp. 297-330 [with Arabic text].

**Hildebrandt** , Thomas, “Between Mu’tazilism and Mysticism. How much
of a Mu’tazilite is Nasr Hâmid Abû Zayda,” in*A Common Rationality* ,
pp. 495-512.

**Madelung** , Wilferd &**Schmidtke** , Sabine, “Yûsuf al-Basîr’s First
Refutation (*Naqd* ) of Abu l-Husayn al-Basrî’s Theology,” in*A Common
Rationality* , pp. 229-96 [with Arabic edition].

**--------** &**-------** , Rational Theology in Interfaith
Communication. Abu l-Husayn al-Basrî’s Mu’tazilî Theology among the
Karaites in the Fâtimid Age (Jerusalem Studies in Religion and Culture
5). Leiden: Brill, 2006, x-144 pp., ISBN 978-9004151772.

**Pomerantz** , Maurice A., “Mu’tazilî Theory in Practice: The
Repentance (*tawba* ) of Government Officials in the 4th/10th Century,”
in*A Common Rationality* , pp. 463-93.

**Schmidtke** , Sabine, “Mu’tazilî Manuscripts in the Abraham Firkovitch
Collection, St. Petersbourg. A Descriptive Catalogue,” in*A Common
Rationality* , pp. 377-462 [with Arabic text].

**-------** , “The Karaites’ Encounter with the Thought of Abû l-Husayn
al-Basrî (D. 436/1044). A Survey of the Relevant Materials in the
Firkovitch-Collection, St. Petersburg,”*Arabica* , 53 (2006): 108-42
[with Arabic text].

**Wedel** , Gerhard, “Mu’tazilitische Tendenzen im*Kitâb at-Tabbâh* des
Samaritaners Abû l-Hasan as-Sûrî,” in*A Common* Rationality, pp. 349-77.

Abû Ishâk

**Frank** , Richard M., “Al-Ustâdh Abû Ishâk: An*‘Akîda* together with
selected fragments,” XIV (pp. 129-202, 1989) [with edition of the Arabic
text].

Al-Biqâ’î

**Saleh** , Walid A., “A Fifteenth-Century Muslim Hebraist: Al-Biqâ’î
and His Defense of Using the Bible to Intepret the Qur’ân,”*Speculum* ,
83 (2008): 629-54.

al-Ghazâlî

**Al-Allaf** , Mashhad, “Al-Ghazâlî on Logical Necessity, Causality, and
Miracles,”*Journal of Islamic Philosophy* , 2 (2006): 37-52.

**Aoyagi** , Kaoru, “Al-Ghazâlî and Marriage from the Viewpoint of
Sufism,”*Orient* (Japan), 40 (2005): 124-39.

**Azadpur** , Mohammad, “Unveiling the Hidden. On the Meditations of
Descartes and Ghazzali,” in*The Passions of the Soul* , pp. 219-40.

**Crone** , Patricia, “Did al-Ghazâlî Write a Mirror for Princesa On the
Authorship of*Nasîhat al-mulûk* ,” in her*From Kavâd to al-Ghazâlî:
Religion, Law and Political Thought in the Near East, c. 600-c. 1100*
(Variorum) (Aldershot: Ashgate, 2004), section XII, 167-92 pp. [reprint
of 1987].

**Dougherty** , M.V., “Ghazâlî and Metaphorical Predication in the Third
Discussion of the*Tahâfut al-Falâsifa* ,”*American Catholic
Philosophical Quarterly* , 82 (2008): 391-409.

**Griffel** , Frank, “Al-Ghazâlî or al-Ghazzâlîa On a Lively Debate
among Ayyûbid and Mamlûk Historians in Damascus,” in*Islamic Thought* ,
pp. 101-112.

**-------** , “Al-Ghazali,” in*Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy* ,
2007, http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/al-ghazali/ .

**-------** , “The Relationship between Averroes and al-Ghazâlî: as it
Presents itself in Averroes’ Early Writings, especially in his
Commentary on al-Ghazâlî’s*al-Mustasfâ* ,” in*Medieval Philosophy and
the Classical Tradition* , pp. 51-63.

**Halevi** , Leor, “The Theologian’s Doubts: Natural Philosophy and the
Skeptical Games of al-Ghazâlî,”*Journal of the History of Ideas* , 63
(2002): 19-39.

**Janssens** , Jules, “L’âme-miroir: al-Ghazâlî entre philosophie et
mysticisme,” in*Miroir et savoir* , pp. 203-17.

**-------** , “Al-Ghazâlî’s*Mîzân al-‘amal* : An Ethical Summa Based on
Ibn Sînâ and al-Râghib al-Isfahânî,” in*Islamic Thought* , pp. 123-37.

**Kebe** , Ndiouga**,** “Al-Ghazâlî et la problématique du rapport entre
les notions de *‘aql* , de*nafs* , de*rûh* et de*qalb* ,”*Annales
Islamologiques* , 40 (2006): 1-52.

**Kogan** , Barry S., “Al-Ghazali and Halevi on Philosophy and the
Philosophers,” in*Medieval Philosophy and the Classical Tradition* , pp.
64-80.

**Leites** , Adrien, “Amour de Dieu et désir de la mort. Le martyre
selon Ghazzâlî,”*Arabica* , 55 (2008): 35-51.

**Mat Akhir** , Noor Shakirah, “Al-Ghazâlî on Spiritual Disease: The
X-factors of the Decline of Civilisation,”*Islamic Quarterly* , 52,1
(2008): 17-28.

**Moad** , Omar Edward, “A Significant Difference Between al-Ghazâlî and
Hume on Causation,”*Journal of Islamic Philosophy* , 3 (2008): 22-39.

**-------** , “Al-Ghazali’s Occasionalism and the Nature of
Creatures,”*International Journal for Philosophy and Religion* , 58
(2005): 95-101.

**Nagel** , Tilman, “Der Textbezüglichkeit entrinnena Al-Ghazâlî’s
Erneuerung der Lehre vom*tauhîd* ,”*Der Islam* , 83 (2008): 417-51.

**Ormsby** , Eric,*Ghazali: The Revival of Islam* (Makers of the Muslim
World). Oxford: Oneworld, 2007, xvi-158 pp., ISBN 978-1-85168-414-4.

**Porcasi** , Germana, “On the Islamic Judicial Logic in
al-Ghazâlî’s*‘Asâs al-qiyâs* ,”*Journal of Islamic Philosophy* , 3
(2008): 68-111.

**Reynolds** , Gabriel Said, “A Philosophical Odyssey: Ghazzâlî’s
Intentions of the Philosophers,” in Medieval Philosophy and the
Classical Tradition, pp. 37-50.

**Treiger** , Alexander, “Monism and Monotheism in al-Ghazâlî’s*Mishkât
al-anwâr* ,”*Journal of Qur’anic Studies* , 9,1 (2007): 1-27.

**Whittingham** , Martin,*Al-Ghazâlî and the Qurân: One Book, Many
Meanings* . London/New York: Routledge, 2007, xiv-154 pp., ISBN
978-0-415-37543-6.

**Wohlman** , Avital,*Contrepoint entre le sens commun et la philosophie
en Islam. Ghazali et Averroès* , transl. by Annie Laurent (Patrimoines
Islam). Paris: Cerf, 2008, 168 pp., ISBN 978-2-204-08370-6.

Ibn Hanbal

**Picken** , Gavin, “Ibn Hanbal and al-Muhâsibî: A Study of Early
Conflicting Scholarly Methodologies,”*Arabica* , 55 (2008): 337-61.

Ibn Hazm

**Ibn Hazm** ,*Promenade amoureuse. Le Collier de la Colombe* , transl.
by Léon Bercher, intro. by Hamdane Hadjadji, and new reading by Moufdi
Bachari. Paris: Bachari, 2008, 125 pp., ISBN 978-2-913678-51-4.

**Sabra** , Adam, “Ibn Hazm’s Literalism: A Critique of Islamic Legal
Theory,”*al-Qantara* , 28, 1 & 2 (2007): 7-40 & 307-48 [with translation
of*The Sufficient Tract on the Rules [Derived from] the Sources of
Religion (II)* ].

**Lázaro Pulido** , Manuel, “Acerca de Ibn Hazm y Duns Escoto ¿Pensar en
Dios más allá de la racionalidad o pensar de otra forma la racionalidad
sobre Diosa,”*Verdad y Vida* , 66, 251-52 (2008): 177-207.

Ibn al-Khallâl al-Basrî

**Mourad** , Suleiman A., “Ibn al-Khallâl al-Basrî and His Oeuvre on the
Problematic Verses of the Qur’ân*Kitâb al-Radd ‘alâ al-jabriyya
al-qadariyya* (Refutation of the Predestinarian Compulsionists),” in*A
Common Rationality* , pp. 81-99.

Ibn al-Malâhimî

**Madelung** . Wilferd, “Ibn al-Malâhimî’s Refutation fo the
Philosophers,” in*A Common Rationality* , pp. 331-36.

Ibn Mattawayh

**Schmidtke** , Sabine, “Ms. Mahdawi 514. An Anonymous Commentary of Ibn
Mattawayh’s*Kitâb al-tadhkira* ,” in*Islamic Thought* , pp. 139-62 [with
edition of the Arabic text].

Ibn al-Muqaffâ’

**London** , J., “How to Do Things with Fables: Ibn al-Muqaffa’’s Frank
Speech in Stories from*Kalîla wa Dimna* ,”*History of Political Thought*
, 29 (2008): 189-212.

**Nagy** , István T. Kristó, “La Lumière et les Ténèbres dans l’Oeuvre
d’Ibn Muqaffa’ (mort vers 757 après J.-C.),”*Acta Orientalia* , 61
(2008): 265-93.

Ibn Taymiyyah

**Ibn Taymiyya** ,*Les saints du Mont Liban. Absence,* jihâd*et
spiritualité, entre la montagne et la cité. Cinq fetwas* , transl. with
notes and intro. by Yahya Michot, Foreword by Nader al-Bizri (Fetwas
d’Ibn Taymiyya 5). Beirut: Albouraq, 2007, xviii-6\*-198 pp., ISBN
2-84161-351-8.

**Ibn Taymiyya** , Muslims under Non-Muslim Rule. On Fleeing from Sin;
Kinds of Emigration; The Status of Mardin; Domain of Peace/War, Domain
Composite; The Conditions for Challenging Power, transl. with notes and
comparison with six modern readings of the Mardin fatwa by Yahya Michot,
Foreword by James Piscatori. Oxford-London: Interface Publications,
2006, pp. xviii-190 pp.

**Belhaj** , Abdessamad, “Ibn Taymiyya et la négation de la métaphore,”
in*Continuity and Change* , pp. 65-75.

**Hoover** , Jon, “Ibn Taymiyya as an Avicennan Theologian,”*Theological
Review (The Near East School of Theology)* , 27,1 (April 2006): 34-46.

**Khalil** , Mohammad, “Ibn Taymiyyah on Reason and Revelation in
Ethics,”*Journal of Islamic Studies* , 19 (2008): 103-32.

**Michot** , Yahya, “Ibn Taymiyya’s Commentary on the*Creed* of
al-Hallâj,” in*Sufism and Theology* , pp. 123-36.

**Opwis** , Felicitas, “The Construction of*Madhhab* Authority: Ibn
Taymiyya’s Interpretation of Juristic Preference (*Istihsân* ),”*Islamic
Law and Society* , 15 (2008): 219-49.

Ibn Tûmart

**Marín** , Manuela, “On Women and Camels. Some Comments on a*hadîth* ,”
in*O ye Gentlemen* , pp. 485-93.

Isfahânî

**Adang** , C., “The chronology of the Israelites according to Hamza
al-Isfahânî,”*Jerusalem Studies in Arabic and Islam* , 32 (2006):
286-310.

**Lewisohn** , Leonard, “Sufism and Theology in the Confessions of Sâ’in
al-Dîn Turka Isfahânî (d. 830/1437),” in*Sufism and Theology* , pp.
63-82.

al-Jubbâ’î

**Ansari** , Hassan, “Abû ‘Alî al-Jubbâ’î et son livre*al-Maqâlât* ,”
in*A Common Rationality* , pp. 21-37.

al-Ka’bî

**el-Omari** , Racha, “Abû l-Qâsim al-Balkhî al-Ka’bî’s Doctrine of
the*Imâma* ,” in*A Common Rationality* , pp. 39-57.

al-Mâturîdî

**Frank** , Richard M., “Notes and remarks on the*tabâ’i’* in the
teaching of al-Mâturîdî,” in*Classical Islamic Theology* , XII (pp.
137-49, 1974).

Qustâ ibn Lûqâ

**Rashed** , Marwan, “New Evidence on the Critique of the Qur’anic
Miracle at the End of the Third/Ninth Century: Qustâ ibn Lûqâ vs. the
Banû al-Munajjim,” in*In the Age of al-Fârâbî* , pp. 277-93.

al-Rassâs

**Ansari** , Hassan, “*Al-Barâhîn al-zâhirra al-jaliyya ‘alâ anna
l’wujûd zâ’id ‘alâ l-mâhiyya* by Husâm al-Dîn Abû Muhammad al-Hasan b.
Muhammad al-Rassâs,” in*A Common Rationality* , pp. 337-48 [with Arabic
text].

al-Râzî (Fakhr al-Dîn)

**Eichner** , Heidrun, “Dissolving the Unity of Metaphysics: from Fakhr
al-Dîn al-Râzî to Mullâ Sadrâ al-Shirâzî,”*Medioevo* , 32 (2007):
139-97.

**Setia** , Adi, “Time, Motion, Distance, and Change in the*Kalâm* of
Fakhr al-Din al-Râzî: A Preliminary Survey with Special Reference to
the*Matâlib ‘Âliyyah* ,”*Islam & Science* , 6,1 (2008): 13-29.

**Shihadeh** , Ayman, “The Mystic and the Sceptic in Fakhr al-Dîn
al-Râzî,” in*Sufism and Theology* , pp. 101-22.

al-Shahrastânî

**Gaiser** , Adam R., “Satan’s Seven Specious Arguments:
Al-Shahrastânî’s*Al-Milal wa-l-Nihal* in an Isma’ili Context,”*Journal
of Islamic studies* , 19, 2 (2008): 178-95.

al-Shîrâzî

**Pourjavady** , Reza &**Schmidtke** , Sabine, “The Qutb al-Dîn
al-Shîrâzî (D. 710/1311) Codex (Ms Mar’ashî 12868) [Studies on Qutb
al-Dîn al-shîrâzî, II],”*Studia Iranica* , 36 (2007): 279-301.

**-------** &**-------** , “Qutb al-Dîn al-Shîrâzî’s (d.
710/1311)*Durrat al-tâj* and Its Sources [Studies on Qutb al-Dîn
al-Shîrâzî, I],”*Journal Asiatique* , 292 (2004): 309-28.

Theodore Abû Qurrah

**Swanson** , Marc N., “Apologetics, Catechesis and the Question of
Audience in “On the Triune Nature of God’ (Sinai Arabic 154) and Three
Treatises of Theodore Abû Qurrah,” in*Christians and Muslims* , pp.
113-34.

al-Tûfî

**Shihadeh** , Ayman, “Three Apologetic Stances in al-Tûfî: Theological
Cognitivism, Noncognitivism, and a Proof of Prophecy from Scriptural
Contradiction,”*Journal of Qur’anic Studies* , 8,2 (2006): 1-23.

Yahyâ ibn ‘Adî, see Falsafa, Ibn ‘Adî

Yûsuf al-Basîr

**Madelung** , Wilferd &**Schmidtke** , Sabine, “Yûsuf al-Basîr’s First
Refutation (*Naqd* ) of Abû l-Husayn al-Basrî’s Theology,” in*A Common
Rationality* , pp. 229-96 [with Arabic edition].

**von Abel** , Wolfgang, “Zum textlichen Verhältnis zwischen*Kitâb
al-Tamyîz* von Yûsuf al-Basîr und der hebräischen Übersetzung*Sefer
Mahkimat Peti* am Beispiel der Schlusskapitel des ersten Hauptteils,”
in*A Common Rationality* , pp. 217-27.

al-Zamakhsharî

**al-Zamakhsharî** ,*Al-Minhâj fî usûl al-dîn* , intro. and ed. by
Sabine Schmidtke. Beirut; Arab Scientific Publishers, 2007, 84 pp., ISBN
978-9953-87-136-3.


