(2009-2010)
===========

I cannot thank enough all the scholars who kindly sent me information
and, in particular, those who sent me a copy of their publications or
photocopies of tables of contents.

a- Collective Works or Collections of Articles

***Avicenna and his Legacy: A Golden Age of Science and Philosophy*** ,
ed. by Y. Tzvi Langermann (Cultural Encounters in Late Antiquity and the
Middle Ages 8). Turnhout: Brepols, 2009, xvi-381 pp., ISBN
978-2-503-52753-6.

***The Cambridge History of Medieval Philosophy*** , ed. by Robert
Pasnau with Christina Van Dyke, 2 vol. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2010, vol. I: xiv-535 pp. & vol. II: viii and 537-1220 pp., ISBN
set 978-0-521-86672-9.

***Classic Issues in Islamic Philosophy and Theology Today*** , ed. by
Anna-Teresa Tymieniecka & Nazif Muhtaroglu (Islamic Philosophy and
Occidental Phenomenology in Dialogue 4). Dordrecht-Heidelberg-London-New
York: Springer, 2010, xii-186 pp., ISBN 978-90-481-3572-1.

Classical Arabic Humanities in Their Own Terms: Festschrift for Wolfhart
Heinrichs on his 65th Birthday Presented by his Students and Colleagues,
ed. by Beatrice Gruendler with Michael Cooperson. Leiden-Boston: Brill,
2008, xxxvi-611 pp., ISBN 978-90-04-16573-1.

***Florilegium mediaevale. Etudes offertes à Jacqueline Hamesse à
l’occasion de son éméritat*** , ed. by José Meirinhos & Olga Weijers
(Textes et études du Moyen Âge 50). Louvain-la-Neuve: Fédération
Internationale des Instituts d’Études Médiévales, 2009 [in fact 2010],
xxxiv-636 pp., ISBN 978-2-503-53146-5.

***Ibn Khaldûn et la fondation des sciences sociales*** , ed. by Zeïneb
Ben Saïd Cherni & Georges Labica. Paris: Publisud, 2009, 144 pp., ISBN
978-2-86600-601-4.

***Ibn Taymiyya and his Times*** , ed. by Yossef Rapoport & Shahab Ahmed
(Studies in Islamic Philosophy 4). Karachi-Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2010, xiv-400 pp., ISBN 978-0-19-547834-1.

***In Aristotelis Analytica Posteriora: Estudos acerca da recepção
medieval dos Segundos Analíticos*** , ed. by Alfredo Carlos Storck.
Porto Alegre: Linus Editores, 2009, 298 pp., ISBN 978-85-60063-10-9.

***In the Age of Averroes: Arabic Philosophy in the Sixth/Twelfth
Century*** , ed. by Peter Adamson. London: Warburg Institute, 2011, 290
pp., ISBN 978-0-85481-154-0.

***Knowledge, Language, Thought and the Civilization of Islam: Essays in
Honor of Syed Muhammad Naquib al-Attas*** , ed. by Wan Mohd Nor Wan Daud
& Muhammad Zainiy Uthman. Johor Darul Ta’zim, Malaysia: UTM, 2010, 566
pp., ISBN 978-983-52-0726-6 & 0725-9 pbk.

***Substance and Attribute: Western and Islamic Tradition in Dialogue***
, ed. by Christian Kanzian & Muhammad Legenhausen (Publications of the
Austrian Ludwig Wittgenstein Society. New Series 5). Frankfurt: Ontos
Verlag, 2007, 248 pp., ISBN 978-3-938793-68-8.

***Les Syriaques transmetteurs de civilisations. L’expérience du Bilâd
el-Shâm à l’époque Omeyyade*** (Patrimoine Syriaque. Actes du Colloque
IX). Paris: L’Harmattan, CERO, 2005, 295 pp., ISBN 9953-0-0369-6.

***Thâbit ibn Qurra: Science and Philosophy in Ninth-Century Baghdad***
, ed. by Roshdi Rashed (Scientia Graeco-Arabica, 4). Berlin-New York:
Walter de Gruyter, 2009, x-790 pp, ISBN 978-3-11-022078-0.

***Via Alberti. Texte-Quellen-Interpretationen*** , ed. by Ludger
Honnefelder, Hannes Möhle & Susana Bullido del Barrio (Subsidia
Albertina II). Munster: Aschendorff, 2009, 610 pp., ISBN
978-3-402-11715-6.

Section I. Falsafa

New Journal

***Ishraq: Islamic Philosophy Yearbook*** is an annual published by the
Russian Academy of Sciences, Institute of Philosophy, and the Iranian
Institute of Philosophy in Moscow. Articles are either in English or in
Russian. The first volume came out in 2010, 591 pp., ISBN
978-5-9551-0402-7. There are English summaries for the articles in
Russian.

Special Issues of Journal

**Diogène** , n. 226 (April 2009), focuses on Philosophie et Islam dans
les sociétés musulmanes.

***Documenti e Studi*** , 21 (2010), is dedicated to Arabic philosophy
and ed. by Amos Bertolacci.

**Vivarium** , 48.1 (2010), focuses on Aristotelian Logic East and West,
500-1500: On Interpretation and Prior Analytics in Two Traditions.

Bibliographies and Chronicles

**Druart** , Thérèse-Anne, “Brief Bibliographical Guide in Medieval
Islamic Philosophy and Theology (2008-2009),”
http://philosophy.cua.edu/faculty/tad/bibliography-08-09.cfm.

Greek, Persian, and Syriac Sources

**Alexander of Aphrodisias** ,*On Aristotle’s “On Coming-to-Be and
Perishing 2.2-5* ”, transl. from Arabic by Emma Gannagé with Peter
Adamson as guest editor. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 2005,
xii-168 pp., ISBN 978-0-8014-4335-0.

**Alon** , Ilai, “Socrates in Arabic Philosophy,” in*A Companion to
Socrates* , ed. by Sara Ahbel-Rappe and Rachana Kamtekar
(Malden-London-Victoria: Blackwell, 2006), pp. 317-36, ISBN
978-1-4051-0863-8.

**Aouad** , Maroun, “Rhétorique aristotélicienne (rhetorica) et faculté
oratoire (oratoria/balâgha) selon les Didascalia in “Rethoricam (sic!)”
Aristotelis ex glosa Alpharabii,” in Classical Arabic Humanities, pp.
40-61.

**Brock** , Sebastian, “Du grec en syriaque: l’art de la traduction chez
les Syriaques,” in*Les Syriaques* , pp. 9-34.

**Cameron** , Margaret &**Marenbon** , John, “Aristotelian Logic East
and West, 500-1500:*On Interpretation* and*Prior Analytics* in Two
Traditions: Introduction,”*Vivarium* , 48 (2010): 1-6.

**Eichner** , Heidrun, “Al-Fârâbî and Ibn Sînâ on ‘Universal Science’
and the System of Sciences: Evidence of the Arabic Tradition of
the*Posterior Analytics* ,”*Documenti e Studi* , 21 (2010): 71-95.

**El Bousklaoui** , Said, “ ‘Yahyâ al-Nahwî in the Arabic
Bio-bibliographical Sources,”*Journal of the Faculty of Letters (Rabat)*
, 29 (2009): 57-81 [in Arabic].

**-------** , “The Alexandrian School and Some Elements of its
Continuity in the Islamic Era,” in*The Institutions of Science and
Learning in Islamic Civilization* ,” ed. by Bennacer El Bouazzati
(Rabat: Faculty of Letters, 2008), pp. 11-43 [in Arabic].

**El Fekkak** , Badr, “Alexander’s*‘Inâya* Transformed: Justice as
Divine Providence in Al-Fârâbî,”*Documenti e Studi* , 21 (2010): 1-17.

**Filius** , Lou S., “The Genre*Problemata* in Arabic. Its Motions and
Changes,” in*Aristotle’s “Problemata” in Different Times and Tongues* ,
ed. by Pieter De Leemans & Michèle Goyens (Mediaevalia Lovaniensia.
Series I. Studia 39) (Louvain: Leuven University Press, 2006), pp.
33-54.

**Fiori** , E., “L’épitomé syriaque du*traité sur les causes du tout*
d’Alexandre d’Aphrodise attribué à Serge de Reš’ayna,”*Le Muséon* , 123,
1-2 (2010): 127-58 [critical ed. and annotated French translation].

**Garrido Clemente** , Pilar, “El debate acerca del presunto influjo del
Pseudo-Empédocles en el pensamiento de Ibn Massarra de Córdoba,”*Revista
Española de Filosofía Medieval* , 16 (2009): 11-33.

**Gignoux** , Philippe, “La transmission de l’héritage grec aux Arabes
par les Syriens,” in*Les Syriaques* , pp. 51-65.

**Gutas** , Dimitri, “Origins in Baghdad,” in*Cambridge Hist. Med.
Philosophy* , I, pp. 11-25.

**-------** , “Greek Philosophical Works Translated into Arabic,” in
Appendix B: Medieval Translations in*Cambridge Hist. Med. Philosophy* ,
II, pp. 802-14.

**-------** , “Some Morphological Functions of Arabic*bi-* : On the Uses
of Galex, II,” in*Classical Arabic Humanities* , pp. 62-67.

**Hansberger** , Rotraud E., “*Kitâb al-Hiss wa-l-mahsûs* .
Aristotle’s*Parva Naturalia* in Arabic Guise,” in*Les* Parva
Naturalia*d’Aristote. Fortune antique et médiévale* , ed. by Christophe
Grellard & Pierre-Marie Morel (Philosophie 28). Paris: Publications de
la Sorbonne, 2010, pp. 143-62.

**-------** , “How Aristotle Came to Believe in God-given Dreams: The
Arabic Version of*De divinatione per somnum* ,” in*Dreaming across
Boundaries: The Interpretation of Dreams in Islamic Lands* , ed. by
Louise Marlow (Ilex Foundation Series) (Boston, Mass.: Ilex Foundation,
2008), pp. 50-77.

**Hugonnard-Roche** , Henri, “Platon syriaque,” in*Pensée grecque et
sagesse d’orient. Hommage à Michel Tardieu* , ed. by M.-A. Amir Moezzi,
J.D. Dubois, C. Jullien & F. Jullien (Bibliothèque de l’École des Hautes
Études, Sciences Religieuses 142). Turnhout: Brepols, 2010, pp. 307-22
[ISBN 978-2-503-52995-0].

**-------** , “La philosophie en syriaque à l’époque des Omeyyades,”
in*Les Syriaques* , pp. 51-65.

**Janos** , Damien, “The Greek and Arabic Proclus and al-Fârâbî’s Theory
of Celestial Intellection in its Relation to Creation,”*Documenti e
Studi* , 21 (2010): 19-44.

**King** , Daniel, “Alexander of Aphrodisias’*On the Principles of the
Universe* in a Syriac Adaptation,”*Le Muséon* , 123,1-2 (2010): 159-91.

**López-Farjeat** , Luis Xavier, “El conocimiento animal en Aristóteles
y Avicena,”*Acta Philosophica* , 19 (2010): 125-44.

**-------** , “El*Liber de Pomo* en la tradición
árabe-islámica,”*Méthexis* , 22 (2009): 151-61.

**Mårtensson** , U., “ “The Persuasive Proof”: A Study of Aristotle’s
Politics and Rhetoric in the Qur’ân and in al-Tabarî’s
Commentary,”*Jerusalem Studies in Arabic and Islam* , 34 (2008):
363-420.

**Martini Bonadeo** , Cecilia, “ ‘Abd al-Latîf al-Baghdâdî’s Reception
of Book Beta of Aristotle’s*Metaphysics* Against the Background of the
Competing Readings by Avicenna and Averroes,”*Documenti e Studi* , 21
(2010): 411-31.

**McCollum** , Adam, “What Does Syriac*Masparta* Meana A Look at the
Syriac and Arabic Versions of the*De Mundo* ,”*Le Muséon* , 123,1-2
(2010): 193-202 [it means scissors].

**Stepanyants** , Marietta, “Models of Philosophical Encounter: The Case
of Zoroastrianism and Islam,”*Ishraq* , 1 (2010): 46-60.

**Theophrastus** ,*On First Principles* (known as his*Metaphysics* ),
Greek Text and Medieval Arabic Translation, ed. & transl. with Intro.,
Commentaries and Glossaries, as well as the Medieval Latin Translation,
and with an Excursus on Graeco-Arabic Editorial Technique by Dimitri
Gutas (Philosophia Antiqua 119). Leiden-Boston: Brill, 2010, xxiv-506
pp., ISBN 978-90-04-17903-5.

**Vagelpohl** , Uwe, “The*Prior Analytics* in the Syriac and Arabic
Traditions,”*Vivarium* , 48 (2010): 134-58.

**Van Reeth** , Jan F.M., “Éléments de théodicée syrienne de Jean
Philopon au*Causa causarum* ,” in*Les Syriaques* , pp. 151-64.

Latin, Hebrew, Syriac, Byzantine, Renaissance, and Modern Translations
and Influences

**Adamson** , Peter, “Freedom and determinism,” in*Cambridge Hist. Med.
Philosophy* , I, pp. 399-413.

**Albert Le Grand** ,*Métaphysique, Livre XI, Traités II et III* ,
Cologne Latin text, transl., intro. and notes by Isabelle Moulin (Sic et
Non). Paris: Vrin, 2009, 476 pp., ISBN 978-2-7116-2208-5 [pp. 35-51
focuses on Albert’s Arabic sources].

**Albertini** , Francesca Yardenit,*Die Konzeption des Messias bei
Maimonides und die frühmittelalterliche islamische Philosophie* (Studia
Judaica 44). Berlin-New York: Walter de Gruyter, 2009, xxiv-472 pp.,
ISBN 978-3-11-020636-4 [mostly al-Fârâbî].

**Arroche** , Victoria, “La proposición I del Liber de Causis en la obra
política de Egidio Romano y Dante Alighieri,”*Revista Española de
Filosofía Medieval* , 16 (2009): 34-42.

**Beertelloni** , F., “Sobre la existencia de un averroísmo iberico en
los siglos XIII y XIV,” in*Idade Média. Tempo do mundo, tempo dos
homens, tempo de Deus* , ed. by José Antonio de Camargo Rodrigues de
Souza (Porto Alegre: EST Edições, 2006), pp. 470-81.

**Berg** , Nancy, “When Ibn Rushd Met Borges,”*Journal of Arabic
Literature* , 41, 1-2 (2010): 148-59.

**Bertolacci** , Amos, “The Reception of Averroes’ Long Commentary on
the*Metaphysics* in Latin Medieval Philosophy until Albertus Magnus,”
in*Via Alberti* , pp. 457-80.

**Black** , Anthony, “Religious authority and the state,” in*Cambridge
Hist. Med. Philosophy* , II, pp. 539-50.

**Black** , Deborah L., “The nature of intellect,” in*Cambridge Hist.
Med. Philosophy* , I, pp. 320-33.

**Burnett** , Charles, “Aristotle as an authority on judicial
astronomy,” in*Florilegium mediaevale* , pp. 41-62.

**-------** , “Arabic philosophical works translated into Latin,” in
Appendix B: Medieval translations in*Cambridge Hist. Med. Philosophy* ,
II, pp. 814-26.

**-------** ,*Arabic into Latin in the Middle Ages: The Translators and
their Intellectual and Social Context* (Variorum). Farnham, Surrey:
Ashgate, 2009, viii-398 pp., ISBN 978-0-7546-5943-3 [each article is
supplemented by addenda at the end of the book; I. King Ptolemy and
Alchandreus the philosopher: the earliest texts on the astrolabe and
Arabic astrology at Fleury, Micy and Chartres, 1998; II. Physics before
the*Physics* : early translations from Arabic of texts concerning nature
in MSS British Library, Additional 22719 and Cotton Galba E IV, 2002;
III. Abelard of Bath and the Arabs, 1990; IV. Antioch as link between
Arabic and Latin culture in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, 2000;
V. Magister Iohannes Hispalensis et Limiensis and Qustâ ibn Lûqâ’s*De
differentia spiritus et animae* : a Portuguese contribution to the arts
curriculuma, 1995; VI. John of Seville and John of Spain, a*mise au
point* , 2002; VII. The coherence of the Arabic-Latin translation
program in Toledo in the twelfth century, 2001; VIII. Michael Scot and
the transmission of scientific culture from Toledo to Bologna via the
court of Frederick II Hohenstaufen, 1994; and IX. Master Theodore,
Frederick II’s philosopher, 1995].

**Cameron** , Margaret &**Marenbon** , John, “Aristotelian Logic East
and West, 500-1500:*On Interpretation* and*Prior Analytics* in Two
Traditions: Introduction,”*Vivarium* , 48 (2010): 1-6.

**Conolly** , Brian Francis, “Averroes, Thomas Aquinas and Giles of Rome
on How this Man Understands,”*Vivarium* , 45 (2007): 69-92.

**Copenhaver** , Brian, “Ten Arguments in Search of a Philosopher:
Averroes and Aquinas in Ficino’s*Platonic Theology* ,”*Vivarium* , 47
(2009): 444-79.

**Fenton** , Paul B., “New Light on Maimonidean Writings on
Metempsychosis and the Influence of Avicenna,” in*Avicenna and his
Legacy* , pp. 341-68.

**Fontaine** , Resianne &**Harvey** , Steven, “Jewish Philosophy on the
Eve of the Age of Averroism: Ibn Daud’s Necessary Existent and His Use
of Avicennian Science,” in*In the Age of Averroes* , pp. 215-27.

**Goodman** , Lenn E., “Happiness,” I, pp. 457-71.

**Harvey** , Steven, “When Did Jews Begin to Consider Averroes the
Commentatora,” in*Florilegium mediaevale* , pp. 279-96.

**-------** , “Avicenna’s Influence on Jewish Thought: Some
Reflections,” in*Avicenna and his Legacy* , pp. 327-40.

**Hasse** , Dag Nikolaus, “The soul’s faculties,” in*Cambridge Hist.
Med. Philosophy* , I, pp. 305-19.

**-------** , “The Early Albertus Magnus and his Arabic Sources on the
Theory of the Soul,”*Vivarium* , 46 (2008): 232-52.

**Hissette** , Roland, “Des leçons doubles dues à Guillaume de Lunaa Le
cas de sa traduction du commentaire moyen d’Averroès sur l’*Isagoge*
,”*Documenti e Studi* , 21 (2010): 433-55.

**Minecan** , Ana Maria C., “Introducción al debate historiográfico en
torno a la noción de “averroísmo latino”,”*Anales del Seminario de
Historia de la Filosofía* , 27 (2010): 63-85.

**Moulin** , Isabelle, “Éduction et émanation chez Albert le Grand:
des*commentaires* sur Denys le Pseudo-Aéropagite au*De causis et
processu universitatis a prima causa* ,” in*Via Alberti* , pp. 243-64
[*Liber de causis* and Avicenna].

**Rossi** , Pietro B., “ “Odor suus me confortat et aliquantulum
prolongat vitam meam”: il fragrante frutto e la morte di Aristotele,”
in*Vita longa. Vecchaia e durata della vita nella tradizione medica e
aristotelica antica e medievale* , ed. by Chiara Crisciani et alii
(Firenze: SISMEL, 2009), pp. 87-119 [on pseudo Aristotelian*De pomo* ].

**Saliba** , George,*Islamic Science and the Making of the European
Renaissance* . Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2007, xii-315 pp. ISBN
978-0-262-19557-7.

**Smith** , A. Mark, “Perception,” in*Cambridge Hist. Med. Philosophy* ,
I, pp. 334-45.

**Stern** , Josef, “The Maimonidean Parable, the Arabic*Poetics* , and
the Garden of Eden,”*Midwest Studies in Philosophy* , 33 (2009): 209-47.

**Stone** , M.W.F., &**Wisnovsky** , Robert, “Philosophy and theology,”
in*Cambridge Hist. Med. Philosophy* , II, pp. 689-706.

**Wood** , Rega, “The influence of Arabic Aristotelianism on scholastic
natural philosophy: Projectile motion, the place of the universe, and
elemental composition,” in*Cambridge Hist. Med. Philosophy* , I, pp.
247-66.

**-------** , “The subject of the Aristotelian science of metaphysics,”
in*Cambridge Hist. Med. Philosophy* , II, pp. 609-21.

**Zonta** , Mauro, “The revisions of Qalonymos ben Qalonymos’s Medieval
Hebrew Version of Averroes’s*Middle Commentary on Aristotle’s
Metaphysics* ,”*Documenti e Studi* , 21 (2010): 457-73.

**-------** , “Ancient philosophical works and commentaries translated
into Hebrew,” in Appendix B: Medieval translations in*Cambridge Hist.
Med. Philosophy* , II, pp. 826-32 [includes commentaries in Arabic].

General Studies

**Abbes** , Makram, “Leo Strauss et la philosophie arabe. Les Lumières
médiévales contre les Lumières modernes,”*Diogène* , n. 226 (April
2009): 117-41.

**Adamson** , Peter, “Freedom and determinism,” in*Cambridge Hist. Med.
Philosophy* , I, pp. 399-413.

**-------** ,*The Arabic Tradition* , in*The Routledge Companion to
Ethics* , ed. by John Skorupski (London & New York: Routledge, 2010),
pp. 63-75,

**Akasoy** , Anna, “What is Philosophical Sufisma,” in*In the Age of
Averroes* , pp. 229-49.

**Albertini** , Tamara, “Dreams, Visions, and Nightmares in Islam: From
the Prophet Muhammad to the Fundamentalist Mindset,” in*Dreams and
Visions: An Interdisciplinary Enquiry* , ed. by Nancy Van Deusen
(Leiden: Brill, 2010), pp. 167-82.

**Baffioni** , Carmela, “Perfect Cities and Political Regimes in Eatern
and Western Medieval Islam,”*Ishraq* , 1 (2010): 242-53.

**Belhaj** , Abdersamad, “Perspectives sur le concept du*bayân*
d’al-Shâfi’î à al-Djâbiri,”*Acta Orientalia* (Hungary), 62-64 (2009):
395-404 [al-Jâhiz, Ibn Hazm].

**Belo** , Catarina, “Predestination and Human Responsibility in
Medieval Islam: Some Aspects of a Classical Problem.”*Didaskalia*
*(Theology Journal of the Catholic University of Portugal in Lisbon)* ,
38.1 (2008): 139-51.

**Black** , Anthony, “Religious authority and the state,” in*Cambridge
Hist. Med. Philosophy* , II, pp. 539-50.

**Black** , Deborah L., “The nature of intellect,” in*Cambridge Hist.
Med. Philosophy* , I, pp. 320-33.

**-------** , “Reason Reflecting on Reason: Philosophy, Rationality, and
the Intellect in the Medieval Islamic and Christian
Traditions,”*Proceedings of the American Catholic Philosophical
Association* , 83 (2009): 41-59.

**Brague** , Rémi,*The Legend of the Middle Ages: Philosophical
Explorations of Medieval Christianity, Judaism, and Islam* , transl. by
Lydia G. Cochrane. Chicago & London: The University of Chicago Press,
2009, xii-287 pp., ISBN 978-0-226-07080-3 [transl. of*Au moyen du Moyen
Âge* , 2006].

**-------** , “La philosophie islamique contre le “kalâm”,”
in*Philosophie et théologie au Moyen Âge* (vol. II of*Philosophie et
théologie* ), ed. by Olivier Boulnois. Paris: Cerf, 2009, pp. 63-74.

**-------** ,*The Law of God: The Philosophical History of an Idea* ,
transl. by Lydia G. Cochrane. Chicago & London: The University of
Chicago Press, 2007, ISBN 978-0-226-07078-0 [transl. of*La loi de Dieu*
, 2005].

**Butterworth** , Charles E., “Political Philosophy and Political
Thought in the Medieval Arabic-Islamic Tradition of the Middle East,”
in*The Sage Handbook of Islamic Studies* , ed. by Akbar S. Ahmed &
Tamara Sonn (Los Angeles: Sage, 2010), pp. 140-59.

**Cameron** , Margaret &**Marenbon** , John, “Aristotelian Logic East
and West, 500-1500:*On Interpretation* and*Prior Analytics* in Two
Traditions: Introduction,”*Vivarium* , 48 (2010): 1-6.

**Cooperson** , Michael,*Al-Ma’mun* . Oxford: Oneworld, 2005, xiv-144
pp., ISBN 1-85168-386-0.

**Crone** Patricia,*Medieval Islamic Political Thought.* Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press, 2004, x-462 pp., ISBN 0-7486-1870-8 hb or
1871-6 pb.

**Daiber** , Hans, “Science Connecting Scholars and Cultures in
Khwârazm: The Case of Khwârazmshâh Ma’mûn Ibn Ma’mûn,” in*Knowledge,
Language, Thought* , pp. 283-94.

**-----** ,Islamic Thought in the Dialogue of Cultures: Innovation and
Mediation between Antiquity and Middle Ages, transl. by Nevad Kahteran.
Sarajeva: Kult-B, 2008, 265 pp.

**Dallal** , Ahmad,*Islam, Science, and the Challenge of History* . New
Haven & London: Yale University Press, 2010, xiv-239 pp., ISBN
978-0-300-15911-0.

**Efremova** , Natalia, “The Proofs of God’s Existence in*Falsafa*
,”*Ishraq* , 1 (2010): 300-16 [in Russian].

**El Bousklaoui** , Said, “The Notion of Nature, or from Nature to the
Will in Islamic Philosophy,”*Journal of Al-fikr al-‘Arabî al-Mu’âsir* ,
150-51 (2010): 78-92 [in Arabic].

**-------** , “The Notion of Happiness between Aristotle and al-Fârâbî,”
in*Journal of Madarat Falsafia (Rabat)* , 12 (2005): 165-79 [in Arabic].

**El-Rouayheb** , Khaled,*Relational Syllogisms and the History of
Arabic Logic, 900-1900* (Islamic Philosophy, Theology and Science, Texts
and studies, 80). Leiden: Brill, 2010, viii-296 pp., ISBN
978-90-04-18319-3.

**-------** , “Impossible Antecedents and Their Consequences: Some
Thirteenth-Century Arabic Discussions,”*History and Philosophy of Logic*
, 30.3 (2009): 209-25.

**Fakhry** , Majid,*Islamic Philosophy* (Beginner’s Guide). Oxford:
Oneworld, 2009, viii-201 pp., ISBN 978-1-85168-625-4 [in fact a reprint
of the 1997*Islamic Philosophy, Theology and Mysticism: A Short
Introduction* ].

**Filius** , Lou S., “The Genre*Problemata* in Arabic. Its Motions and
Changes,” in*Aristotle’s “Problemata” in Different Times and Tongues* ,
ed. by Pieter De Leemans & Michèle Goyens (Mediaevalia Lovaniensia.
Series I. Studia 39) (Louvain: Leuven University Press, 2006), pp.
33-54.

**Goodman** , Lenn E., “Happiness,” in*Cambridge Hist. Med. Philosophy*
, I, pp. 457-71.

**Grandguillaume** , Gilbert, “Les cultures oubliées du Coran,”*Diogène*
, n. 226 (April 2009): 58-71.

**Griffel** , Frank, “Between al-Ghazâlî and Abû l-Barakât al-Baghdâdî:
The Dialectical Turn in the Philosophy of Iraq and Iran during the
Sixth/Twelfth Century,” in*In the Age of Averroes* , pp. 45-75.

**Gutas** , Dimitri, “Philosophy in the Twelfth Century: One View from
Baghdad, or the Repudiation of al-Ghazâlî,” in*In the Age of Averroes* ,
pp. 9-25.

**-------** , “Origins in Baghdad,” in*Cambridge Hist. Med. Philosophy*
, I, pp. 11-25.

**-------** , “Creeds in Islam,” in Appendix A: Doctrinal Creeds
in*Cambridge Hist. Med. Philosophy* , II, pp. 788-90.

**Haque** , Amber, “Psychology from Islamic Perspective: Contribution of
Early Muslim Scholars and Challenges to Contemporary Muslim
Psychologists,”*Journal of Religion and Health* , 43.4 (2004): 357-77
[very general].

**Hasse** , Dag Nikolaus, “The soul’s faculties,” in*Cambridge Hist.
Med. Philosophy* , I, pp. 305-19.

**Heath** , Peter, “Allegory in Islamic Literatures,” in*The Cambridge
Companion to Allegory* , ed. by Rita Copeland & Peter T. Struck
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2010), pp. 83-100.

**Hozien** , Muhammad, “A Philosopher’s Toolkit: A Review
Essay,”*Journal of Islamic Philosophy* , 5 (2009): 99-104.

**Kahana-Smilansky** , Hagar, “Self-Reflection and Conversion in
Medieval Muslim Autobiographical Dreams,” in*Dreaming across Boundaries:
The Interpretation of Dreams in Islamic Lands* , ed. by Louise Marlow
(Ilex Foundation Series) (Boston, Mass.: Ilex Foundation, 2008), pp.
99-130 [mainly on al-Tawhîdî].

**Kalin** , Ibrahim, “Will, Necessity, and Creation as Monistic
Theophany in the Islamic Philosophical Tradition,”*Ishraq* , 1 (2010):
345-67.

**Kamada** , Shigeru, “System of Knowledge in Islam and its
Transformation,”*Ishraq* , 1 (2010): 141-47.

**Kennedy-Day** , Kiki, “Translating Male-Oriented Philosophical Works
for a Multi-Gender Society,” in*Classic Issues in Islamic Philosophy* ,
pp. 171-82 [applied to Ibn Sînâ’s*al-Adhawiyya fî al-ma’âd* ].

**Kirmanj** , Sherko, “Challenging the Islamist Politization of Islam:
The Non-Islamic Origins of Muslim Political Concepts,” in*Political
Islam from Muhammad to Ahmadinejad: Defenders, Detractors, and
Definitions* , ed. by Joseph Morrison Skelly (Santa Barbara, CA: Praeger
Security International, 2010), pp. 35-50.

**Kraemer** , Joel L., “The Medieval Arabic Enlightenment,” in*The
Cambridge Companion to Leo Strauss* , ed. by Steven B. Smith (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2009), pp. 137-70.

**Kruk** , Remke, “Encounters with the Giraffe, from Paris to the
Medieval Islamic World,” in*Classical Arabic Humanities* , pp. 568-92.

**Kukkonen** , Taneli, “Creation and Causation,” in*Cambridge Hist. Med.
Philosophy* , I, pp. 232-46.

**Leaman** , Oliver, “The Influence of Influence: How Not to Talk about
Islamic Culture,”*Ishraq* , 1 (2010): 35-45 [on Ibn al-Haytham].

**-------** ,*Islamic Philosophy: An Introduction* , 2nd ed. Malden, MA:
Polity Press, 2009, xiv-231 pp., ISBN 978-0-7456-4598-8 or 4599-5 (pb).

**-------** , “Poetry and the Emotions in Islamic Philosophy,”
in*Classic Issues in Islamic Philosophy* , pp. 139-50.

**-------** ,*Islamic Aesthetics: An Introduction* . Notre Dame, IN:
University of Notre Dame Press, 2004, viii-211 pp., ISBN 0-268-03370-6.

**Lettinck** , Paul, “Science in*Adab* Literature,” in*Knowledge,
Language, Thought* , pp. 247a or 257a or 267a-282 [I have been unable to
consult a copy of this book even by interlibrary loan, but have a table
of contents with an obviosu mistake for the pagination fo this article].

**Morrison** , Robert, “*Falsafa* and Astronomy after Avicenna: An
Evolving Relationship,” in*Avicenna and his Legacy* , pp. 307-26.

**Nasirov** , Ilshat, “Research on Classical Islamic Philosophy in the
Post-Soviet Russia (in the 1990s and the Early XXIst Century),”*Ishraq*
, 1 (2010): 536-64.

**Opwis** , Felicitas, Maalaha*and the Purpose of the Law: Islamic
Discourse on Legal Change from the 4th/10th to 8th/14th Century*
(Studies in Islamic Law and Society 31). Leiden: Brill, 2010, xiv-370
pp., ISBN 978-90-04-18416-9.

**Puig Montada** , Josep, “La doctrina de la dinastía almohade y
Averroes,” in*Idade Média. Tempo do mundo, tempo dos homens, tempo de
Deus* , ed. by José Antonio de Camargo Rodrigues de Souza (Porto Alegre:
EST Edições, 2006), pp. 362-73.

**Ramón Guerrero** , Rafael, “La idea del “hombre perfecto” en el
pensiamento islámico,” in*Idade Média. Tempo do mundo, tempo dos homens,
tempo de Deus* , ed. by José Antonio de Camargo Rodrigues de Souza
(Porto Alegre: EST Edições, 2006), pp. 347-54.

**Sawa** , George Dimitri,*Rhythmic Theories and Practices in Arabic
Writings to 339 AH/950 CE. Annotated Translations and Commentaries*
(Musicological Studies). Ottawa: The Institute of Mediaeval Music, 2009,
xvi-639 pp., ISBN 978-1-896926-98-8 [mainly al-Kindî & al-Fârâbî].

**Schöck** , Cornelia,*Koranexegese, Grammatik und Logik. Zum Verhältnis
von arabische und aristotelischer Urteils-, Konsequenz- und
Schlusslehre* (Islamic Philosophy, Theology and Science. Texts and
Studies 60). Leiden: Brill, 2006, xiv-468 pp., ISBN 90-04-14588-5.

**Sebti** , Meryem, “Le déclin de la pensée dans le monde arabe selon
Muhammad ‘Âbid al-Jâbirî,”*Diogène* , n. 226 (April 2009): 106-16.

**Shahrudi** , Ali Abidi, “Substantial Motion and Perpetual Creation,”
in*Substance and Attribute* , pp. 193-214.

**Shomali** , Muhammad Ali, “Psychic Substance: A Meeting Point between
Metaphysics & Spirituality,” in*Substance and Attribute* , pp. 215-28.

**Smart** , Ninian,*World Philosophies* , rev. 2nd ed., ed. by Oliver
Leaman. London & New York: Routledge, 2008 [ch. 7, Islamic philosophies
is on pp. 191-222].

**Smith** , A. Mark, “Perception,” in*Cambridge Hist. Med. Philosophy* ,
I, pp. 334-45.

**Soumeahsaraei** , Narjes Javandel, “A Report on Graduate Work in Qom
on the Problem of Essence/Attribute and Substance/Accident,”
in*Substance and Attribute* , pp. 45-54.

**Stone** , M.W.F., &**Wisnovsky** , Robert, “Philosophy and theology,”
in*Cambridge Hist. Med. Philosophy* , II, pp. 689-706.

**Syros** , Vasileios, “Political Treatises,” in*Handbook of Medieval
Studies: Terms—Methods—Trends* , ed. by Albrecht Classen, 3 vol.
(Berlin, New York: De Gruyter, 2010), pp. 2000-2021, ISBN
978-3-11-018409-9; e-book 021558-8.

**Taylor** , Richard C., “Philosophy,” in*The New Cambridge History of
Islam* . Vol. 4:*Islamic Cultures and Societies to the End of the
Eighteenth Century* , ed. by Robert Irwin (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2010), pp. 532-63 & 825-30.

**Vagelpohl** , Uwe, “The*Prior Analytics* in the Syriac and Arabic
Tradition,”*Vivarium* , 48 (2010): 134-58 [Avicenna and Averroes].

**Wisnovsky** , Robert, “Arabic Logicians on Perfect and Imperfect
Syllogisms: A Supplement to Patzig’s ‘Historical Excursus’,” in*Avicenna
and his Legacy* , pp. 257-73.

**Wood** , Rega, “The subject of the Aristotelian science of
metaphysics,” in*Cambridge Hist. Med. Philosophy* , II, pp. 609-21.

‘Abd al-Latîf al-Baghdâdî

**Joosse** , N. Peter, “ ‘Abd al-Latîf al-Baghdâdî as a Philosopher and
a Physician: Myth or Reality, Topos or Trutha,” in*The Age of Averroes*
, pp. 27-43.

**Martini Bonadeo** , Cecilia, “ ‘Abd al-Latîf al-Baghdâdî’s Reception
of Book Beta of Aristotle’s*Metaphysics* Against the Background of the
Competing Readings by Avicenna and Averroes,”*Documenti e Studi* , 21
(2010): 411-31.

al-Abharî (1200-1265)

**Thom** , Paul, “Abharî on the Logic of Conjunctive Terms,”*Arabic
Sciences and Philosophy* , 20 (2010): 105-117 with in Appendix “Readings
of the Subject Term” a translation by Tony Street of Nasîr al-Dîn
al-Tûsî’s critique of al-Abharî: 118-24 [includes criticisms by
al-Tûsî].

Abû al-Barakât al-Baghdâdî

**Griffel** , Frank, “Between al-Ghazâlî and Abû l-Barakât al-Baghdâdî:
The Dialectical Turn in the Philosophy of Iraq and Iran during the
Sixth/Twelfth Century,” in*In the Age of Averroes* , pp. 45-75.

**Nony** , Sylvie, “La dynamique d’Abû l-Barakât: faire le vide pour
penser le changement du changement,” in*The Age of Averroes* , pp.
93116.

al-Âmidî

**Arif** , Syamsuddin, “Al-Âmidî’s Reception of Ibn Sînâ: Reading*Al-Nûr
al-Bâhir fî al-Hikam al-Zawâhir* ,” in*Avicenna and his Legacy* , pp.
205-18.

**Janssens** , Jules, “Al-Amidi and His Integration of Philosophy into
Kalam,” in*Uluslararasi Seyfuddîn Âmidî Sempozyumu
Bildirileri/International Conference on Sayf al-Din al-Amidi Papers* ,
ed. by Ahmet Erkol, Abdurrahman Adak & Ibrahim Bor (Istanbul: Ensar,
2009), pp. 305-22.

Averroes

**Averroes** ,*Commentarium magnum in Aristotelis physicorum librum
septimum (Vindobonensis, lat. 2334)* , ed. by Horst Schmieja consilio et
auctoritate Rhenano-Westphalicae (Abhandlungen der
Nordrheinisch-Westfälischen Akademie der Wissenschaften. Averrois Opera
115. Series B: Averroes latinus) (Paderborn: Schöningh, 2007), xxxii-292
pp., ISBN 978-3-506-76316-7.

**Averroes** ,*On Aristotle’s “Metaphysics”* . An annotated transl. of
the so-called “Epitome” ed. by Rüdiger Arnzen (Scientia Graeco-Arabica
5). Berlin-New York: De Gruyter, 2010, x-378 pp., ISBN
978-3-11-022001-8.

**Averroes** ,*Geloof en wetenschap in de Islam. Averroes’ “Het
beslissende woord”* , intro. transl. and notes by Remke Kruk (Viator).
Kampen: Klement, 2006, 72 pp., ISBN 90-77070-75-3.

**Adamson** , Peter, “Yahyá ibn ‘Adî and Averroes on*Metaphysics* Alpha
Elatton,”*Documenti e Studi* , 21 (2010): 343-74.

**Amar** , Zohar,**Lev** , Efraim &**Serri** , Yaron, “Ibn Rushd on
Galen and the New Drugs Spread by the Arabs,”*Journal Asiatique* , 297.1
(2009): 83-101.

**Arnzen** , Rüdiger**,** “Ibn Rushd on the Structure of
Aristotle’s*Metaphysics* ,”*Documenti e Studi* , 21 (2010): 375-410.

**Attali** , Jacques,*Raison et foi. Averroès, Maïmonide, Thomas
d’Aquin* (Conférence Del Duca). Paris: Bibliothèque Nationale de France,
2004, 84 pp., ISBN 2-7177-2321-8.

**Bäck** , Allan, “Avicenna and Averroes: Modality and Theology,”
in*Potentialität und Possibilität. Modalaussagen in der Geschichte der
Metaphysik* , ed. by Thomas Buchheim et alii (Stuttgart-Bad Cannstatt:
Frommann-Holzboog, 2001), pp. 125-45.

**Bauloye** , Laurence &**Rutten** , Christina, “Genres et catégories
chez Aristote, chez Plotin et chez Averroès,” in*Platon et Aristote*
.*Dialectique et métaphysique* , ed. by Ilias Tsimbidaros (Cahiers de
philosophie ancienne 19). (Brussels: OUSIA, 2004), pp. 103-119.

**Belo** , Catarina, “Deus na filosofia e na teologia islâmicas: a
resposta de Averróis a al-Ghazzali,” in*A Questão de Deus na História da
Filosofia* , vol. I, ed. by Maria Leonor L. O. Xavier (Lisbon: Sintra,
Zéfiro/Fundação para a Ciência e Tecnologia/Centro de Filosofia da
Universidade de Lisboa, 2008), pp. 229-37.

**Benmakhlouf** , Ali, “Les limites du language comme limites du monde:
Averroès et Montaigne,”*Rencontres d’Averroès* , 15 (2009): 23-27.

**Berg** , Nancy, “When Ibn Rushd Met Borges,”*Journal of Arabic
Literature* , 41, 1-2 (2010): 148-59.

**Bertolacci** , Amos, “The Reception of Averroes’ Long Commentary on
the*Metaphysics* in Latin Medieval Philosophy until Albertus Magnus,”
in*Via Alberti* , pp. 457-80.

**Black** , Deborah L., “Averroes on the Spirituality and Intentionality
of Sensation,” in*The Age of Averroes* , pp. 159-74.

**Boulègue** , Laurence, “A propos de la thèse d’Averroès. Pietro
Pomponazzi*versus* Agostino Nifo,” in*Pietro Pomponazzi entre traditions
et innovations* , ed. by Joël Biard & Thierry Gonthier (Bochumer Studien
zur Philosophie 48) (Amsterdam: Grüner, 2009), pp. 83-98.

**Brenet** , Jean-Baptiste, “Corps-sujet, corps-objet. Notes sur
Averroès et Thomas d’Aquin dans le*De immortalitate animae* de
Pomponazzi,” in*Pietro Pomponazzi entre traditions et innovations* , ed.
by Joël Biard & Thierry Gonthier (Bochumer Studien zur Philosophie 48)
(Amsterdam: Grüner, 2009), pp. 11-28.

**-------** , “Averroès et les “averroïstes” dans le traité*Sur
l’éternité des choses* de Nicolas d’Autrécourt,” in*Nicolas d’Autrécourt
et la Faculté des Arts de Paris. Actes du Colloque de Paris, 19-21 mai
2005* , ed. by S. Caroti & C. Grellard (Quaderni di “Paideia” 4)
(Cesena: Stilgraf Editrice, 2006), pp. 253-76.

**Conolly** , Brian Francis, “Averroes, Thomas Aquinas and Giles of Rome
on How this Man Understands,”*Vivarium* , 45 (2007): 69-92.

**Copenhaver** , Brian, “Ten Arguments in Search of a Philosopher:
Averroes and Aquinas in Ficino’s*Platonic Theology* ,”*Vivarium* , 47
(2009): 444-79.

**Di Giovanni** , Matteo, “Substantial Form in Averroes’s*Long
Commentary* on the*Metaphysics* ,” in*In the Age of Averroes* , pp.
175-94.

**-------** , “Demonstration and First Philosophy. Averroes on*Met.*
Zeta as a Demonstrative Examination (*al-fahs al-burhânî* ),”*Documenti
e Studi* , 20 (2009): 95-126.

**Di Martino** , Carla, “La memoria nell’ Epitome dei Parva Naturalia di
Ibn Rushd,” in Parva Naturalia. Saperi medievali, natura e vita. Atti
dell’XI Convegno della Società Italiana per lo Studio del Pensiero
Medievale (Macerata, 7-9 dicembre 2001), ed. by Chiara Crisciani,
Roberto Lambettini & Romana Martorelli Vico (Università degli Studi di
Macerata 97, Atti 44) (Pisa & Rome: Istituti Editoriali e Poligrafici
Internazionali, 2004), pp. 189-99.

**Feldman** , Noah, “War and Reason in Maimonides and Averroes,” in*The
Ethics of War. Shared Problems in Different Traditions* , ed. by Richard
Sorabji & David Rodin (Aldershot: Ashgate, 2006), pp. 92-107.

**Harvey** , Steven, “When Did Jews Begin to Consider Averroes the
Commentatora,” in*Florilegium mediaevale* , pp. 279-96.

**Heller-Roazen** , Daniel, “Philosophy before the Law:
Averroës’s*Decisive Treatise* ,”*Critical Inquiry* , 32.3 (2006):
412-42.

**Hissette** , Roland, “Des leçons doubles dues à Guillaume de Lunaa Le
cas de sa traduction du commentaire moyen d’Averroès sur l’*Isagoge*
,”*Documenti e Studi* , 21 (2010): 433-55.

**-------** , “A propos de l’édition*princeps* (1497) des*Destructiones
destructionum* d’Averroès. Contribution au*Gesamtkatalog der
Wiegendrucke* (notice 3106),” in*Florilegium mediaevale* , pp. 297-322.

**Kleven** , Terence J., “ “For Truth Does Not Oppose Truth”: The
Agreement of Divine Law and Philosophy in Averroës’ The Book of the
Decisive Treatise (Kitab Fasl al-Maqal),” in Political Islam from
Muhammad to Ahmadinejad: Defenders, Detractors, and Definitions, ed. by
Joseph Morrison Skelly (Santa Barbara, CA: Praeger Security
International, 2010), pp. 225-36.

**Kukkonen** , Taneli, “Mind and Modal Judgment. Al-Ghazâlî and Ibn
Rushd on Conceivability and Possibility,” in*Mind and Modality. Studies
in the History of Philosophy in Honour of Simo Knuutila* , ed. by Vesa
Hirvonen, Toivo J. Holopainen & Miira Tuominen (Brill’s Studies in
Intellectual History 14). (Leiden: Brill, 2006), pp. 121-39.

**Kurmanalieva** , Ainur D., “Al-Farabi and Ibn Rushd on the Correlation
between Philosophy and Religion,”*Comparative Islamic Studies* , 3,2
(2007): 247-53.

**López Farjeat** , Luis Xavier, “Scientia, opinio et fides: El impacto
de los tratados lógicos de Aristóteles en Tomás de Aquino y Averroes,”
in*Tomás de Aquino, Commentador de Aristóteles* , ed. by Héctor
Velásquez (Mexico City: Universidad Panamericana, 2010), pp. 91-123.

**-------** ,“La crítica de Averroes contra el determinismo de los
asharíes,”*Diánoia* (Mexico), LIV/63 (2009): 115-32.

**Makki** , Carmen &**Martínez Lorca** , Andrés, “Averroes, sobre las
facultades locomotriz y desiderativa en al*Taljîs del* De Anima,”*La
Ciudad de Dios* , 221.1 (2008): 201-21 [includes translation by Makki].

**Martini Bonadeo** , Cecilia, “ ‘Abd al-Latîf al-Baghdâdî’s Reception
of Book Beta of Aristotle’s*Metaphysics* Against the Background of the
Competing Readings by Avicenna and Averroes,”*Documenti e Studi* , 21
(2010): 411-31.

**Pereira de Souza** , Rosalie Helena, “Eternidade e tempo em Averóis.
Da Palavra eterna de deus ao discurso racional dos filósofos,” in*Tempo
e eternidade na Idade Média* , ed. by Jan G.T. ter Reegen, Luis A. De
Boni, Marcos Roberto N. Costa (Porto Alegre: EST Edições, 2007), pp.
52-60.

**Pérez-Ilzarbe** , Paloma, “Definition and Demonstration: Aristotle,
Averroes, Grosseteste,” in*In Aristotelis Analytica Posteriora* , pp.
71-110.

**Puig Montada** , Josep, “ ‘Substance’ in Averroes’ Three Commentaries
on the*Metaphysics* ,” in*Florilegium mediaevale* , pp. 491-524.

**-------** , “La doctrina de la dinastía almohade y Averroes,” in*Idade
Média. Tempo do mundo, tempo dos homens, tempo de Deus* , ed. by José
Antonio de Camargo Rodrigues de Souza (Porto Alegre: EST Edições, 2006),
pp. 362-73.

**Sidiropoulou** , Chryssi, “Who is the God of the Qur’ana A Medieval
Islamic Debate and Contemporary Philosophy of Religion,” in*Classic
Issues in Islamic Philosophy* , pp. 91-109 [also on al-Ghazâlî].

**Sirat** , Colette &**Geoffroy** , Marc, “La version arabo-hébraïque
médiévale du*Grand Commentaire* d’Averroès sur le*De anima* d’Aristote
et Shem Tov b. Joseph b. Shem Tov,” in*Florilegium mediaevale* , pp.
541-61.

**Tellkamp** , Jörg A., “Why does Albert the Great Criticize Averroes’
Theory of the Possible Intellecta,” in*Via Alberti* , pp. 61-78.

**Thom** , Paul, “Averröes,” in his*Medieval Modal Systems: Problems and
Concepts* (Ashgate Studies in Medieval Philosophy) (Aldershot: Ashgate,
2003), pp. 81-91.

**Vagelpohl** , Uwe, “The*Prior Analytics* in the Syriac and Arabic
Traditions,”*Vivarium* , 48 (2010): 136-58.

**Villani-Lubelli** , Ubaldo, “Heinrich von Lübeck als Leser des
Averroes,” in Per perscrutationem philosophicam. Neue Perspektiven der
mittelalterlichen Forschung, Loris Sturlese zum 60. Geburtstag gewidmet,
ed. by Alessandra Beccarisi, Ruedi Imbach & Pasquale Porro (Corpus
philosophorum teutonicorum medii aevi 4) (Hamburg: Meiner, 2008), pp.
240-51.

**Zonta** , Mauro, “The revisions of Qalonymos ben Qalonymos’s Medieval
Hebrew Version of Averroes’s*Middle Commentary on Aristotle’s
Metaphysics* ,”*Documenti e Studi* , 21 (2010): 457-73.

Avicenna

**Avicenna** ,*The Physics of* The Healing, A parallel English-Arabic
text & transl., introduced, and annotated by Jon McGinnis, vol. I, Books
I & II, and vol. II, Books III & IV (Islamic Translation Series). Provo,
Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 2009, vol. I: xxxiv-259+259 pp;
vol. II, xiii+260-579+260-560 pp., ISBN 978-0-8425-2747-7 for the set
[rev. Arabic Cairo edition].

**ibn Sina** ,*Risalah: 'asbab huduth al-huruf: A Treatise on Arabic
Phonetics* , transl., notes and comments by Solomon I. Sara, S.J.
(Lincom Studies in Phonetics). Munich: Lincom Europa, 2009, x-182 pp.,
ISBN 978-3-929075-915 [includes the 1983 Damascus Arabic edition; uses
an unusual system of transliteration].

**Acikgenc** , Alparslan, “The Relevance of the Ibn Sina and Ghazali
Debate: An Evaluation and Reassessment,”*Ishraq* , 1 (2010): 254-67.

**Ahmed** , Asad Q., “Interpreting Avicenna: Urmawî/Tahtânî and the
Later Logical Tradition on Propositions,”*Documenti e Studi* , 21
(2010): 313-42.

**Akasoy** , Anna, “Ibn Sînâ in the Arab West: The Testimony of an
Andalusian Sufi,”*Documenti e Studi* , 21 (2010): 287-312

**Arif** , Syamsuddin, “Al-Âmidî’s Reception of Ibn Sînâ: Reading*Al-Nûr
al-Bâhir fî al-Hikam al-Zawâhir* ,” in*Avicenna and his Legacy* , pp.
205-18.

**-------** , “The Universe as a System: Ibn Sînâ’s Cosmology
Revisited,”*Islam & Science* , 7, n. 2 (Winter 2009): 127-45.

**Bäck** , Allan, “Insights of Avicenna,” in*In Aristotelis Analytica
Posteriora* , pp. 111-48.

**-------** , “Avicenna on the Categorical Assertion,” in Medieval
Theories on Assertive and Non-Assertive Languages. Acts of the 14th
European Symposium on Medieval Logic and Semantics. Rome, June 11-15,
2002, ed. by Alfonso Maierù and Luisa Valente (Lessico intellettuale
europeo 97) (Florence: Olschki, 2004), pp. 141-62.

**-------** , “Avicenna and Averroes: Modality and Theology,”
in*Potentialität und Possibilität. Modalaussagen in der Geschichte der
Metaphysik* , ed. by Thomas Buchheim et alii (Stuttgart-Bad Cannstatt:
Frommann-Holzboog, 2001), pp. 125-45.

**Burrell** , David B., “*Existence* Deriving from the ‘Existent’: Mulla
Sadra with Ibn Sînâ and al-Suhrawardî,” in*Avicenna and his Legacy* ,
pp. 249-55.

**Carusi** , Paola, “Età avanzata e qualità della vita nel ‘Canone’ di
Avicenna,” in*Vita longa. Vecchaia e durata della vita nella tradizione
medica e aristotelica antica e medievale* , ed. by Chiara Crisciani et
alii (Firenze: SISMEL, 2009), pp. 41-60.

**Copenhaver** , Brian, “Ten Arguments in Search of a Philosopher:
Averroes and Aquinas in Ficino’s*Platonic Theology* ,”*Vivarium* , 47
(2009): 444-79.

**Demirli** , Ekrem, “The Influence of Ibn Sînâ on Sar al-Dîn Qûnawî and
his Followers,”*Ishraq* , 1 (2010): 472-78.

**Druart** , Thérèse-Anne, “Ibn Sînâ (Avicenna) and Duns Scotus,”
in*John Duns Scotus, Philosopher. Proceedings of “The Quadruple
Congress” on John Duns Scotus* , Part I, ed. by Mary Beth Ingham & Oleg
Bychkov (Archa Verbi. Subsidia 3) (Münster: Aschendorff Verlag & St.
Bonaventure, NY: Franciscan Institute Publications, 2010), pp. 13-27.

**Eichner** , Heidrun, “Al-Fârâbî and Ibn Sînâ on ‘Universal Science’
and the System of Sciences: Evidence of the Arabic Tradition of
the*Posterior Analytics* ,”*Documenti e Studi* , 21 (2010): 71-95

**Fenton** , Paul B., “New Light on Maimonidean Writings on
Metempsychosis and the Influence of Avicenna,” in*Avicenna and his
Legacy* , pp. 341-68.

**Fidora** , Alexander, “Zum epistemologischen Status der Medizin in
der*Summa Avicennae* und bei Thomas von Aquin,” in*Handlung und
Wissenschaft. Die Epistemologie der praktischen Wissenschaft im 13. und
14. Jahrhundert* , ed. by Matthias Lutz-Bachmann & Alexander Fidora
(Wissenskultur und gesellschaftlicher Wandel 29) (Berlin:
Akademie-Verlag, 2008), pp. 97-105.

**Fontaine** , Resianne &**Harvey** , Steven, “Jewish Philosophy on the
Eve of the Age of Averroism: Ibn Daud’s Necessary Existent and His Use
of Avicennian Science,” in*In the Age of Averroes* , pp. 215-27.

**Furlong** , Peter, “The Latin Avicenna and Aquinas on the Relationship
between God and the Subject of Metaphysics,”*Proceedings of the American
Catholic Philosophical Association* , 83 (2009): 129-40.

**Gutas** , Dimitri, “The Study of Avicenna. Status Quaestionis atque
Agenda,”*Documenti e Studi* , 21 (2010): 45-69.

**Harvey** , Steven, “Avicenna’s Influence on Jewish Thought: Some
Reflections,” in*Avicenna and his Legacy* , pp. 327-40.

**Hodges** , Wilfrid, “Ibn Sînâ on Analysis: 1. Proof search. Or:
Abstract State Machines as a Tool for History of Logic,” in*Fields of
Logic and Computation* , ed. by A. Blass et al. (Lecture Notes in
Computer Science 6300). Berlin: Springer, 2010, pp. 354-404.

**Hughes** , Aaron W., “Mi’râj and the Language of Legitimation in the
Medieval Islamic and Jewish Philosophical Traditions: A Case Study of
Avicenna and Abraham ibn Ezra,” in*The Prophet’s Ascension:
Cross-Cultural Encounters with the Islamic* Mi’râj*Tales* , ed. by
Christiane Gruber & Frederick Colby (Bloomington: Indiana University
Press, 2010), pp. 172-91.

**Janssens** , Jules, “Ibn Sînâ’s Impact on Fakhr ad-Dîn
ar-Râzî’s*Mabâhit al-Mashriqiyya* , with Particular Regard to the
Section Entitled*al-Ilâhiyyât al-mahda* : An Essay of Critical
Evaluation,”*Documenti e Studi* , 21 (2010): 259-85.

**Kennedy-Day** , Kiki, “Translating Male-Oriented Philosophical Works
for a Multi-Gender Society,” in*Classic Issues in Islamic Philosophy* ,
pp. 171-82 [applied to Ibn Sînâ’s*al-Adhawiyya fî al-ma’âd* ].

**Lagerlund** , Henrik, “Avicenna and al-Tûsî on Modal Logic,”*History
and Philosophy of Logic* , 30.3 (2009): 227-39.

**Legenhausen** , Muhammad**,** “Ibn Sina’s Concept of God,”*Ishraq* , 1
(2010): 317-44.

**-------,** “Ibn Sina’s Arguments Against God’s Being a Substance,”
in*Substance and Attribute* , pp. 117-43.

**Lim** , Kevjn, “God’s Knowledge of Particulars: Avicenna, Maimonides,
Gersonides,”*Journal of Islamic Philosophy* , 5 (2009): 75-98.

**Lizzini** , Olga, “L’âme chez Avicenne: quelques remarques autour de
son statut épistémologique et de son fondement métaphysique,”*Documenti
e Studi* , 21 (2010): 223-42.

**-------** , “Intellectus, intelligentia,*mens* in Avicenna,” in*Per
una storia del concetto di mente* , vol. I, ed. by Eugenio Canone
(Lessico intellettuale europeo 99). (Florence: Olschki, 2005), pp.
123-65.

**López Farjeat** , Luis Xavier, “Percepción, intencionalidad y
pensamiento animal en Arístoteles y Avicena,” in*La mente animal* , ed.
by Luis Xavier López Farjeat (Mexico City: Los Libros de
Homero/Universidad Panamericana, 2009), pp. 33-47.

**-------** ,“El conocimiento animal en Aristóteles y Avicena,”*Acta
Philosophica* , 19 (2010): 125-44.

**López Farjeat** , Luis Xavier &**Ladrón de Guevara** , Jorge Morales,
“El contenido cognitivo de la percepción: Avicena y McDowell,”*Thémata*
(Sevilla), 43 (2010): 251-70.

**Marmura** , Michael E., “Avicenna on Meno’s Paradox: On “Apprehending”
Unknown Things through Known Things,”*Mediaeval Studies* , 71 (2009):
47-62.

**Martini Bonadeo** , Cecilia, “ ‘Abd al-Latîf al-Baghdâdî’s Reception
of Book Beta of Aristotle’s*Metaphysics* Against the Background of the
Competing Readings by Avicenna and Averroes,”*Documenti e Studi* , 21
(2010): 411-31.

**Mazzola Verza** , Tadeu, “Deus como causa final na*Ilahiyyat da
Shifa’* de Avicena,” in*In Aristotelis Analytica Posteriora* , pp.
149-62.

**McGinnis** , Jon,*Avicenna* (Great Medieval Thinkers). Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2010, xvi-300 pp., ISBN 978-0-19-533148-6.

**-------** , “Avicennan Infinity: A Select History of the Infinite
through Avicenna,”*Documenti e Studi* , 21 (2010): 199-222.

**-------** , “Positioning Heaven. The infidelity of a faithful
Aristotelian,”*Phronesis* , 51 (2006): 140-61.

**Muehlethaler** , Lukas, “Ibn Kammûna (d. 683/1284) on the Argument of
the Flying Man in Avicenna’s*Ishârât* and al-Suhrawardî’s*Talwîhât* ,”
in*Avicenna and his Legacy* , pp. 179-2003.

**Nusseibeh** , S., “Avicenna: Providence and God’s Knowledge of
Particulars,” in*Avicenna and his Legacy* , pp. 275-88.

**Palazzo** , Alessandro, “Ez sprichet gar ein hôher meister”: Eckhart e
Avicenna,” in*Studi sulle fonti di Meister Eckhart* , vol. I*,* ed. by
Loris Sturlese (Dokimion 34) (Freiburg: Academic Press, 2008), pp. 71-95
& 97-111.

**Pazouki** , Shahram, “From Aristotle’s*Ousia* to Ibn Sina’s*Jawhar* ,”
in*Substance and Attribute* , pp. 163-71.

**Piro** , Francesco, “Animalité et connaissance animale. Notes sur la
doctrine avicennienne de l’estimative et sur ses interprétations en
Occident,” transl. by A. Moretti with Th. Gontier in*Animal et animalité
dans la philosophie de la Renaissance et de l’âge classique* , ed. by
Thierry Gonthier (Bibliothèque philosophique de Louvain 64)
(Louvain-la-Neuve: Éditions de l’Institut Supérieur de Philosophie
2005), pp. 131-51.

**Privot** , M., “Le*Moi* , d’Ibn Sînâ au*Kitâb al-Rumûz* d’al
Shahrazûrî,” in*Ultra Mare: Mélanges…offerts à Aubert Martin* , ed. by
Frédéric Bauden (A.P.H.A. mémoires 3) (Louvain: Peeters, 2004), pp.
289-99.

**al-Rahim** , Ahmed, “Avicenna’s Immediate Disciples: Their Lives and
Works,” in*Avicenna and his Legacy* , pp. 1-25 [Bahmanyâr, Ibn Zayla,
and al-Ma’sûmî].

**Reisman** , David C., “The Ps.-Avicenna Corpus II: The Sûfistic
Turn,”*Documenti e Studi* , 21 (2010): 243-58.

**Street** , Tony, “Avicenna’s*Twenty Questions on Logic* : Preliminary
Notes for Further Work,”*Documenti e Studi* , 21 (2010): 97-111.

**Strobino** , Riccardo*,* “Avicennaon the Indemonstrability of
Definition,”*Documenti e Studi* , 21 (2010): 113-63 [includes the
English translation of*Kitâb al-burhân* , IV, 2].

**Szpiech** , Ryan, “In Search of Ibn Sînâ’s “Oriental Philosophy” in
Medieval Castile,”*Arabic Sciences and Philosophy* , 20.2 (2010):
185-206.

**Tegtmeier** , Erwin, “Ibn Sina on Substances and Accidents,”
in*Substance and Attribute* , pp. 229-36.

**Thom** , Paul, “Avicenna,” in his*Medieval Modal Systems: Problems and
Concepts* (Ashgate Studies in Medieval Philosophy) (Aldershot: Ashgate,
2003), pp. 81-91.

**Treiger** , Alexander, “Avicenna’s Notion of Transcendental Modulation
of Existence (*tashkîk al-wujûd, analogia entis* ) and Its Greek and
Arabic Sources,”*Documenti e Studi* , 21 (2010): 165-98.

**Turker** , Habip, “A Discussion of the Aesthetic Views of Ibn Sînâ and
Aristotle on the Basis of Aesthetic Value,” in*Classic Issues in Islamic
Philosophy* , pp. 151-70.

**Vagelpohl** , Uwe, “The*Prior Analytics* in the Syriac and Arabic
Tradition,”*Vivarium* , 48 (2010): 136-58.

**Yaldir** , Hulya, “Ibn Sînâ and Descartes on the Origins and Structure
of the Universe: Cosmology and Cosmogony,”*Journal of Islamic
Philosophy* , 3-57.

al-Fârâbî

**Albertini** , Francesca Yardenit,*Die Konzeption des Messias bei
Maimonides und die frühmittelalterliche islamische Philosophie* (Studia
Judaica 44). Berlin-New York: Walter de Gruyter, 2009, xxiv-472 pp.,
ISBN 978-3-11-020636-4.

**Aouad** , Maroun, “Rhétorique aristotélicienne (rhetorica) et faculté
oratoire (oratoria/balâgha) selon les Didascalia in “Rethoricam (sic!)”
Aristotelis ex glosa Alpharabii,” in Classical Arabic Humanities, pp.
40-61.

**Barontini** , Michele &**Tonietti** , Tito M., “ ‘Umar al-Khayyâm’s
Contribution to the Arabic Mathematical Theory of Music,”*Arabic
Sciences and Philosophy* , 20.2 (2010): 255-79.

**de Vaulx d’Arcy** , Guillaume, “La*naqla* , étude du concept de
transfert dans l’oeuvre d’al-Fârâbî,”*Arabic Sciences and Philosophy* ,
20 (2010): 125-76.

**Eichner** , Heidrun, “Al-Fârâbî and Ibn Sînâ on ‘Universal Science’
and the System of Sciences: Evidence of the Arabic Tradition of
the*Posterior Analytics* ,”*Documenti e Studi* , 21 (2010): 71-95

**El Fekkak** , Badr, “Alexander’s*‘Inâya* Transformed: Justice as
Divine Providence in Al-Fârâbî,”*Documenti e Studi* , 21 (2010): 1-17.

**Freudenthal** , Gad, “Le détermination partielle, biologique et
climatologique de la félicité humaine. Maïmonide*versus* al-Fârâbî à
propos des influences célestes,” in*Maïmonide, philosophe et savant
(1138-1204)* , ed. by Tony Lévy & Roshdi Rashed (Ancient and Classical
Philosophy). (Louvain: Peeters, 2004), pp. 79-129.

**Hasnawi** , Ahmad, “Réflexions sur la terminologie logique de
Maïmonide et son contexte Farabien,” in*Maïmonide, philosophe et savant
(1138-1204)* , ed. by Tony Lévy & Roshdi Rashed (Ancient and Classical
Philosophy). (Louvain: Peeters, 2004), pp.39-78.

**Janos** , Damien, “The Greek and Arabic Proclus and al-Fârâbî’s Theory
of Celestial Intellection in its Relation to Creation,”*Documenti e
Studi* , 21 (2010): 19-44.

**-------** , “Al-Fârâbi, Creation ex nihilo, and the Cosmological
Doctrine of*K. al-Jam’* and*Jawâbât* ,”*Journal of the American Oriental
Society* , 129 (2009): 1-17.

**Javadi** , Mohsen, “Aristotle and Farabi on the Definition and
Priority of Substance,” in*Substance and Attribute* , pp. 67-77.

**Kurmanalieva** , Ainur D., “Al-Farabi and Ibn Rushd on the Correlation
between Philosophy and Religion,”*Comparative Islamic Studies* , 3,2
(2007): 247-53.

**López Farjeat** , Luis Xavier, “Las relaciones entre retórica y
poética en los*Fusûl [al-‘ilm] al-Madani de al-Fârâbî* ,” in*Ensayos
sobre la tradición retórica* , ed. by Helena Beristáin & Gerardo Ramírez
Vidal (Mexico City: Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, 2009), pp.
293-306.

**Neubauer** , Eckhard, “Musikalische Metrik bei al-Fârâbî (gest. 950)
und ihr Ebenbild bei Thoinot Arbeau (gest. 1595),” in*Classical Arabic
Humanities* , pp. 127-47.

**Sawa** , George Dimitri,*Rhythmic Theories and Practices in Arabic
Writings to 339 AH/950 CE. Annotated Translations and Commentaries*
(Musicological Studies). Ottawa: The Institute of Mediaeval Music, 2009,
xvi-639 pp., ISBN 978-1-896926-98-8 [includes translations].

Ibn ‘Adî

**Adamson** , Peter, “Yahyá ibn ‘Adî and Averroes on*Metaphysics* Alpha
Elatton,”*Documenti e Studi* , 21 (2010): 343-74.

**Shah** , Muhammad Sultan, “Christian and Muslim Philosophers’ Apologia
for Greek Philosophy,”*The Islamic Quarterly* , 54, n.2 (2010): 83-93
[also on Miskawayh].

Ibn Bâjjah (Avempace)

**Ibn Bâjja (Avempace)** ,*La conduite de l’isolé et deux autres
épîtres* , intro., critical ed. of the Arabic text, transl. and comments
by Charles Genequand (Textes et traditions 19). Paris: Vrin, 2010, x-420
pp., ISBN 978-2-7116-2278-8 [the two other texts are*The Farewell
Epistle* &*Conjunction of the Intellect with Man* ].

**El Bousklaoui** , Said, “Ibn Bâjja’s Notion of Spontaneous
Movement,”*Journal of Al-Fikr al-‘Arabî al-Mu’âsir* , 144-45 (2008):
100-19 [in Arabic].

Ibn Kammûna

**Eichner** , Heidrun, “The Chapter ‘On Existence and Non-existence’ of
Ibn Kammûna’s*al-Jadîd fî l-Hikma* : Trends and Sources in an Author’s
Shaping the Exegetical Tradition of al-Suhrawardî’s Ontology,”
in*Avicenna and his Legacy* , pp. 143-77.

**Muehlethaler** , Lukas, “Ibn Kammûna (d. 683/1284) on the Argument of
the Flying Man in Avicenna’s*Ishârât* and al-Suhrawardî’s*Talwîhât* ,”
in*Avicenna and his Legacy* , pp. 179-2003.

Ibn Khaldûn

**Abbès** , Makram, “La guerre chez Ibn Khaldûn. Lecture du chapitre 35
du livre III de la*Muqaddima* ,”*Annales islamologiques* , 43 (2009):
87-106

**Arnason** , Jóhann Páll &**Stauth** , Georg, “Civilization and State
Formation in the Islamic Context. Re-reading Ibn Khaldûn,”*Thesis
Eleven* , n. 76 (2004): 29-48.

**Ben Saïd Cherni** , Zeïneb, “Ontologie de la donation et “monde de
l’esprit” chez Ibn Khaldûn,” in*Ibn Khaldûn et la fondation* , pp.
79-87.

**Cheddadi** , Abdesselam, “La vision de soi et de l’autre: de l’islam
classique à Ibn Khaldûn,” in*Ibn Khaldûn et la fondation* , pp. 21-31.

**--------** , “La théorie de la civilisation d’Ibn Khaldûn est-elle
universalisablea,”*Esprit* , n. 2 (2009): 82-95.

**-------** , “Reconnaissance d’Ibn Khaldûn. Entretien avec Abdesselam
Cheddadi. Propos recueillis à Rabat par Olivier Mongin,*Esprit* , n. 11
(2005): 132-47.

**Elamrani-Jamal** , Abdelali, “Prophétie selon Ibn Khaldûn et
philosophie arabe classique,” in*Ibn Khaldûn et la fondation* , pp.
69-77.

**Labib** , Abdelaziz, “Sociabilité et histoire chez Mably et Ibn
Khaldûn,” in*Ibn Khaldûn et la fondation* ,” pp. 109-29.

**Labica** , Georges, “La sociologie d’Ibn Khaldûn: La naissance de
l’Islam,” in*Ibn Khaldûn et la fondation* , pp. 33-45.

**Martinez-Gros** , Gabriel, “Ibn Khaldûn et Tocqueville,” in*Ibn
Khaldûn et la fondation* , pp. 91-107.

**-------** , “Que Faire d’Ibn Khaldûna,”*Esprit,* n. 11 (2005):148-66.

**Mufti** , Malik, “Jihad as Statecraft: Ibn Khaldun on the Conduct of
War and Empire,”*History of Political Thought* , 30, n.3 (2009):
385-410.

**Rumo** , Khaled, “La problématique foi et raison chez Ibn Khaldûn et
son actualisation,” in*Ibn Khaldûn et la fondation* , pp. 47-66.

**Turroni Roussillon** , Giuliana, “Ibn Khaldûn et le destin de
l’histoire humaine entre politique et civilisation,” in*Ibn Khaldûn et
la fondation* , pp. 131-41.

**Wolf-Gazo** , Ernest, “Prolegomena to West and East,” in*Knowledge,
Language, Thought* , pp. 209-220.

Ibn Masarra

**Garrido Clemente** , Pilar, “The Book of the Universe: On the Life and
Works of Ibn Masarra al-Jabalî,”*Ishraq* , 1 (2010): 379-403.

**-------** , “El debate acerca del presunto influjo del
Pseudo-Empédocles en el pensamiento de Ibn Massarra de Córdoba,”*Revista
Española de Filosofía Medieval* , 16 (2009): 11-33.

Ibn al-Nafîs

**Fancy** , Nahyan, “The Virtuous Son of the Rational: A
Traditionalist’s Response to the*Falâsifa* ,” in*Avicenna and his
Legacy* , pp. 219-47.

Ibn Sab’în

**Ibn Sab’în** ,*Die Sizilianischen Fragen* , ed. and transl. by Anna
Akasoy (Herders Bibliothek der Philosophie des Mittelalters 2). Freiburg
i. Br., Basel, Vienna: Herder, 2005, 252 pp., ISBN 3-451-28505-3.

Ibn Tufayl

***Ibn Tufayl’s*** **Hayy ibn Yaqzân: A Philosophical Tale** , updated
transl. with Intro. and Notes by Lenn Evan Goodman. Chicago: The
University of Chicago Press, 2009, xx-260 pp., ISBN 978-0-226-30310-9
[New Preface and Bibliography].

**Ibn Tufail, Abû B.** ,*Der Philosoph als Autodidakt. Ein
philosophischer Insel-Roman* [Hayy ibn Yaqzan], transl. with intro. and
notes by Patric O. Schaerer (Philosophische Bibliothek 5558). Hamburg:
Meiner, 2004, lxxxvi-152 pp., ISBN 3-7873-1797-X or 978-3-7873-1797-4.

**Ibn Tufail, Abû Bakr Muhammad** ,*Hayy ibn Yaqzân. Een filosofische
allegorie uit Moors Spanje* , transl. with intro. by Remke Kruk.
Amsterdam: Bulaaq, 2005, 149 pp., ISBN 90-5460-054-3.

**Ibn Tufayl** ,*El filósofo autodidacta* , tansl. by Ángel González
Palencia & Intro. by Marcelino Rodríguez Donis [with 1900 prólogo by
Marcelino Menéndez Pelayo, 1948 prólogo by Ángel González Palencia, 1955
Intro. by Emilio Tornero Poveda, and illustrations of the 1708 Latin ed.
by Ockley]. Sevilla: doble, 2007, xii, liii-104 pp., ISBN
978-84-935264-5-0 [mostly a reprint of 1948].

**Fancy** , Nahyan, “The Virtuous Son of the Rational: A
Traditionalist’s Response to the*Falâsifa* ,” in*Avicenna and his
Legacy* , pp. 219-47.

**Kukkonen** , Taneli, “Heart, Spirit, Form, Substance: Ibn Tufyal’s
Psychology,” in*In the Age of Averroes* , pp. 195-214.

Ikhwân as-Safâ’

***The Epistles of the Brethern of Purity*** **,** *On Logic* , An
Arabic Critical Edition and English Translation of*EPISTLES* 10-14, ed.
and transl. by Carmela Baffioni. Oxford: Oxford University Press with
The Institute of Ismaili Studies, 2010, xviii-200+202 pp., ISBN
978-0-19-958652-3.

***The Epistles of the Brethern of Purity*** *, The Case of the Animals
versus Man Before the King of the Jinn,* An Arabic Critical Edition and
English Translation of*EPISTLE* 22, ed. and transl. by Lenn E. Goodman &
Richard McGregor, foreword by Nader El-Bizri. Oxford: Oxford University
Press with The Institute of Ismaili Studies, 2009, xxvi-394+280 pp.,
ISBN 978-0-19-958016-3.

**Albert Reyna** , Ricardo Felipe, “El concepto de lenguaje en
las*Epístolas de los Hermanos de la Pureza* ,”*Anaquel de Estudios
Árabes* , 20 (2009): 5-17.

**La Spisa** , Paolo, “Deux fragments des Ikhwân al-Safâ’ dans une
collection arabe chrétienne,”*Le Muséon* , 123,1-2 (2010): 203-27 [in
Parisinus 213 from*Epistle of the Man as microcosm* and from*Epistle on
Meteorology* ].

al-Jûzjânî

**Ragep** , F. Jamil, “The*Khilâs kayfiyyat tarkîb al-aflâk* of
al-Jûzjânî: A Preliminary Description of its Avicennian Themes,”
in*Avicenna and his Legacy* , pp. 301-06.

al-Kindî

**[al-Kindî]** ,*Medieval Islamic Swords and Swordmaking: Kindi’s
treatise “On Swords and their Kinds”* , ed. by Robert G. Hoyland & Brian
Gilmour, intro. by James Allan. Oxford: Gibb Memorial Trust, 2006,
viii-216 pp., ISBN 978-0-906094-52-5.

**Altmann** , A. &**Stern** , S.M.,*Isaac Israeli: A Neoplatonic
Philosopher of the Early Tenth Century* , with a new foreword by Alfred
Ivry. Chicago & London: The University of Chicago Press, 2009, xxx-226
pp., ISBN 978-0-226-01613-9 [reprint of 1958 book, contains translations
of some of al-Kindî’s small treatises].

**Adamson** , Peter, “Immanence and transcendence. Intellect and forms
in al-Kindî and the*Liber de causis* ,” in*Eriugena, Berkeley, and the
Idealist Tradition* , ed. by Stephen Gersh & Dermot Moran. (Notre Dame,
IN: University of Notre Dame Press, 2006), pp. 187-201.

**Sawa** , George Dimitri,*Rhythmic Theories and Practices in Arabic
Writings to 339 AH/950 CE. Annotated Translations and Commentaries*
(Musicological Studies). Ottawa: The Institute of Mediaeval Music, 2009,
xvi-639 pp., ISBN 978-1-896926-98-8.

Mîr Dâmâd

**Ilkhani** , Mohammad, “De l’unité divine transcendante à la pluralité
des créatures: Achard de Saint-Victor et Mîr Dâmâd,” in a*aλλa εa μοι
κατaλεξον… “Mais raconte-moi en detail…”. Mélanges de philosophie et de
philologie offerts à Lambros Couloubaritsis* , ed. by M. Broze, B.
Decharneux & S. Delcomminette (Paris: Ousia-Vrin, 2008), pp. 581-93.

Miskawayh

**Bettini** , Lidia, “Una questione di filosofia morale: come
considerare*al-istirsâl ilâ al-mawt* ,”*Islamochristiana* , 35 (209):
141-52 [based on*Kitâb al-Hawâmil* ].

**Shah** , Muhammad Sultan, “Christian and Muslim Philosophers’ Apologia
for Greek Philosophy,”*The Islamic Quarterly* , 54, n.2 (2010): 83-93
[also on Yahya ibn ‘Adî].

Mullâ Sadrâ

**Mullâ Sadrâ Shîrâzî** ,*On the Hermeneutics of the Light Verse of the
Qur’ân (* Tafsîr Âyat al-Nûr*)* , transl., intro. and notes by Latimah
Parvin Peerwani. London: ICAS Press, 2004, ISBN 1-904063-16-0.

**[Mullâ Sadrâ]** , see**Nasir** , Mohamad Nasrin, “On God’s names and
Attributes: An Annotated Translation from Mullâ Sadrâ’s*al-Mazâhir
al-ilâhiyya* ,”*Journal of Islamic Philosophy* , 5 (2009): 59-74.

**Burrell** , David B., “*Existence* Deriving from the ‘Existent’: Mullâ
Sadrâ with Ibn Sînâ and al-Suhrawardî,” in*Avicenna and his Legacy* ,
pp. 249-55.

**Eshkevari** , Mohammad Fanaei, “Mulla Sadra’s Theory of Substantial
Motion,” in*Substance and Attribute* , pp. 25-43.

**Hadavi** , Hamid, “The Transcendent Philosophy of Mullâ Sadrâ: Sources
and Innovations,”*Ishraq* , 1 (2010): 160-68 [in Russian].

**Kalbasi** , Hossein Ashtari, “The Science of the Soul according to
Mullâ Sadrâ,”*Ishraq* , 1 (2010): 148-59.

**Kalin** , Ibrahim,*Knowledge in Later Islamic Philosophy: Mullâ Sadrâ
on Existence, Intellect, and Intuition* . Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2010, xxii-315 pp., ISBN 978-0-19-973524-2.

**Khâjavî** , Muhammad, “How Did Mullâ Sadrâ Himself Define the
“Transcendent Philosophy”,”*Ishraq* , 1 (2010): 113-17 [in Russian].

**Mujtahidî** , Karîm, “Mullâ Sadrâ in Henry Corbin’s
Interpretation,”*Ishraq* , 1 (2010): 88-96 [in Russian].

al-Shahrazûrî

**Aavani** , Gholamreza, “Shahrazûrî’s Ethical Theory as Expounded in
His*Shajarah al-Hâhiyyah* ,”*Ishraq* , 1 (2010): 193-200.

**Privot** , M., “Le*Moi* , d’Ibn Sînâ au*Kitâb al-Rumûz* d’al
Shahrazûrî,” in*Ultra Mare: Mélanges…offerts à Aubert Martin* , ed. by
Frédéric Bauden (A.P.H.A. mémoires 3) (Louvain: Peeters, 2004), pp.
289-99.

al-Shîrâzî

**Chipman** , Leigh N., “Is Medicine an*‘ilm* a A Preliminary Note on
Qutb al-Dîn al-Shîrâzî’s*al-Tuhfa al-sa’diyya* (MS Sehid ‘Ali Pesa
2047),” in*Avicenna and his Legacy* , pp. 289-300.

**Pourjavady** , Reza &**Schmidtke** , Sabine, “Qutb al-Dîn al-Shîrâzî
(d. 710/1311) as a Teacher: an Analysis of his*Ijâzât* [Studies on Qutb
al-Dîn al-Shîrâzî, III],”*Jurnal Asiatique* , 297.1 (2009): 15-55.

Sirâj al-Dîn Urmavî

**Ahmed** , Asad Q., “Interpreting Avicenna: Urmawî/Tahtânî and the
Later Logical Tradition on Propositions,”*Documenti e Studi* , 21
(2010): 313-42.

**Marlow** , Louise, “A Thirteenth-Century Scholar in the Eastern
Mediterranean: Sirâj al-Dîn Urmavî, Jurist, Logician,
Diplomat,”*Al-Masaq* , 22,3 (2010): 279-313.

al-Suhrawardî

**Burrell** , David B., “*Existence* Deriving from the ‘Existent’: Mullâ
Sadrâ with Ibn Sînâ and al-Suhrawardî,” in*Avicenna and his Legacy* ,
pp. 249-55.

**Dînânî** , Gholamhossein Ibrahimî, “The World of Imagination,”*Ishraq*
, 1 (2010): 97-104 [in Russian].

**Eichner** , Heidrun, “ ‘Knowledge by Presence’, Apperception and the
Mind-Body Relationship: Fakhr al-Dîn al-Râzî and al-Suhrawardî as
Representatives of a Thirteenth Century Discussion,” in*In the Age of
Averroes* , pp. 117-40.

**-------** , “The Chapter ‘On Existence and Non-existence’ of Ibn
Kammûna’s*al-Jadîd fî l-Hikma* : Trends and Sources in an Author’s
Shaping the Exegetical Tradition of al-Suhrawardî’s Ontology,”
in*Avicenna and his Legacy* , pp. 143-77.

**Eshots** , Yanis, “A Few Remarks Concerning the Image of Temple in the
Writings of Shihâb al-Dîn Suhrawardî,”*Ishraq* , 1 (2010): 509-15 [in
Russian].

**Kaukua** , Jari, “I in the Light of God: Selfhood and Self-Awareness
in Suhrawardî’s*Hikmat al-ishrâq* ,” in*In the Age of Averroes* , pp.
141-57.

**Muelethaler** , Lukas, “Ibn Kammûna (d. 683/1284) on the Argumentof
the Flying Man in Avicenna’s*Ishârât* and al-Suhrawardî’s*Talwîhât* ,”
in*Avicenna and his Legacy* , pp. 179-2003.

al-Tahtânî

**Ahmed** , Asad Q., “Interpreting Avicenna: Urmawî/Tahtânî and the
Later Logical Tradition on Propositions,”*Documenti e Studi* , 21
(2010): 313-42.

al-Tawhîdî

**Kahana-Smilansky** , Hagar, “Self-Reflection and Conversion in
Medieval Muslim Autobiographical Dreams,” in*Dreaming across Boundaries:
The Interpretation of Dreams in Islamic Lands* , ed. by Louise Marlow
(Ilex Foundation Series) (Boston, Mass.: Ilex Foundation, 2008), pp.
99-130.

Thâbit ibn Qurra

**Morelon** , Régis, “The Astronomy of Thâbit ibn Qurra,” in*Thâbit* ,
pp. 601-18.

**Rashed** , Marwan, “Thâbit ibn Qurra sur l’existence et l’infini:
les*Réponses aux questions posées par Ibn Usayyid* ,” in*Thâbit* , pp.
619-73 [includes intro., Arabic text, transl. and commentary].

**-------** , “Thâbit ibn Qurra, la*Physique* d’Aristote et le meilleur
des mondes,” in*Thâbit* , pp. 675-714.

**Rashed** , Roshdi, “Thâbit ibn Qurra, Scholar and Philosopher
(826-901),” in*Thâbit* , pp. 3-13.

**-------** , “Thâbit ibn Qurra: From Harrân to Baghdad,” in*Thâbit* ,
pp. 15-24.

**Reisman** , David C. &**Bertolacci** , Amos, “Thâbit ibn
Qurra’s*Concise Exposition of Aristotle’s Mataphysics* ,” in*Thâbit* ,
pp. 715-76 [includes intro., Arabic text, transl. and commentary].

al-Tûsî

**[al-Tûsî]** , see**Street** , Tony, “Readings of the Subject
Term,”*Arabic Sciences and Philosophy* , 20 (2010): 118-24 [preceded by
Thom’s article on al-Abharî].

**Lagerlund** , Henrik, “Avicenna and al-Tûsî on Modal Logic,”*History
and Philosophy of Logic* , 30.3 (2009): 227-39.

**Thom** , Paul, “Abharî on the Logic of Conjunctive Terms,”*Arabic
Sciences and Philosophy* , 20 (2010): 105-117 [includes criticisms by
al-Tûsî].

Modern and Current Scholars

[**Gardet** , Louis],**Borrmans** , Maurice,*Louis Gardet (1904-1986).
Philosophe chrétien des cultures et témoin du dialogue islamo-chrétien*
(L’histoire à vif). Paris: Cerf, 2010, vi-370 pp., ISBN
978-2-204-08959-3.

[**Strauss** , Leo],**Abbes** , Makram, “Leo Strauss et la philosophie
arabe. Les Lumières médiévales contre les Lumières modernes,”*Diogène* ,
n. 226 (April 2009): 117-41.

**Brisson** , Thomas, “Le savoir de l’autrea Les intellectuels arabes de
l’université parisienne (1955-1980): une relecture de l’orientalisme
français,” in*Revue des mondes musulmans et de la Méditerranée* , n. 125
(2009, 1): 255-70.

Section II. Kalâm

General Studies

**Belo** , Catarina, “Predestination and Human Responsibility in
Medieval Islam: Some Aspects of a Classical Problem.”*Didaskalia*
*(Theology Journal of the Catholic University of Portugal in Lisbon)* ,
38.1 (2008): 139-51.

**Brague** , Rémi, “La philosophie islamique contre le “kalâm”,”
in*Philosophie et théologie au Moyen Âge* (vol. II of*Philosophie et
théologie* ), ed. by Olivier Boulnois. Paris: Cerf, 2009, pp. 63-74.

***Christian-Muslim Relations. A Bibliographical History*** , vol.
I:***(600-900)*** , ed. by David Thomas & Barbara Roggema. Leiden:
Brill, 2009, xvi-957 pp., ISBN 978-90-04-16975-3.

**Keating** , Sandra Toenies, “ “Say Not Three”: Some Early Christian
Responses to Muslim Questions about the Trinity,”*The Thomist* , 74
(2010): 85-104.

**López Farjeat** , Luis Xavier, “La crítica de Averroes contra el
determinismo de los asharíes,”*Diánoia* (Mexico), LIV/63 (2009): 115-32.

**Schöck** , Cornelia,*Koranexegese, Grammatik und Logik. Zum Verhältnis
von arabischer und aristotelischer Urteils-, Konsequenz- und
Schlusslehre* (Islamic Philosophy, Theology and Science. Texts and
Studies 60). Leiden: Brill, 2006, xiv-468 pp., ISBN 90-04-14588-5.

**Schwarb** , Gregor, “Mu’tazilism in the Age of Averroes,” in*In the
Age of Averroes* , pp. 251-82.

**Vasalou** , Sophia,*Moral Agents and Their Deserts: The Character of
Mu’tazilite Ethics* . Princeton & Oxford: Princeton University Press,
2008, xvi-252 pp., ISBN ISBN 978-0-691-13145-0 [mainly Basran
Mu’tazilites].

**Thiele** , Jan, “Propagating Mutazilism in the VIth/XIIth Century
Zaydiyya: The Role of al-asan al-Raâ,”*Arabica* , 57,5-6 (2010): 536-58.

N.B. Mark R. Nowacki’s*The Kalam Cosmological Argument for God* .
Amherst, N.Y.: Prometheus Books, 2007, is irrelevant for Kalâm.

‘Abd al-Jabbâr

**‘Abd al-Jabbâr** ,*Critique of Christian Origins* , parallel
English-Arabic text, ed., transl. & annotated by Gabriel Said Reynolds &
Samir Khalil Samir (Islamic Translation Series). Provo, Utah: Brigham
Young University Press, 2010, lxxvii-247+179 Arabic pp., ISBN
978-0-8425-2715-6.

**Heemskerk** , Margaretha, “A Mu’tazilite Refutation of Christianity
and Judaism. Two Fragments from ‘Abd al-Jabbâr’s al-Mughnî fî abwâb
al-tawhîd wa-l-adal,” in The Three Rings. Textual Studies in the
Historical Trialogue of Judaism, Christianity and Islam, ed. by Barbara
Roggema, Marcel Poorthuis & Pim Valkenberg (Publications of the Thomas
Instituut te Untrecht. New Series 11). (Louvain: Peeters, 2005), pp.
183-201.

**Ibrahim** , Tawfiq, “The Proofs of God’s Existence and Oneness in
the*Kalâm* ,”*Ishraq,* 1 (2010): 284-99 [in Russian].

Abû Qurrah (Theodore)

**Varsanyi** , Orsolya, “The Role of the Intellect in Theodore Abû
Qurrah’s*On the True Religion* in Comparison with his Contemporaries’
Use of the Term,”*Parole de l’Orient* , 34 (2009): 51-60 [Abû Râ’ita,
al-Jâhiz, al-Rassî & al-Tirmidhî].

al-Ahsâ’î (Ibn Abî Jumhûr)

**Schmidtke** , Sabine, “New Sources for the Life and Works of Ibn Abî
Jumhûr al-Ahsâ’î,”*Studia Iranica* , 38.1 (2009): 49-68.

al-Ghazâlî

**Al-Ghazâlî** ,*Le critère de distinction entre l’islam et
l’incroyance. Interprétation et divergence en islam* , Arabic ed.,
transl, intro. & notes by Mustapha Hogga & foreword by Jean Jolivet
(Etudes musulmanes XLII). Paris: Vrin, 2010, 130 pp., ISBN
978-2-7116-2216-0.

**[Al-Ghazâlî]** , Le livre de la Science, integral transl. of*Kitâb
al-‘ilm* by Jean Abd-al-Wadoud Gouraud. Beirut: Albouraq, 2009, 246 pp.,
ISBN 978-2-84161-400-4.

**[Abû Hâmid Muhammad al-Ghazâlî]** ,*L’Alchimie du bonheur, suivie du
dernier poème attribué à l’Imâm al-Ghazâlî* , transl. from English by
Muhammad Marcelot. Tunisia; Alif, 2010, 149 pp., ISBN
978-2-9080-087-22-2 [from English translation by Claude Field, 1910].

**Abrahamov** , Benyamin, “Ibn al-‘Arabî’s Attitude toward al-Ghazâlî,”
in*Avicenna and his Legacy* , pp. 101-15.

**Açikgenç** , Alparslan, “The Relevance of the Ibn Sina and Ghazali
Debate: An Evaluation and Reassessment,”*Ishraq* , 1 (2010): 254-67.

**-------,** “Kant and Ghâzâlî on Human Nature,” in*Knowledge, Language,
Thought* , pp. 163-98.

**Akasoy** , Anna, “The al-Ghazâlî’ Conspiracy: Reflections on the
Inter-Mediterranean Dimension of Islamic Intellectual History,”
in*Avicenna and his Legacy* , pp. 117-42.

**al-Akiti** , M. Affifi, “The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly of*Falsafa* :
Al-Ghazâlî’s*Madnûn* ,*Tahâfut* , and*Maqâsid* , with Particular
Attention to their*Falsafî* Treatments of God’s Knowledge of Temporal
Events,” in*Avicenna and his Legacy* , pp. 51-100.

**Bargeron** , Carol L., “Re-thinking*Necessity (al-Darûra)* in
al-Ghazâlî’s Understanding of Physical Causation,”*Theology and Science*
, 5.1 (2007): 21-36.

**Belo** , Catarina, “Deus na filosofia e na teologia islâmicas: a
resposta de Averróis a al-Ghazzali,” in*A Questão de Deus na História da
Filosofia* , vol. I, ed. by Maria Leonor L. O. Xavier (Lisbon: Sintra,
Zéfiro/Fundação para a Ciência e Tecnologia/Centro de Filosofia da
Universidade de Lisboa, 2008), pp. 229-37.

**Garden** , Kenneth, “Al-Mâzarî al-Dhakî: al-Ghazâlî’s Maghribi
Adversary in Nishapur,”*Journal of Islamic Studies* , 21.1 (2010):
89-107.

**Griffel** , Frank, “Between al-Ghazâlî and Abû l-Barakât al-Baghdâdî:
The Dialectical Turn in the Philosophy of Iraq and Iran during the
Sixth/Twelfth Century,” in*In the Age of Averroes* , pp. 45-75.

**-------** , “Al-Ghazâlî’s Cosmology and the Veil Section of
his*Mishkât al-Anwâr* ,” in*Avicenna and his Legacy* ,” pp. 27-49.

**Gutas** , Dimitri, “Philosophy in the Twelfth Century: One View from
Baghdad, or the Repudiation of al-Ghazâlî,” in*In the Age of Averroes* ,
pp. 9-25.

**Hennig** , Boris, “Ghazali on Immaterial Substances,” in*Substance and
Attribute* , pp. 55-65.

**Hoover** , Jon,*Ibn Taymiyya’s Theodicy of Perpetual Optimism*
(Islamic Philosophy, Theology and Science, 73). Leiden-Boston: Brill,
2007, xii-270 pp.

**Janssens** , Jules, “Al-Ghazâlî: The Introduction of Peripatetic
Syllogistic in Islamic Law (and Kalâm),”*MIDEO* , 28 (2010): 219-33.

**Kukkonen** , Taneli, “Al-Ghazâlî on the Signification of
Names,”*Vivarium* , 48 (2010): 55-74.

**-------** , “Al-Ghazâlî’s Skepticism Revisited,” in*Rethinking the
History of Skepticism: The Missing Medieval Background* , ed. by Henrik
Lagerlund (Studien und Texte zur Geistesgeschichte des Mittelalters 103)
(Leiden: Brill, 2010), pp. 29-59.

**-------** , “Mind and Modal Judgment. Al-Ghazâlî and Ibn Rushd on
Conceivability and Possibility,” in*Mind and Modality. Studies in the
History of Philosophy in Honour of Simo Knuutila* , ed. by Vesa
Hirvonen, Toivo J. Holopainen & Miira Tuominen (Brill’s Studies in
Intellectual History 14). (Leiden: Brill, 2006), pp. 121-39.

**Lagerlund** , Henrik, “Al-Ghazâlî on the Form and Matter of the
Syllogisms,”*Vivarium* , 48 (2010): 193-214.

**Mårtensson** , Ulrika, “Through the Lens of Modern Hermeneutics:
Authorial Intention in al-Tabarî’s and al-Ghazâlî’s Interpretation of Q.
24:35,”*Journal of Qur’anic Studies* , 11.2 (2009): 20-48.

**Ormsby** , Eric, “The Poor Man’s Prophecy: Al-Ghazâlî on Dreams,”
in*Dreaming across Boundaries: The Interpretation of Dreams in Islamic
Lands* , ed. by Louise Marlow (Ilex Foundation Series) (Boston, Mass.:
Ilex Foundation, 2008), pp. 142-51.

**Rayan** , Sobhi, “Al-Ghazali’s Use of the Terms “Necessity” and
“Habit” in his Theory of Natural Causality,”*Theology and Science* , 2.2
(2004): 255-68.

**Shihadeh** , Ayman, “New Light on the Reception of
al-Ghazâlî’s*Doctrine of the Philosophers* (*Maqâsid al-falâsifa* ),”
in*In the Age of Averroes* , pp. 77-92.

**Sidiropoulou** , Chryssi, “Who is the God of the Qur’ana A Medieval
Islamic Debate and Contemporary Philosophy of Religion,” in*Classic
Issues in Islamic Philosophy* , pp. 91-109 [also on al-Ghazâlî].

**Truglia** , Craig, “Al-Ghazali and Giovanni Pico della Mirandola on
the Question of Human Freedom and the Chain of Being,”*Philosophy East
and West* , 60.2 (2010): 143-66.

**Whittingham** , Martin, “Al-Gahzâlî on Jews and Christians,”in*The
Three Rings. Textual Studies in the Historical Trialogue of Judaism,
Christianity and Islam* , ed. by Barbara Roggema, Marcel Poorthuis & Pim
Valkenberg (Publications of the Thomas Instituut te Untrecht. New Series
11). (Louvain: Peeters, 2005), pp. 203-16.

**Yaqub** , Aladdin M., “Al-Ghazâlî’s Philosophers on the Divine Unity,”
20.2 (2010): 281-306.

Ibn Hazm

**Bauer** , Karen, “Debates on Women’s Status as Judges and Witnesses in
Post-Formative Islamic Law,”*Journal of the American Oriental Society* ,
130.1 (2010); 1-21.

**Martínez Lorca** , Andrés, “Ibn Hazm, filósofo: Los temas centrales de
su pensamiento,”*La Ciudad de Dios* , 222.2 (2009): 357-400.

**Ramón Guerrero** , Rafael, “Ibn Hazm of Cordova: On
Porphyry’s*Isagoge* ,” in*Florilegium mediaevale* , pp. 525-40.

Hasan al-Basrî

**Mourad** , Suleiman Ali, Early Islam Between Myth and History:
Al-Hasan al-Basrî (d. 110H/728CE) and the Formation of His Legacy in
Classical Islamic Scholarship (Islamic Philosophy, Theology and Science
62). Leiden-Boston: Brill, 2006, xii-339 pp., ISBN 90-04-14829-9
[includes edition of texts quoted and of the Epistle by ‘Abd al-Malik].

al-Hillî

**al-Jamil** , Tariq, “Ibn Taymiyya and Ibn al-Mutahhar al-Hillî: Shi’i
Polemics and the Struggle for Religious Authority in Medieval Islam,”
in*Ibn Taymiyya* , pp. 229-46.

Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyya

**Holtzman** , Livnat, “Human Choice, Divine Guidance and the*Fitra*
Tradition: The Use of Hadith in Theological Treatises by Ibn Taymiyya
and Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyya,” in*Ibn Taymiyya* , pp. 163-88.

Ibn Taymiyyah

**Bori** , Caterina, “Ibn Taymiyya*wa-Jamâ’atu-hu* : Authority, Conflict
and Consensus in Ibn Taymiyya’s Circle,” in*Ibn Taymiyya* , pp. 23-52.

**El-Rouayheb** , Khaled, “From Ibn Hajar (d. 1566) to Khayr al-Dîn
al-Âlûsî (d. 1899): Changing Views of Ibn Taymiyya among non-Hanbalî
Sunni Scholars,” in*Ibn Taymiyya* , pp. 269-318.

**Fons** , Emmanuel, “A propos des Mongols. Une lettre d’Ibn Taymiyya au
sultan al-Malik al-Nâsir Muhammad b. Qalâwûn,”*Annales islamologiques* ,
43 (2009): 31-73 [includes transl.].

**Hassan** , Mona, “Modern Interpretations and Misinterpretations of a
Medieval Scholar: Apprehending the Political Thought of Ibn Taymiyya,”
in*Ibn Taymiyya* , pp. 338-66.

**Holtzman** , Livnat, “Human Choice, Divine Guidance and the*Fitra*
Tradition: The Use of Hadith in Theological Treatises by Ibn Taymiyya
and Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyya,” in*Ibn Taymiyya* , pp. 163-88.

**Hoover** , Jon, “God Acts by His Will and Power: Ibn Taymiyya’s
Theology of a Personal God in his Treatise on the Voluntary Attributes,”
in*Ibn Taymiyya* , pp. 55-77.

**-------** ,*Ibn Taymiyya’s Theodicy of Perpetual Optimism* (Islamic
Philosophy, Theology and Science, 73). Leiden-Boston: Brill, 2007,
xii-270 pp., ISBN 978-90-04-15847-4.

**al-Jamil** , Tariq, “Ibn Taymiyya and Ibn al-Mutahhar al-Hillî: Shi’i
Polemics and the Struggle for Religious Authority in Medieval Islam,”
in*Ibn Taymiyya* , pp. 229-46.

**el Omari** , Racha, “Ibn Taymiyya’s ‘Theology of the Sunna’ and his
Polemics with the Ash’arites,” in*Ibn Taymiyya* , pp. 101-19.

**Özervali** , M. Sait, “The Qur’ânic Rational Theology of Ibn Taymiyya
and his Criticism of the*Mutakallimûn* ,” in*Ibn Taymiyya* , pp. 78-100.

**Rapoport** , Yossef, “Ibn Taymiyya’s Radical Thought: Rationalism,
Pluralism and the Primacy of Intention,” in*Ibn Taymiyya* , pp. 191-226.

**Rapoport** , Yossef &**Ahmed** , Shahab, “Ibn Taymiyya and his Times,”
in*Ibn Taymiyya* , pp. 3-20.

**Saleh** , Walid A., “Ibn Taymiyya and the Rise of Radical
Hermeneutics: An Analysis of*An Introduction to the Foundations of
Qur’ânic Exegesis* ,” in*Ibn Taymiyya* , pp. 123-62.

**Thomas** , David, “Apologetic and Polemic in the*Letter from Cyprus*
and Ibn Taymiyya’s*Jawâb al-sahîh li-man baddala dîn al-Masîh* ,” in*Ibn
Taymiyya* , pp. 247-65.

**Ukeles** , Raquel M., “The Sensitive Puritana Revisiting Ibn
Taymiyya’s Approach to Law and Spirituality in Light of 20th-century
Debates on the Prophet’s Birthday (*mawlid al-nabî* ), in*Ibn Taymiyya*
, pp. 319-337.

al-Juwaynî

**[al-Juwaynî]** ,*Le livre du Tawhîd. Kitâb al-irshâd. Traité sur
l’Unicité selon le Sunnisme* , transl. by J.-D. Luciani with A. Penot.
Tunisia: Alif, 2010, 386 pp., ISBN 978-2-908087-20-8.

al-Kulaynî

**Amir-Moezzi** , Mohammad Ali &**Ansari** , Hassan, “Muhammad b. Ya’qûb
al-Kulaynî (m.328 ou 329/939-40 ou 940-41) et son*Kitâb al-Kâfî* . Une
introduction,”*Studia Iranica* , 38.2 (2009): 191-247.

al-Naysâbûrî

**[al-Naysâbûrî, Ahamad b. Ibrâhîm]** ,*Degrees of Excellence; A Fatimid
Treatise on Leadership in Islam* , new Arabic edition and English
translation by Arzina R. Lalani. London-New York: I.B. Taurus Publishers
with The Institute of Ismaili Studies, 2010, xvi-112+140 pp., ISBN
978-1-84511-145-8.

al-Râzî (Fakhr al-Dîn)

**Eichner** , Heidrun, “ ‘Knowledge by Presence’, Apperception and the
Mind-Body Relationship: Fakhr al-Dîn al-Râzî and al-Suhrawardî as
Representatives of a Thirteenth Century Discussion,” in*In the Age of
Averroes* , pp. 117-40.

**Janssens** , Jules, “Ibn Sînâ’s Impact on Fakhr ad-Dîn
ar-Râzî’s*Mabâhit al-Mashriqiyya* , with Particular Regard to the
Section Entitled*al-Ilâhiyyât al-mahda* : An Essay of Critical
Evaluation,”*Documenti e Studi* , 21 (2010): 259-85.

**Lagarde** , Michel, Les Secrets de l’invisible. Essai sur le Grand
Commentaire de Fakhr al-Dîn al-Râzî. Beirut: Albouraq, 2008, 647 pp.,
ISBN 978-2-84161-387-8.

**Oulddali** , Ahmed, “Les recherches de J. Jomier consacrées au
commentaire coranique de Fakhr al-Dîn al-Râzî,”*MIDEO* , 28 (2010):
49-71.

**-------** , “Wujûb al-qitâl al-mufsirîn. Mas’alat al-naskh bi-âyat
al-sayf wa mawqif Fakhr al-Dîn al Râzî minhâ,”*Annales islamologiques* ,
43 (2009): 74-86 [in Arabic].

**Severino** , Gabriella, “Semplici osservazioni in margine al*capitolo
sui pronomi* in*al-Tafsîr al-Kabîr* di Fakhr al-Dîn
al-Râzî,”*Islamochristiana* , 35 (2009): 85-100.

Sadr al-Shari’a

**Muhtaroglu** , Nazif, “An Occasionalist Defence of Free Will,”
in*Classic Issues in Islamic Philosophy* , pp. 45-62.

al-Shahrastânî

**[al-Shahrastânî]** ,*Keys to the Arcana: Shahrastânî’s Esoteric
Commentary on the Qur’an.* A translation of the commentary on*Sûrat
al-Fâtiha* from Muhammad b. ‘Abd al-Karîm al-Shahrastânî’s*Mafâtîh
al-asrâr wa masâbîh al-abrâr* by Toby Mayer with the Arabic text
reproduced from the ed. by M.A. Adharshab. Oxford: Oxford University
Press with The Institute of Ismaili Studies, 2009, xvi-268+124 pp. ISBN
978-019-953365-7.

al-Zamakhsharî

**Lane** , Andrew J.,*A Traditional Mu’tazilite Qur’ân Commentary. The*
Kashshâf*of Jâr Allah al-Zamakhsharî (d. 538/1144)* (Texts and Studies
on the Qur’ân 2). Leiden-Boston: Brill, 2006, xiv-418 pp., ISBN
90-04-14700-4.

Yahyâ ibn ‘Adî, see Falsafa, Ibn ‘Adî


