(2010-2011)
===========

I cannot thank enough all the scholars who kindly sent me information
and, in particular, those who provided me with a copy of their
publications or photocopies of tables of contents of collective works.

a- Collective Works or Collections of Articles

Albertus Magnus und der Ursprung der Universitätsidee. Die Begegnung der
Wissenschaftskulturen im 13. Jahrhundert und die Entdeckung des Konzepts
der Bildung durch Wissenschaft, ed. by Ludger Honnefelder. Berlin:
Berlin University Press, 2011, 560 pp., ISBN 9783862800070.

***Angeli: Ebraismo, Cristianesimo, Islam*** , ed. by Giorgio Agamben &
Emanuele Coccia. Vicenza: Neri Pozza, 2012 pp., ISBN 978885400648
[Islamic section ed. by Olga Lizzini & Samuela Pagani, pp. 1453-2012].

Christlicher Norden-Muslimischer Süden. Ansprüche und Wirklichkeiten von
Christen, Juden und Muslimen auf der Iberischen Halbinsel im Hoch-und
Spätmittelalter, ed. by Matthias M. Tischler & Alexander Fidora (Erudiri
Sapientia 7). Munster: Aschendorff, 2011, 789 pp., ISBN 9783402104279.

***Classical Foundations of Islamic Educational Thought: A Compendium of
parallel English-Arabic texts*** , ed. by Bradley J. Cook with Fathi H.
Malkawi (Islamic Translation Series). Provo, Utah: Brigham Young
University Press, xviii-307+241 (Arabic) pp., ISBN 978-0-8425-2763-7.

***De las Pasiones en la Filosofía Medieval. Actas del X Congreso
Latinoamericano de Filosofía Medieval*** , ed. by Giannina Burlando B.
Santiago. Chile: Pontifica Universidad Católica de Chile, Instituto de
Filosofía & Société Internationale pour l’Étude de la Philosophie
Médiévale, 2009, 459 pp., ISBN 9789563198515.

Expertus sum. L’expérience par les sens dans la philosophie naturelle
médiévale. Actes du colloque international de Pont-à-Mousson (5-7
février 2009), ed. by Thomas Bénatouïl & Isabelle Draelants (Micrologus
Library). Florence : SISMEL, 2011, viii-470 pp., ISBN 9788884504043.

***Fortresses of the Intellect : Ismaili and Other Islamic Studies in
Honour of Farhad Daftary*** , ed. by Omar Ali-de-Unzaga. London & New
York : I.B. Tauris with The Institute of Ismaili Studies, 2011, xvii-600
pp., ISBN 9781848856264.

***Immaginario e immaginazione nel medioevo*** , ed. by Maria Bettetini
& Francesco Paparella with Roberto Furlan (Textes et Études du Moyen Âge
51). Louvain-la-Neuve : Fédération Internationale des Instituts d’Études
Médiévales, 2009), 400 pp., ISBN 9782503531502.

***Islamic Philosophy, Science, and Religion: Studies in Honor of
Dimitri Gutas*** , ed. by Felicitas Opwis & David Reisman (Islamic
Philosophy, Theology and Science 83). Leiden-Boston: Brill, 2012,
xii-493 pp., ISBN 9789004202740.

La Letteratura arabo-cristiana e le scienze nel periodo abbaside
(750-1250 d.C.). Atti del 2o convegno di studi arabo-cristiani, Roma
9-10 marzo 2007, ed. by Davide Righi (Patrimonio culturale arabo
cristiano 11). Turin: Silvio Zamorani, 2008, 322 pp., ISBN
9788871581637.

***La lumière de l’intellect. La pensée scientifique et philosophique
d’Averroès dans son temps*** . Actes du IVe colloque international de la
SIHSPAI (Société Internationale d’Histoire des Sciences et de la
Philosophie Arabes et Islamiques) Cordoue, 9-12 décembre 1998, ed. by
Ahmad Hasnawi and with a Foreword by Roshdi Rashed. Leuven: Peeters,
2011, xii-528 pp., ISBN 9789042926028.

***Medieval Political Philosophy: A Sourcebook*** , ed. by Joshua Parens
& Joseph C. Macfarland, 2nd ed. (Agora). Ithaca & London: Cornell
University Press, 2011, xii-443 pp., ISBN 9780801449628 cloth; 801476815
pbk [Islamic section pp. 9-143; the 1963 first ed. had been ed. by Ralph
Lerner & Muhsin Mahdi].

***Philosophy in the Middle Ages: The Christian, Islamic and Jewish
Traditions*** , ed. by Arthur Hyman, James J. Walsh & Thomas Williams,
3rd ed. Indianapolis: Hackett, 2010, xvi-711pp., ISBN 9781603842099
cloth; 60384-208-2 pbk [Islamic section pp. 215-333; 2nd ed. 1983].

***Reason, Spirit and the Sacral in the New Enlightenment: Islamic
Metaphysics Revived and Recent Phenomenology of Life*** , ed. by
Anna-Teresa Tymieniecka (Islamic Philosophy and Occidental Phenomenology
in Dialogue 5). Dordrecht: Springer, 2011, viii-207 pp., ISBN
978-90-481-9612-8.

***Le Shî’isme Imâmite Quarante Ans Après. Hommage à Etan Kohlberg*** ,
ed. by Mohammad Ali Amir-Moezzi, Meir M. Bar-Asher & Simon Hopkins
(Biliothèque de l’École des Hautes Études, Sciences Religieuses 137).
Turnhout: Brepols, 2009, 438 pp., ISBN 9782503531144.

***The Three Rings: Textual Studies in the Historical Trialogue of
Judaism, Christianism and Islam*** , ed. by Barbara Roggema, Marcel
Poorthuis & Pim Valkenberg (Publications of the Thomas Instituut te
Utrecht 11). Leuven: Peeters, 2005, xxii-297 pp., ISBN 9042915633.

**Watt** , John W., ***Rhetoric and Philosophy from Greek into Syriac***
(Variorum CS960). Farnham, Surry: Ashgate, 2010, xiv-314 pp., ISBN
9781409400202.

***Well Begun is Only Half Done: Tracing Aristotle’s Political Ideas in
Medieval Arabic, Syriac, Byzantine, and Jewish Sources*** , ed. by
Vasileios Syros (Medieval and Renaissance Texts and Studies 388;
Medieval Confluences Series 1). Tempe, Arizona: ACMRS (Arizona Center
for Medieval and Renaissance Studies), 2011, xiv-226 pp., ISBN
9780866984362.

Section I. Falsafa

Bibliographies and Chronicles

**Daiber** , Hans,*Bibliography of Islamic Philosophy,* vol. 1 (in 2
vol.) & vol. 2. Leiden-Boston: Brill, 2011, ISBN 9789004202382
[paperback reprint of the 1999 ed.].

**Druart** , Thérèse-Anne, “Brief Bibliographical Guide in Medieval
Islamic Philosophy and Theology (2009-2010),”
http://philosophy.cua.edu/faculty/tad/bibliography-09-10.cfm.

Online Dictionary of Arabic Philosophical Terms

Andreas**Lammer** has begun an online dictionary of Arabic philosophical
terms. It can be accessed at http://www.arabic-philosophy.com/dict .

New Journals

***Journal of Islamic Research*** is published twice a year by the
Islamic University of Europe located in Rotterdam in the Netherlands. It
began in 2008 and can be accessed on the internet at
http://www.iueurope.com It includes articles in Turkish, English, French
and German.

***Studia graeco-arabica*** is the on line journal of the European
Research Council Advanced Grant*Greek into Arabic. Philosophical
Concepts and LinguisticBridges* . It features critical articles and
reviews on the transmission of philosophical and scientific texts from
and into various languages – Greek, Syriac, Arabic, and Latin – from
late Antiquity to the Middle Ages and Renaissance. The first issue came
out in 2011. The journal can be accessed at
http://www.greekintoarabic.edu/index.phpaid=20.

Resurrected Journal

***Oriens*** published its vol. 35 in 1996 and its vol. 36 in honor of
Rosenthal in 2001. Vol. 37 was published in 2009, vol. 38 in 2010, and
the two issues of vol. 39 in 2011 by Brill. The journal is directed by
Gerhard Endress, Cornelia Schöck & Florian Schwarz.

Special Issues of Journals

**Arabica** , 58.1/2 (2011) centers on Les Nusayris et les Druzes: deux
communautés ésotériques à la périphérie doctrinale de l’Islam. Actes des
journées d’études organisées par Daniel De Smet et Orkhan Mir-Kasimov.
Nantes – Paris, 18-19 juin 2009 [Hassan Ansari, “L’héritage ésotérique
du chiisme: un livre sur l’exégèse de la sourate 97,” 7-18; Bruno Paoli,
“La diffiusion de la doctrine nusayrie au IVe/Xe siècle d’après le Kitâb
Khayr al-sanî’a du cheikh Husayn Mayhûb Harfûsh,” 1952; Bella Tendler
Krieger, “Marriage, Birth, and bâtinî ta’wîl: A Study of Nusayrî
Initiation Based on the Kitâb al-Hâwî fî ‘ilm al-fatâwî of Abû Sa’îd
Maymûn al-Tabarânî,” 53-75; Kais M. Firro, “The Druze Faith: Origin,
Development and Interpretation,” 76-99; Daniel De Smet, “La Loi
Spirituelle (al-sharî’a l-rûhâniyya) druze selon Hamza b. ‘Alî: textes
canoniques et apocryphes,” 100-27; & Wissam Halabi-Halawi, “Le Kitâb
Durrat al-taj wa-sullam al-mi’raj d’Ibn Nasr: un éloge de Jamâl al-Dîn
‘Abd Allâh al-Tanûhî (820/1417-884/1479),” 128-64].

***Concordia*** , 59 (2011) focuses on contemporary Arabic philosophy
[Mohamed Arkoun, “Reform oder Subversiona Zu einer Politik der
Vernunft,” 5-13; Sadik Jalel al-Azm, “Der säkulare Staat und die
religiöse Frage: Das Modell Türkei. Ein philosophisch-politischer
Beitrag,” 15-31; Hassan Hanafi, “From Orientalism to Occidentalism,”
33-40; Ali Harb, “Philosophische Schriften in arabischer Sprache: Ihre
Leistung—ihr Dilemma—ihre Zielsetzung,” 41-56; Mohamed Mesbahi, “In
welchem Sinn könnte Ibn Rushd einen Zugang zum Dialog der Kulturen
bietena,” 57-69; Fuad Zakariya, “Die Prinzipien der Menschenrechte in
der Zeitgenössischen islamischen Welt,” 71-82; Fahmi Jadaane, “Féminisme
et Islam,” 83-91; Fathi Triki, “Para una razonabilidad de la
convivencia,” 93-101; & Mohamed Abed Al-Jabri im Gespräch,
“Rationalismus, Politik und Erkenntnistheorie. Ein Beitrag zur
arabisch-islamischen Philosophie der Gegenwart,” 103-16].

***Islam & Science*** , 9.2 (Winter 2011) is dedicated to al-Ghazâlî.
Articles by M. Iqbal, M. Hozein, Wan Abdullah and F. Shu’ayb. For detail
see section on al-Ghazâlî.

***Journal of Islamic Philosophy*** , 6 (2010), is a special issue on
Mullâ Sadrâ. Articles by M. Massi Dakake, D.B. Burrell, S. Kamada, Y.
Eshots, Z. Moris & M. Rustom. For detail see section on Mullâ Sadrâ.

***Mélanges de l’Université Saint-Joseph*** celebrates one hundred years
at the service of sciences (1906-2006) and so dedicates its volume 62
(2009) to two themes: 1. The Founders and 2. Just war in the ancient and
medieval Near East: Historical, philosophical and juridical approaches.

***Rue Descartes*** , 61 (Sept. 2008) is dedicated to Philosophizing
Today in Tunisia [Patrick Vauday, Fathi Triki & Rachida Boubaker-Triki,
Horizons, 1-7; Moez Mediouni, Les philosophes de Carthage, 10-15;
Rachida Smine, L’École de Kairouan, 16-23; Souad Chaherli Harrar, Les
Lumières et les réformistes tunisiens, 25-32; Tahar Ben Guiza, Pratiques
de la philosophie en Tunisie, 33-41; Salah Mosbah, Spinoza et le
problème du théologico-politique en Tunisie, 42-50; Fathi Nguezzou, La
phénoménologie et l’herméneutique en Tunisie, 52-57; Fathi Triki, Penser
l’Islam coutumier, 58-65; Mohamed Ali Halouani, Raison et laïcité,
67-75; interview with Abdelwahab Bouhdiba, L’arabisation de la
philosophie, 78-81].

Greek, Persian, and Syriac Sources

**Aouad** , Maroun &**Woerther** , Frédérique, „Le commentaire par
Averroès du chapitre 9 du livre X de l’*Éthique à Nicomaque* : pédagogie
de la contrainte, habitude et lois,“*Mélanges de l’Université
Saint-Joseph* , 62 (2009): 353-80 [with Latin text and French
translation].

**Arnzen** , Rüdiger,*Platonische Ideen in der arabischen Philosophie.
Texte und Materialien zur Begriffsgeschichte von* suwar aflâtûniyya*und*
muthul aflâtûniyya (Scientia Graeco-Arabica 6). Berlin & Boston: Walter
de Gruyter, 2011, viii-463 pp., ISBN 9783110259810 [includes a German
translation of the anonymous*Risâla fî l-muthul al-‘aqliyya
al-aflâtûniyya* , pp. 213-354 and of a text of Ibn Sînâ and of a passage
in Mullâ Sadrâ].

**-------** , „On the Contents, Sources and Composition of Two Arabic
Pseudo-Platonica:*Multaqatât Aflâtûn al-ilâhî* and*Fiqar ultuqitat
wa-jumi’at ‚an Aflâtûn* ,“*Oriens* , 37 (2009): 7-52.

**Bertaina** , David, “Science, Syntax, and Superiority in
Eleventh-Century Christian-Muslim Discussion: Elias of Nisibis on the
Arabic and Syriac Languages,”*Islam and Christian-Muslim Relations* ,
22,2 (2011): 197-207.

**Berti** , Vittorio, “L’angeologia siriaca,” in*Angeli* , pp. 1403-51
[Bar Ebreo].

**Bertolacci** , Amos, “Different Attitudes to Aristotle’s Authority in
the Arabic Medieval Commentaries on the Metaphysics*,” Antiquorum
Philosophia* , 3 (2009): 145-63 [al-Kindî, al-Fârâbî & Ibn Sînâ].

**Bladel** **van** , Kevin, “The Arabic History of Science of Abû Sahl
ibn Nawbaht (fl. Ca 770-809) and Its Middle Persian Sources,” in*Islamic
Philosophy* , pp. 41-62.

**Bonmariage** , Cécile &**Moureau** , Sébastien, “*Corpus Dionysiacum
Arabicum* . “Étude, ed. critique et traduction des*Noms Divins* , IV,
1-9, Partie I,”*Le Muséon* , 124,1-2 (2011): 181-227; “Partie II,”*Le
Muséon* , 124, 3-4 (2011): 419-59.

**Boudignon** , Christian, “Logique aristotélicienne et*kalâm
alâ-l-nasârâ* : la Réponse à Abû Qurra dans le*Mugnî* de Abd
al-Djabbâr,”*Arabica* , 58.6 (2011): 519-544.

**Buendia** , Pedro, “Acerca del Ave Felix en las tradiciones
islamicas,”*Al-Qantara* , 32.1 (2011): 7-26.

**Burnett** , Charles &**Bohak** , Gideon, “A Judaeo-Arabic Version of
Tâbit ibn Qurra’s*De Imaginibus* and Pseudo-Ptolemy’s*Opus Imaginum* ,”
in*Islamic Philosophy* , pp. 179-200.

**Cacouros** , Michel, “Exégèse grecque et problèmes éditoriaux dans le
Commentaire moyen d’Averroès aux*Seconds analytiques* (livre II, chap.
1-10), in*La lumière de l’intellect* , pp. 213-43.

**Chiaradonna** , Riccardo &**Rashed** , Marwan, “Before and after the
Commentators: An Exercise in Periodization. A Discussion of Richard
Sorabji,*The Philosophy of the Commentators, 200-600 AD* ,”*Oxford
Studies in Ancient Philosophy* , 38 (Summer 2010): 251-97 [section 3 by
M. Rashed deals with “The*Sourcebook* and Islamic philosophy,” pp.
273-92].

**Daiber** , Hans, “Graeco-Arabica Christiana: The Christian Scholar
‘Abd Allâh ibn al-Fadl from Antiochia (11th c. A.D.) as Transmitter of
Greek Works,” in*Islamic Philosophy* , pp. 3-9.

**D’Ancona** , Cristina, “Platonic and Neoplatonic Terminology for Being
in Arabic Translation,”*Studia graeco-arabica* , 1 (2011): 23-45.

**-------** , “The Origins of Islamic Philosophy,” in*The Cambridge
History of Philosophy in Late Antiquity* , ed. by Lloyd P. Gerson
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2010), pp. 869-93 + 1170-78.

**DiPasquale** , David M., “The end of Aristotle’s*Topics* and the
beginning of Islamic philosophy,” in*La lumière de l’intellect* , pp.
245-54.

**Doufikar-Aerts** , Faustina,*Alexander Magnus Arabicus: A Survey of
the Alexander Tradition through Seven Centuries: from
Pseudo-Callisthenes to Sûrî* (Mediaevalia Groningana New Series 13).
Paris-Louvain-Walpole, MA: Peeters, 2010, xxvi-416 pp., ISBN
9789042921832 [ch. 1.7 on the “*Epistola Alexandri ad Aristotelem* , pp.
74-76 & ch. 2 on Alexander in Wisdom Literature, pp. 93-133 are
particularly relevant].

***The Earliest Syriac translation of Aristotle’s*** **Categories** ,
Text, Translation and Commentary by Daniel King (Aristoteles
Semitico-Latinus 21). Leiden-Boston: Brill, 2010, x-327 pp., ISBN
9789004186606.

**Forster** , Regula,*Das Geheimnis der Geheimnisse. Die arabischen und
deutschen Fassungen des pseudo-aristotelischen* Sirr al-asrâr*, Secretum
secretorum* (Wissensliteratur im Mittelalter 43). Wiesbaden: Reichert,
2006, viii-329 pp., ISBN 9783895004957.

**Genequand** , Charles, “Ibn Rushd, Alexandre d’Aphrodise et le
problème de la génération,” in*La lumière de l’intellect* , pp. 311-18.

**Gruendler** , Beatrice, “*In Aristotle’s Words* …al-Hâtimî’s (a)
Epistle on al-Mutanabbî and Aristotle,” in*Islamic Philosophy* , pp.
89-129.

**Hansberger** , Rotraud, “Plotinus Arabus Rides Again,”*Arabic*
Sciences*and Philosophy* , 21 (2011): 57-84.

**Joosse** , N. Peter, “Expounding on a Theme: Structures and Sources of
Bar Hebraeus’ ‘Practical Philosophy’ in the*Cream of Wisdom* ,” in*The
Syriac Renaissance* , ed. by Herman Teule & Carmen Fostescu Tauwinkl
with Bas ter Haar Romany & Jan van Ginkel (Eastern Christian Studies 9)
(Leuven: Peeters, 2010), pp. 135-50.

**Kessler** , Eckhard, “Alexander of Aphrodisias and his Doctrine of the
Soul: 1400 Years of Lasting Significance,”*Early Science and Medicine* ,
16.1 (2011): 1-93 [not much on the Arabic side].

**McCollum** , Adam Carter,*A Greek and Syriac Index to Sergius of
Reshaina’s Version of the* De mundo (Gorgias Handbooks 12). Piscataway,
NJ: Gorgias Press, 2009, xii-368 pp., ISBN 9781607245834.

**Moawad** , Samuel, “Die arabische Version der*Vita Dioscori* ,”*Le
Muséon* , 124,1-2 (2011): 149-80.

**Rashed** , Marwan, “Le prologue perdu de l’abrégé du*Timée* de Galien
dans un texte de magie noire,”*Antiquorum Philosophia* , 3 (2009):
89-100.

**Reinink** , Gerrit J., “The ‘Book of Nature’ and Syriac Apologetics
against Islam. The Case of Job of Edessa’s*Book of Treasures* ,” in*The
Book of Nature in Antiquity and the Middle Ages* , ed. by Arjo
Vanderjagt & Klaas van Berkel (Groningen Studies in Cultural Changes 16)
(Leuven-Paris, Dudley, MA: Peeters, 2005), pp. 71-84.

**Saccenti** , Riccardo, “La*Summa Alexandrinorum* . Storia e contenuto
di un’epitome dell’*Etica Nicomachea* ,”*Recherches de Théologie et
Philosophie médiévales* , 77.2 (2010): 201-34 [includes ed. of Latin
version of ch. 7].

**Sweeney** , Michael, « Greek Essence and Islamic Tolerance :
Al-Farabi, Al-Ghazali, Ibn Rush’d, »*The Review of Metaphysics* , 65.1
(Sept. 2011) : 41-61.

**Syros** , Vasileios, « Forgotten Commentators Society: Aristotle’s
Political Ideas in Arabic, Syriac, Byzantine, and Jewish Garb, » in*Well
Begun* , pp. 1-16.

**Ter Reegen** , Jan G.J., “Virtudes, paixões e vicios*No segredo dos
segredos* do Pseudo-Aristoteles,” in*De las Pasiones* , pp. 183-98.

**Terrier** , Matthieu, “De l’éternité ou de la nouveauté du monde:
parcours d’un problème philosophique d’Athènes à Ispahan,”*Journal
Asiatique* , 299.1 (2011): 369-421.

**Vagelpohl** , Uwe, “The ‘Abbasid Translation Movement in Context:
Contemporary Voices on Translation,” in*‘Abbasid Studies II: Occasional
Papers of the School of ‘Abbasid Studies, Leuven 28 June-1 July 2004* ,
ed. by John Nawas (Orientalia Lovaniensia Analecta 177). Leuven/Paris:
Peeters, 2010, pp. 245-67.

**-------** , ‘Cultural Accommodation and the Idea of
Translation,”*Oriens* , 38 (2010): 165-84.

**Viano** , Cristina, “Les alchimistes gréco-alexandrins et leur savoir:
la transmutation entre théorie, pratique et “expériences’,” in*Expertus
sum* , pp. 223-38.

**Watt** , John W., “Aristotle’s*Rhetoric* and Political Thought in the
Christian Orient and in al-Fârâbî, Avicenna and Averroes,” in*Well
Begun* , pp. 17-47.

**-------,** “Graeco-Syriac Tradition in Arabic Philosophy in Bar
hebraeus,” in*The Syriac Renaissance* , ed. by Herman Teule & Carmen
Fostescu Tauwinkl with Bas ter Haar Romany & Jan van Ginkel (Eastern
Christian Studies 9) (Leuven: Peeters, 2010), pp. 123-33.

**-------** , “Syriac rhetorical theory and the Syriac tradition of
Aristotle’s*Rhetoric* ,” in Watt,*Rhetoric* , VII [originally 1994].

**-------** , “The Syriac reception of Platonic and Aristotelian
rhetoric,” in Watt,*Rhetoric* , VIII [originally 1993].

**--------** , “The philosopher-king in the*Rhetoric* of Antony of
Tagrit,” in Watt, X [originally 1992].

**--------** , “From Themistius to al-Fârâbî: Platonic political
philosophy and Aristotle’s*Rhetoric* in the East,” in Watt,*Rhetoric* ,
XI [originally 1995].

**-------** , “From Synesius to al-Fârâbî: philosophy, religion, and
rhetoric in the Christian Orient,” in Watt,*Rhetoric* , XII [originally
1998].

**------** , “Syriac translators and Greek philosophy in early Abbasid
Iraq,” in Watt,*Rhetoric* , XIII [originally 2004].

**-------** , “Syriac and Syrians as mediators of Greek political
thought to Islam,” in Watt,*Rhetoric* , XIV [originally 2004].

**--------** ,*Al-Farabi and the History of the Syriac Organon*
(Analecta Gorgiana 129). Piscataway N.J.: Gorgias Press, 2009, 29 pp.,
ISBN 978-1-60724-041-9 [a reprint of the same in*Malphono* : Studies in
Honor of Sebastian P. Brock, same press, 2008, pp. 751-78 but with 1
page of addenda et corrigenda].

Latin, Hebrew, Syriac, Byzantine, Renaissance, and Modern Translations
and Influences

**Barhebraeus** ,*Butyrum Sapientiae, Physics* , Introduction, ed.,
transl. & Commentary by Jens Ole Schmitt (Aristoteles Semitico-Arabus
20). Leiden-Boston: Brill, 2011, 325 pp., ISBN 9789004186514.

**Beccarisi** , Alessandra, “La morte e il filosofo: il ‘Liber de pomo
seu de morte Aristotelis’,” in*Parva Naturalia. Saperi medievali, natura
e vita* , ed. by Chiara Crisciani, Roberto Lambertini & Romana
Martorelli Vico (Pisa-Rome: Istituti Editoriali e Poligrafici
Internazionali, 2004), pp. 171-87.

**Bertolacci** , Amos, “A New Phase of the Reception of Aristotle in the
Latin West: Albertus Magnus and His Use of Arabic Sources in the
Commentaries on Aristotle,” in*Albertus Magnus* , pp. 259-76 + 491-500.

**Biard** , Joël, “La noétique de Jean de Jandun et son rapport à celle
d’Averroès,” in*La lumière de l’intellect* , pp. 495-506.

**Bieniak** , Magdalena,*The Soul-Body Problem at Paris, ca. 1200-1250:
Hugh of St-Cher and His Contemporaries* (Ancient and Medieval
Philosophy, De Wulf-Mansion Centre, Series I, 42). Leuven: Leuven
University Press, 2010, xii-245 pp., ISBN 9789058678027 [discusses at
length the influence of Avicenna].

**Burger** , Maria, “Albertus Magnus. Theologie als Wissenschaft unter
der Herausforderung aristotelisch-arabischer Wissenschaftstheorie,”
in*Albertus Magnus* , pp. 97-114 + 451-63.

**Burnett** , Charles, “*Experimentum* and*Ratio* in the
Salernitan*Summa de saporibus et odoribus* ,” in*Expertus sum* , pp.
337-58 [includes Latin ed. & transl.]

**Djedi** , Youcef, “Spinoza et l’islam: un état des
lieux,”*Philosophiques* , 37.2 (Fall 2010): 275-98.

**Endress** , Gerhard, « Kulturtransfer und Lehrüberlieferung Moritz
Steinschneider (1816-1907) und « Die Juden als Dolmetscher », »*Oriens*
, 39,1 (2011) : 59-74.

**Federici Vescovini** , Graziella, « Averroè e l’averroismo italiano, »
in*La lumière de l’intellect* , pp. 507-17.

**Fidora** , Alexander, « Aristotelische Wissenschaft als Netzwerk von
Wissenschaften: Die Rezeption der aristotelischen Wissenschaftstheorie
bei al-Fârâbî und Dominicus Gundissalinus, » in*Albertus Magnus* , pp.
77-96 + 442-51.

**-------** , « Die Wahrnemung des Anderen im Spiegel von
mittelalterlichen Übersetzungtheorien, » in*Christlicher Norden* , pp.
81-92.

**Fioravanti** , Gianfranco, « Phantasia : tra Aristotele e i
Peripatetici, » in*Immaginario* , pp. 163-77 [Gundisalinus].

**Forster** , Regula,*Das Geheimnis der Geheimnisse. Die arabischen und
deutschen Fassungen des pseudo-aristotelischen* Sirr al-asrâr*, Secretum
secretorum* (Wissensliteratur im Mittelalter 43). Wiesbaden: Reichert,
2006, viii-329 pp., ISBN 9783895004957.

**Germann** , Nadja, “Die ‘inneren Sinne’ im*Liber Contemplationis* ,”
in*Gottes Schau und Weltbetrachtung. Interpretationen zum “Liber
contemplationis” des Raimundus Lullus* , ed. by Fernando Domínguez
Reboiras, Viola Tenge-Wolf & Peter Walter (Turnhout: Brepols, 2011), pp.
239-69 [Avicenna & Averroes].

**Hackett** , Jeremiah, “*Ego Expertus Sum* : Roger Bacon’s Science and
the Origins of Empiricism,” in*Expertus sum* , pp. 145-73.

**Hasse** , Dag Nikolaus, „Der mutmassliche arabische Einfluss auf die
literarische Form der Universitätsliteratur des 13. Jahrhunderts,“
in*Albertus Magnus* , pp. 241-58 + 487-91.

**-------** ,Latin Averroes Translations of the First Half of the
Thirteenth Century. Hildesheim: Olms, 2010, 38 pp., ISBN 9783487144320.

**-------,** „Arabic philosophy and Averroism,“ in*The Cambridge
Companion to Renaissance Philosophy* , ed. by J. Hankins (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2007), pp. 113-36.

**Hissette** , Roland, „Des fragments de l’Averroes Latinus
(Commentaires de la Logica Vetus) à Darmstadt Universitäts- und
Landesbibliothek, Ms. 426,“ Recherches de Théologie et Philosophie
médiévales, 78.1 (2011): 1-24.

**Jolivet** , Jean, „L‘“augustinisme avicennisant“ au XIIe siècle: un
effet de mirage,“ in*Chora* , 2 (2004): 5-20.

**McGinnis** , Jon, „Aquinas‘ Arabic Sources on the Age of the Universe:
A Response to Gerald J. Massey,“*Divinatio* , 26 (2007): 191-204.

**Montero Cartelle** , Enrique, „Deformaciones de términos árabes,“
in*Medicina y filología: estudios de léxico médico latino en la edad
media* , ed. by Ana Isabel Martín Ferreira (Textes et Études du moyen
Âge) (Porto: Fédération Internationale des Instituts d’Études
Médiévales, 2010), pp. 165-82.

**Ramón Guerrero** , Rafael, „Conocimiento de la filosofía árabe y
musulmana parte de algunos judíos hispanos del siglo XI y comienzo del
XII,“ in*Christlicher Norden* , pp. 59-68.

**Reynolds** , Philip, „Thomas Aquinas, Muslims, Angels and Happiness,“
in*Frontiers in the Middle Ages* , ed. by O. Merisalo with P. Pahta
(Textes et Études du Moyen Âge 35). (Louvain-la-Neuve: Fédération
Internationale des Instituts d’Études Médiévales, 2006), pp. 87-103.

**Rezazadeh** , Reza, “Thomas Aquinas and Mulla Sadra on the Soul-Body
Problem: A Comparative Investigation,”*Journal of Shi’a Islamic Studies*
, 4.4 (2011): 415-28.

**Rubern-Hayoun** , Maurice, „Moïse de Narbone (1300-1362) et
l’averroïsme juif,“*Chora* , 2 (2004): 81-124.

**Saccenti** , Riccardo, “La*Summa Alexandrinorum* . Storia e contenuto
di un’epitome dell’*Etica Nicomachea* ,”*Recherches de Théologie et
Philosophie médiévales* , 77.2 (2010): 201-34 [includes ed. of Latin
version of ch. 7].

**Schwartz** , Yossef, « Celestial Motion, Immaterial Causality and the
Latin Encounter with Arabic Aristotelian Cosmology, » in*Albertus
Magnus* , pp. 277-98 + 500-511.

**Sidiropoulou** , Chryssi, « Aquinas, Ghazali, and Averroes on the Age
of the Universe. Response to Massey, »*Divinatio* , 28 (2008): 171-94.

**Szpiech** , Ryan, « Citas árabes en caracteres hebreos en el*Pugio
Fidei* del dominico Ramón Martí : entre la autenticidad y la autoridad,
»*Al-Qantara* , 32.1 (2011) : 71-107.

**Terrier** , Matthieu, “De l’éternité ou de la nouveauté du monde:
parcours d’un problème philosophique d’Athènes à Ispahan,”*Journal
Asiatique* , 299.1 (2011): 369-421.

**Tolan** , John, «*Ratio* et*experientia* dans la promotion de la
science arabe dans le monde latin au 12e siecle, » in*Expertus sum* ,
pp. 257-68.

**Vinciguerra** , Antony, « L’*ars alchimie* de Michel Scot.
Apprentissage, maîtrise et transmission des savoirs liés à la
fabrication artificielle de l’or et de l’argent, » in*Expertus sum* ,
pp. 289-307.

General Studies

**Adeline** , Yves-Marie,*La pensée médiévale en Occident et en Orient*
. Paris: Ellipses, 2011, 183 pp., ISBN 978-2-7298-6350-0 [Falsafa deals
with al-Kindi, al-Farabi & Avicenna, pp. 53-64 and Rupture islamique
treats of Algazel & Averroes, pp. 69-78].

**Akasoy** , Anna, “Al-Andalus in Exile. Identity and Diversity in
Islamic Intellectual History,” in*Christlicher Norden* , pp. 329-43.

**al-Khalili** , Jim,*The House of Wisdom: How Arabic Science Saved
Ancient Knowledge and Gave Us the Renaissance* . New York: The Penguin
Press, 2011, xxxiv-302 pp., ISBN 978-1-59420-279-7.

**Bennison** , Amira K., “The Necklace of al-Shifâ: Abbasid Borrowings
in the Islamic West,”*Oriens* , 38 (2010): 249-73.

**Black** , Deborah L., “Intentionality in Medieval Arabic
Philosophy,”*Quaestio* , 10 (2010): 65-81 [Avicenna and Averroes].

**Bladel** **van** , Kevin, “The Arabic History of Science of Abû Sahl
ibn Nawbaht (fl. ca 770-809) and Its Middle Persian Sources,” in*Islamic
Philosophy* , pp. 41-62.

**Bray** , Julia, “Literary Approaches to Medieval and Early Modern
Arabic Biography,”*Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society* , 20 (2010):
237-53.

**Brentjes** , Sonja, “The Prison of Categories—‘Decline’ and Its
Company,” in*Islamic Philosophy* , pp. 131-56.

**Buendia** , Pedro, “Acerca del Ave Felix en las tradiciones
islamicas,”*Al-Qantara* , 32.1 (2011): 7-26.

**Burnett** , Charles, “Two approaches to Natural Science in Toledo of
the twelfth century,” in*Christlicher Norden* , pp. 69-80 [*De ortu
scientiarum* & al-Fârâbî].

**Butterworth** , Charles E., “The World of Logic and Its Detractors,”
in*La lumière de l’intellect* , pp. 297-308.

**Chittick** , William C., “Reason, Intellect, and Consciousness in
Islamic Thought,” in*Reason, Spirit and the Sacral* , pp. 11-35.

**De Smet** , Daniel, “Philosophie grecque et religion musulmane:
Aristote comme exégète du Coran selon la tradition shi’ite
ismaélienne,”*Ishrâq* , 2 (2011): 344-63.

**-------,** « The Sacredness of Nature in Shi’i Isma’ili Islam, »
in*The Book of Nature in Antiquity and the Middle Ages* , ed. by Arjo
Vanderjagt & Klaas van Berkel (Groningen Studies in Cultural Changes 16)
(Leuven-Paris, Dudley, MA: Peeters, 2005), pp. 85-96.

**Endress** , Gerhard, “Der arabische Aristoteles. Traditionen,
Institutionen und Enzyklopädien der Wissenschaften im
arabisch-islamischen Mittelalter,” in*Albertus Magnus* , pp. 141-91 +
467-74.

**Escobar Gómez** , Santiago, “El concepto de sufrimiento en la
filosofía islámica clásica, » in*Filosofía y dolor* , ed. by Moisés
González García (Madrid: Tecnos, 2006), pp; 121-57.

**Evkuran** , Mehmet, “The Problem of Causality in Islamic
Thought,”*Journal of Islamic Research* , 2.2 (2009): 115-27.

**Flasch** , Kurt,*Introduction à la philosophie médiévale* , transl. by
Janine de Bourgknecht, Ruedi Imbach & François Xavier Putallaz, 2nd ed.
with a Postword (Vestigia 37). Fribourg: Academic Press & Paris: Cerf,
2010, 324 pp., ISBN 9782204072199 (Fribourg) or 9782825110520 (Paris)
[ch. 8, Scepticisme et piété ou métaphysique et science: Averroès contre
Al-Ghazali, pp. 123-52 & ch. 9, L’immortalité individuelle ou le retour
à l’esprit universel: Albert le Grand contre Averroès, pp. 153-74].

**Gannagé** , Emma, « Médecine et philosophie à Damas à l’aube du
XIIIème siècle: un tournant post-avicennien. »*Oriens* , 39.2 (2011) :
227-56 [focuses on Ya’qûb b. Ishâq al-Isrâ’îlî].

**Gruendler** , Beatrice, “*In Aristotle’s Words* …al-Hâtimî’s (a)
Epistle on al-Mutanabbî and Aristotle,” in*Islamic Philosophy* , pp.
89-129.

**Hasse** , Dag Nikolaus, „Arabic philosophy and Averroism,“ in*The
Cambridge Companion to Renaissance Philosophy* , ed. by J. Hankins
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007), pp. 113-36.

**Hechaimé** , Camille, S.J., „Contributions des jésuites aux études
orientales dans les*Mélanges de l’Université Saint-Joseph* ,“*Mélanges
de l’Université Saint-Joseph* , 62 (2009): 23-34.

**Heck** , Paul, “Language Theory and State Officials in the Reign of
al-Muqtadir: The Case of Ibn Wahb al-Kâtib,” in*‘Abbasid Studies II:
Occasional Papers of the School of ‘Abbasid Studies, Leuven 28 June-1
July 2004* , ed. by John Nawas (Orientalia Lovaniensia Analecta 177).
Leuven/Paris: Peeters, 2010, pp. 271-82.

**Hunsberger** , Alice C., “Cosmos into Verse: Two Examples of Islamic
Philosophical Poetry in Persian,” in*Fortresses of the Intellect* , pp.
343-67.

**Jambet** , Christian,*Qu’est-ce que la philosophie islamiquea* (folio
essais 547). Paris: Gallimard, 2011, 472 pp., ISBN 978-2-07-033647-0.

**Joose** , N. Peter, « Between Enigma and Paradigm : The Reception of
Aristotle’s*Politica* in the Near East : The Arabic and Syriac-Aramaic
Traditions, » in*Well Begun* , pp. 97-120.

**Koetschet** , Pauline,*La philosophie arabe, IXe-XIVe siècle* ,
selected and commented texts (Bibliothèque 660). Paris: Points, 2011,
298 pp., ISBN 9782757809372 [brief texts selected by theme].

**Lettinck** , Paul, “Science in*Adab* Literature,”*Arabic Sciences and
Philosophy* , 21 (2011): 149-63.

**Lizzini** , Olga, “Il nulla, l’inesistente, la cosa: note intorno alla
terminologia e alla dottrina del nulla e della creazione dal nulla nel
pensiero islamico,” in*Discussioni sul nulla tra medioevo ed età
moderna* ,ed. by Massimiliano Lenzi & Alfonso Maierù (Lessico
Intellettuale Europeo 104). (Florence: Leo S. Olschki Editore, 2009),
pp. 63-103.

**Moulfi** , Mohamed, “Philosophie et*falsafa* . Oeuvre et mise en
oeuvre de la*falsafa* ,”*Revue de Métaphysique et de Morale* , s.v., n.4
(Oct.-Dec. 2009): 511-22.

**Omar** , Mohammad Nasir, « Christian and Muslim Philosophers’ Apologia
for Greek Philosophy, »*The Islamic Quarterly* , 54.2 (2010) ; 83-93.

**Osti** , Letizia, « The Practical Matters of Culture in Pre-*Madrasa*
Baghdad, »*Oriens* , 38 (2010): 145-64.

**Ramón Guerrero** , Rafael, « Legislador y poder en la filosofía
política del Islam y del Judaísmo, » in*El pensamiento político en la
Edad Media* , ed. by P. Roche (Madrid : Editorial Centro de Estudios
Ramón Areces, 2010), pp. 191-213

**-------** , “Del amor en la filosofía árabe,” in*De las Pasiones* ,
pp. 143-67.

**Richter-Benburg** , Lutz, « ‘God Created Adam in his likeness’ in the
Muslim Tradition’, » in*The Quest for a Common Humanity : Human Dignity
and Otherness in the Religious Traditions of the Mediterranean* , ed. by
Katell Berthelot & Matthias Morgenstern (Numen Book Series, Studies in
the History of Religions 134) (Leiden: Brill, 2011), pp. 67-82 [Ibn
Hazm, al-Ghazâlî & Ibn Tufayl among others].

**Samir** , Samir Khalil, “La rivoluzione culturale introdotta a Bagdad
dai Cristiani,” in*La Letteratura* , pp. 35-57.

**Spevak** , Aaron, « Apples and Oranges : The Logic of The Early and
Later Arabic Logicians, »*Islamic Law and Society* , 17 (2010) : 159-84.

**Terrier** , Matthieu, “De l’éternité ou de la nouveauté du monde:
parcours d’un problème philosophique d’Athènes à Ispahan,”*Journal
Asiatique* , 299.1 (2011): 369-421.

**Toorawa** , Shawkat M., « Proximity, Resemblance, Sidebars and
Clusters : Ibn al-Nadîm’s Organizational Principles in*Fihrist* 3.3,
»*Oriens* , 38 (2010) : 217-47.

**Yaman** , Hikmet,*Prophetic Niche in The Virtuous City : The Concept
of* Hikmah*in Early Islamic Thought* (Islamic Philosophy, Theology and
Science 81). Leiden-Boston : Brill, 2011, xii-316 pp., ISBN
9789004186620 [part IV focuses on*hijkmah* in philosophy, pp. 207-67 and
covers al-Kindî, al-Fârâbî & Ibn Sînâ].

‘Abd al-Latîf al-Baghdâdî

**Joosse** , N. Peter &**Pormann** , Peter E., « Decline and Decadence
in Iraq and Syria after the Age of Avicenna a: ‘Abd al-Latîf al-Baghdâdî
(1162-1231) between Myth and History, »*Bulletin of the History of
Medicine* , 84.1 (Spring 2010) : 1-29.

Abû Bishr Mattâ

**Watt** , John W., “Christianity in the Renaissance of Islam: Abû Bishr
Mattâ, al-Fârâbî, and Yahyâ ibn ‘Adî,” in Watt,*Rhetoric* , XVI
[originally 2007].

Ashkevarî (Qutb al-Dîn)

**Terrier** , Matthieu, “Le*Mahbûb al-qulûb* de Qutb al-Dîn Ashkevarî:
une oeuvre méconnue dans l’histoire de la sagesse en Islam,”*Journal
Asiatique* , 298.2 (2010): 345-87.

Averroes

***Averroes Latinus. Commentum Medium Super Librum***
**Praedicamentorum** ***Aristotelis*** . Translation Wilhelmo De Luna
Adscripta, ed. by R. Hissette, Arabic-Latin apparatus with notes by A.
Bertolacci, glossaries by Hissette & Bertolacci and with † L.J.
Bataillon (Averrois Opera. Series B. Averroes latinus 11). Leuven:
Peeters, 2010, xvi-199\*-8 ill.-270 pp., ISBN 9789042922822.

**The Decisive Treatise** , transl. by G.F. Hourani, in Philosophy in
the Middle Ages, pp. 289-304.

***The Decisive Treatise*** , transl. by Charles E. Butterworth,
in*Medieval Political Philosophy* , pp. 123-40.

***Long Commentary on the Soul*** ,3.4, transl. by Arthur Hyman & 3.5,
3.18-3.20, transl. by Jon McGinnis & David C. Reisman, in*Philosophy in
the Middle Ages* , pp. 304-24.

***The Incoherence of the Incoherence*** *,* On the Eternity of the
World, transl. by Jon McGinnis & David C. Reisman, in*Philosophy in the
Middle Ages* , pp. 324-33.

**Abrahamov** , Binyamin, “Ibn Rushd and the Kalâm,” in*La lumière de
l’intellect* , pp. 481-86.

**Aouad** , Maroun &**Woerther** , Frédérique, „Le commentaire par
Averroès du chapitre 9 du livre X de l’*Éthique à Nicomaque* : pédagogie
de la contrainte, habitude et lois,“*Mélanges de l’Université
Saint-Joseph* , 62 (2009): 353-80 [with Latin text and French
translation].

**Aroua** , Mahmoud, „La douleur dans le*Colliget* d’Averroès,“ in*La
lumière de l’intellect* , pp. 125-33.

**Atalay** , Orhan, “Ibn Rushd and his Criticism for Esh’arism,”*Journal
of Islamic Research* , 3.2 (2010): 82-97.

**Baffioni** , Carmela, “Averroes’ contribution to embryology,” in*La
lumière de l’intellect* , pp. 109-21.

**Bauloye** , Laurence, “Physique et métaphysique chez Averroès,” in*La
lumière de l’intellect* , pp.359-67.

**Bellosta** , Hélène, “Averroès commentateur d’Aristote ou lecteur
d’Alhazen,” in*La lumière de l’intellect* , pp. 23-37.

**Biard** , Joël, “La noétique de Jean de Jandun et son rapport à celle
d’Averroès,” in*La lumière de l’intellect* , pp. 495-506.

**Black** , Deborah L., “Intentionality in Medieval Arabic
Philosophy,”*Quaestio* , 10 (2010): 65-81.

**Bonin** , Thérèse, “A Muslim Perspective on Philosophy and Religion:
The ‘Decisive Treatise’ of Averroes,”*Peripatetikos* , 6 (2007): 1-25.

**Butterworth** , Charles E., “The World of Logic and Its Detractors,”
in*La lumière de l’intellect* , pp. 297-308.

**Cacouros** , Michel, “Exégèse grecque et problèmes éditoriaux dans le
Commentaire moyen d’Averroès aux*Seconds analytiques* (livre II, chap.
1-10),” in*La lumière de l’intellect* , pp. 213-43.

**Cerami** , Cristina, “Generazione verticale, generazione orizzontale:
il principio di sinonimia nel*Commento grande* di Averroè al Libro Z
della*Metafisica* di Aristotle,”*Chôra. Revue d’Études anciennes et
médiévales* , 7-8 (2009-2010): 133-62.

**di Giovanni** , Matteo, “Averroes and the Logical Status of
Metaphysics,” in*Methods and Methodologies: Aristotelian Logic East and
West, 500-1500* , ed. by Margaret Cameron & John Marenbon
(Leiden/Boston: Brill, 2011), pp. 53-74.

**Di Martino** , Carla, “La memoria nell’*Epitome* dei*Parva Naturalia*
di Ibn Rushd,” in*Parva Naturalia. Saperi medievali, natura e vita* ,
ed. by Chiara Crisciani, Roberto Lambertini & Romana Martorelli Vico
(Pisa-Rome: Istituti Editoriali e Poligrafici Internazionali, 2004), pp.
189-99.

**Druart** , Thérèse-Anne, “Averroes’s Long Commentary on Aristotle’s*De
anima* and Direct Knowledge of Separate Beings,” in*La lumière de
l’intellect* , pp. 371-79.

**Elamrani-Jamal** , Abdelali, “L’usage des enseignements de la
philosophie dans le premier ouvrage juridique d’Ibn Rushd: l’Abrégé
du*Mustasfâ* d’al-Ghazâlî,” in*La lumière de l’intellect* , pp. 471-80.

**Endress** , Gerhard, “*In ansa’a Llâhu fî al-‘umr* , The Project of
Averroes,” in*La lumière de l’intellect* , pp. 169-96.

**Federici Vescovini** , Graziella, « Averroè e l’averroismo italiano, »
in*La lumière de l’intellect* , pp. 507-17.

**Fontaine** , Resianne, “Averroes as a commentator of Aristotle: the
case of the*Meteorologica* and the*De animalibus* ,” in*La lumière de
l’intellect* , pp. 99-108.

**Freudenthal** , Gad, “Averroes’ changing mind on the role of the
active intellect in the generation of animate beings,” in*La lumière de
l’intellect* , pp. 319-28.

**Fraenkel** , Carlos, “Maimonides, Averroes, and Samuel Tibbon on a
Skandalon of Medieval Sciences,”*Aleph* , 8 (2008): 195-211.

**Gatti** , Roberto, „Lewi Ben Gershom (Gersonide) commentatore di
Averroè: il tema dell’immaginazione nel supercommentario al*De Anima* ,“
in*Immaginario* , pp. 203-18 [in fact on the*Epitome of the De anima* ].

**Genequand** , Charles, “Ibn Rushd, Alexandre d’Aphrodise et le
problème de la génération,” in*La lumière de l’intellect* , pp. 311-18.

**Germann** , Nadja, “Die ‘inneren Sinne’ im*Liber Contemplationis* ,”
in*Gottes Schau und Weltbetrachtung. Interpretationen zum “Liber
contemplationis” des Raimundus Lullus* , ed. by Fernando Domínguez
Reboiras, Viola Tenge-Wolf & Peter Walter (Turnhout: Brepols, 2011), pp.
239-69.

**Harvey** , Steven, „Similarities and differences among Averroes‘ three
commentaries on Aristotle’s*Physics* ,“ in*La lumière de l’intellect* ,
pp. 81-97.

**Hasnawi** , Ahmad, „La topique de l’accident chez Averroès: de
l’Abrégé de logique au Commentaire moyen sur les*Topiques* ,“ in*La
lumière de l’intellect* , pp. 255-95.

**-------** , „Topique et syllogistique: la tradition arabe (al-Fârâbî
et Averroès),“ in*Les Lieux de l’argumentation. Histoire du syllogisme
topique d’Aristote à Leibniz* , ed. by J. Biard & F. Mariani-Zini
(Turnhout: Brepols, 2009), pp. 191-226.

**Hasse** , Dag Nikolaus,*Latin Averroes Translations of the First Half
of the Thirteenth Century* . Hildesheim: Olms, 2010, 38 pp., ISBN
9783487144320.

**-------** „Arabic philosophy and Averroism,“ in*The Cambridge
Companion to Renaissance Philosophy* , ed. by J. Hankins (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2007), pp. 113-36.

**Hissette** , Roland, „Des fragments de l’Averroes Latinus
(Commentaires de la Logica Vetus) à Darmstadt Universitäts- und
Landesbibliothek, Ms. 426,“ Recherches de Théologie et Philosophie
médiévales, 78.1 (2011): 1-24.

**Hugonnard-Roche** , Henri, „Vues sur la théorie de la science dans
quelques commentaires d’Averroès, à propos de l’Épitomé de la*Physique*
, in*La lumière de l’intellect* , pp. 197-206.

**Ivry** , Alfred L., „Averroes‘ Treatises on The Intellect,“ in*La
lumière de l’intellect* , pp. 381-89.

**Janssens** , Jules, „Ibn Rushd et sa critique d’Ibn Bâjja (dans le
Grand Commentaire sur le*De anima* ),“ in*La lumière de l’intellect* ,
p. 405-18.

**Katouzian-Safadi** , Mehrnaz, „Lois de la composition des médicaments:
propriétés prévisibles et imprévisibles selon Averroès,“ in*La lumière
de l’intellect* , pp. 135-45.

**Kock** , Ilona, „The Debate about God’s Simplicity: Reason and Spirit
in the Eighth Discussion of al-Ghazali’s*Tahafut al-falasifa* and Ibn
Rushd’s*Tahafut t-tahafut* ,“ in*Reason, Spirit and the Sacral* , pp.
157-83.

**Lay** , Juliane, “L’*Abrégé de l’Almageste* : abrégé d’astronomie ou
épitomé de l’*Almageste* a,” in*La lumière de l’intellect* , pp. 63-79.

**Lemay** , Richard †, “Le*De substantia orbis* d’Averroès: zénith et
nadîr de la*falsafa* ,” in*La lumière de l’intellect* , pp. 329-44.

La lumière de l’intellect.

**Maróth** , Miklós, “Averroes on the void,” in*La lumière de
l’intellect* , pp. 11-22.

**Martínez Lorca** , Andrés,*Averroes, el sabio cordobés que iluminó
Europa* . Cordoba: El Páramo, 2010, 133 pp., ISBN 9788492904037.

**Martos Quesada** , Juan, “Averroes como muftí,” in*La lumière de
l’intellect* , pp. 445-55.

**Masoumi-Hamedani** , Hossein, “La voie lactée: Ibn al-Haytham et Ibn
Rushd,” in*La lumière de l’intellect* , pp. 39-62.

**Mensia** , Mokdad Arfa, “Ibn Rushd et le zâhirisme pratique,” in*La
lumière de l’intellect* , pp. 457-70.

**Mesbahi** , Mohamed, “In welchem Sinn könnte Ibn Rushd einen Zugang
zum Dialog der Kulturen bietena,”*Concordia* , 59 (2011): 57-69.

**-------** , „Rôle du paradigme médical dans le discours philosophique
d’Ibn Rushd,“ in*La lumière de l’intellect* , pp. 207-12.

**Okumus** , Mesut, “The Influence of al-Ghazzali on the Hermeneutics of
Ibn Rushd,”*Der Islam* , 86.2 (2011): 286-311.

**-------** , “The Hermeneutics of Ibn Rushd,”*Journal of Islamic
Research* , 2.2 (2009): 46-65.

**Pavalko** , Rima, “The Intention of the Law and the Lawgiver in
Averroes’s*Decisive Treatise* ,” in*La lumière de l’intellect* , pp.
487-92.

**Puig Montada** , Josep, «*Jawhar* en el epítome averroico de
la*Metafísica* , » in*La lumière de l’intellect* , pp. 419-29.

**-------,** “Averroes, sobre las pasiones,” in*De las Pasiones* , pp.
209-21.

**Ramón Guerrero** , Rafael, «*Veritas filia temporis* en Averroes
commentario a*Metafísica* II, 1, » in*La lumière de l’intellect* , pp.
431-441.

**Rashed** , Roshdi, « Le concept de lieu : Ibn al-Haytham, Averroès, »
in*La lumière de l’intellect* , pp. 3-9.

**Ricordel** , Joëlle, « Ibn Juljul et Ibn Rushd : propos sur la
thériaque, » in*La lumière de l’intellect* , pp. 157-66.

**Sidiropoulou** , Chryssi, « Aquinas, Ghazali, and Averroes on the Age
of the Universe. Response to Massey, »*Divinatio* , 28 (2008): 171-94.

**Stephan** , Nouha, « La théorie pharmacologique d’Ibn Rushd d’après
le*Kitâb al-Kulliyyât fî al-tibb* , V : principaux points de convergence
et de divergence avec la théorie pharmacologique d’al-Kindî, » in*La
lumière de l’intellect* , pp. 147-55.

**Sweeney** , Michael, « Greek essence and Islamic Tolerance :
Al-Farabi, Al-Ghazali, Ibn Rush’d, »*The Review of Metaphysics* , 65.1
(Sept. 2011): 41-61.

**Taylor** , Richard C., « Averroes’ Philosophical Conception of
Separate Intellect and God, » in*La lumière de l’intellect* , pp.
391-404.

**Terkan** , Fehrullah, “Revisiting the Conflict between Religion and
Philosophy in Islam: al-Ghazâlî’s Diagnosis of Onto-Theology,”*Journal
of Islamic Research* , 1.2 (2008): 5-22.

**Twetten** , David B., “Where is Averroes’s physical proof of God’s
existencea,” in*La lumière de l’intellect* , pp. 345-57.

**Watt** , John W., “Aristotle’s*Rhetoric* and Political Thought in the
Christian Orient and in al-Fârâbî, Avicenna and Averroes,” in*Well
Begun* , pp. 17-47.

**Yazicioglu** , Isra, “Redefining the Miraculous: al-Ghazâlî, Ibn Rushd
and Said Nursi on Qur’anic Miracle Stories,”*Journal of Qur’anic
Studies* , 13.2 (2011): 86-108.

Avicenna

***The Cure, The Soul*** , 5.7, transl. by Jon McGinnis & David C.
Reisman, in*Philosophy in the Middle Ages* , pp. 261-64.

***The Cure, Metaphysics*** , 6.1-6.2, transl. by Arthur Hyman,
in*Philosophy in the Middle Ages* , pp. 249-55.

***Healing, Metaphysics*** , 10, transl. by Michael E. Marmura,
in*Medieval Political Philosophy* , pp. 77-88.

***Salvation, Psychology*** , 6.9, 6.12, 6.13, transl. by F. Rahman,
in*Philosophy in the Middle Ages* , pp. 256-61.

***Salvation, Metaphysics*** , 2.1-2.5, 2.12, 2.13, 2.18, 2.19, transl.
by Jon McGinnis & David C. Reisman, in*Philosophy in the Middle Ages* ,
pp. 244-49.

**On the Division of the Rational Sciences** , political science,
transl. by Muhsin Mahdi, in Medieval Political Philosophy, pp. 74-76.

**Brief eines tugendhaften Mannes an die Gelehrten Baghdâds**
in**Arnzen** , Rüdiger, Platonische Ideen in der arabischen Philosophie.
Texte und Materialien zur Begriffsgeschichte von suwar aflâtûniyya und
muthul aflâtûniyya (Scientia Graeco-Arabica 6). Berlin & Boston: Walter
de Gruyter, 2011, pp. 355-73.

**Avicena (Ibn Sînâ)** ,***Cuestiones divinas (Ilâhiyyât).*** Selection
of texts, ed. and transl. by Carlos A. Segovia (Clásicos del pensamiento
37). Madrid: Biblioteca Nueva, 2006, 195 pp., ISBN 8497425219.

***“Avicena: El Libro de las definiciones (*** **Kitâb al-Hudûd** ***),
1a parte,”*** trasnl., notes and commentary by Ángel Poncela González &
Jaime Coullaut Cordero,*Revista Española de Filosofía Medieval* , 17
(2010): 181-94 [covers intro. plus def. 1-16].

**Bäck** , Allan, “Avicenna’s Hermeneutics,”*Vivarium* , 49.1-3 (2011):
9-25.

**Bahlul** , Raja, “Avicenna and the Problem of Universals,”*Philosophy
and Theology* , 21.1-2 (2009): 3-25.

**Bennison** , Amira K., “The Necklace of al-Shifâ: Abbasid Borrowings
in the Islamic West,”*Oriens* , 38 (2010): 249-73.

**Bertolacci** , Amos, “The Distinction of Essence and Existence in
Avicenna’s Metaphysics: The Text and Its Context,” in*Islamic
Philosophy,* pp. 257-88.

**-------** , “The ‘Ontologization’ of Logic. Metaphysical Themes in
Avicenna’s Reworking of the*Organon* ,” in*Methods and Methodologies:
Aristotelian Logic East and West, 500-1500* , ed. by Margaret Cameron &
John Marenbon (Leiden/Boston: Brill, 2011), pp. 27-51.

**Bieniak** , Magdalena,*The Soul-Body Problem at Paris, ca. 1200-1250:
Hugh of St-Cher and His Contemporaries* (Ancient and Medieval
Philosophy, De Wulf-Mansion Centre, Series I, 42). Leuven: Leuven
University Press, 2010, xii-245 pp., ISBN 9789058678027 [discusses at
length the influence of Avicenna].

**Black** , Deborah L., “Intentionality in Medieval Arabic
Philosophy,”*Quaestio* , 10 (2010): 65-81.

**Chandelier** , Joël, “Expérience, expérimentation et connaissance dans
la médecine scolastique italienne du 14e siècle,” in*Expertus sum* , pp.
385-403.

**De Souza Pereira** , Rosalie Helena, “Avicena e*O poema de medicina* :
A doutrina dos temperamentos de Galeno,” in*De las Pasiones* , pp.
169-81.

**El-Bizri** , Nader, « Ibn Sînâ’s Ontology of the Question of Being,
»*Ishrâq* , 2 (2011):222-37.

**Fioravanti** , Gianfranco, « Phantasia: tra Aristotele e i
Peripatetici, » in*Immaginario* , pp. 163-77.

**Freudenthal** , Gad, « Samuel Ibn Tibbon’s Avicennian Theory of an
Eternal World, »*Aleph* , 8 (2008) : 41-129.

**Gannagé** , Emma, « Médecine et philosophie à Damas à l’aube du
XIIIème siècle: un tournant post-avicennien. »*Oriens* , 39.2 (2011) :
227-56 [focuses on Ya’qûb b. Ishâq al-Isrâ’îlî].

**Germann** , Nadja, “Die ‘inneren Sinne’ im*Liber Contemplationis* ,”
in*Gottes Schau und Weltbetrachtung. Interpretationen zum “Liber
contemplationis” des Raimundus Lullus* , ed. by Fernando Domínguez
Reboiras, Viola Tenge-Wolf & Peter Walter (Turnhout: Brepols, 2011), pp.
239-69.

**González Ginocchio** , David, « Concepto, juicio y ser en Avicena, »
in*In umbra intelligentiae. Estudios en homenaje al Prof. Juan Cruz
Cruz* , ed. by Ángel Luis González & Maria Idoya Zorroza (Pamplona:
Eunsa, 2011), pp. 437-50.

**-------** ,*La metafísica de Avicena : Arquitectura de la ontología*
(Cuadernos de Anuario Filosófico 224). Pamplona : Servicio de
publicaciones de la Universidad de Navarra, 2010, 121 pp.

**-------** , « Creación natural y voluntaria: sobre Avicena y Escoto, »
in*Metafísica y libertad* , ed. by David González Ginocchio (Cuadernos
de Anuario Filosófico 214) (Pamplona : Servicio de publicaciones de la
Universidad de Navarra, 2009), pp. 261-74.

**Houser** , R.E., « Aristotle and Two Medieval Aristotelians on the
Nature of God, »*International Philosophical Quarterly* , 51.3 (2011) :
355-75 [Aquinas & Avicenna]..

**Janssens** , Jules, « Ibn Sînâ’s*Ta’liqât* : The Presence of
Paraphrases of and Super-Commentaries on the*Ilâhîyât* of the*Shifâ’* ,
» in*Islamic Philosophy* , pp. 201-22.

**Koutzarova** , Tiana, « Wissenschaft als « Genesung » : Avicennas
Konzept einer Enzyklopädie von Wissenchaften, » in*Albertus Magnus* ,
pp. 192-205 + 476-81.

**Lizzini** , Olga,*Fluxus (fayd). Indagine sui fondamenti della
metafisica e della fisica di Avicenna* (Biblioteca filosofica di
Quaestio 14). Bari : Pagina, 2011, 679 pp., ISBN 9788874701230.

**-------** , “Vie active, vie contemplative et philosophie chez
Avicenne,” in*Vie active et vie contemplative au Moyen Âge et au seuil
de la Renaissance* , ed. by Christian Trottmann (Collection de l’École
Française de Rome 423) (Rome: École Française de Rome, 2009), pp.
207-239.

**-------** , “L’angelologia filosofica di Avicenna,” in Angeli, pp.
1845-63 [transl from Libro delle definizioni; from Epistola sulle
divisioni delle scienze intellettuali; from Indicazione
dell’inconsistenza dell’astrologia giudiziaria; Epistola del Trono;
Epistola in cui si stabiliscono l’esistenza e la validità delle profezie
e l’interpretazione dei simboli e delle immagini che i profeti
utilizzano; from Libro delle indicazioni e degli avvertimenti, VI, Sui
fini, sui loro principi e sull’ordinamento & from Gemme della sapienza].

**-------** , “Critica dell’emanazione e creazione dal nulla in Yahyâ
Ibn ‘Adî,” in*La Letteratura* , pp. 225-44.

**McGinnis** , Jon, « The Ultimate Why Question : Avicenna on Why God Is
Absolutely Necessary, » in*The Ultimate Why Question : Why Is There
Anything at All Rather than Nothing Whatsoever a* , ed. by John F.
Wippel (Studies in Philosophy and the History of Philosophy 54).
(Washington, D.C. : The Catholic University of America, 2011), pp.
65-83.

**-------** , « Avicenna (Ibn Sina), » in*The History of Western
Philosophy of Religion* , ed. by Graham Oppy & Nick Trakakis, vol. 2
:*Medieval Philosophy of Religion* (Durham, UK : Acumen, 2009), pp.
61-72.

**--------** , « What Underlies the Change from Potentiality to
Possibilitya A Select History of the Theory of Matter from Aristotle to
Avicenna, »*Cadernos de História e Filosofía de Ciência* , ser. 3, 17
(2007): 259-78.

**Moureau** , Sébastien, «*Ratio et sensus* : les sens au service de
l’acquisition des connaissances dans le*De anima in arte alchemiae* du
pseudo-Avicenne, » in*Expertus sum* , pp. 269-88.

**Perrone Compagni** , Vittoria, « « Artificiose operari ».
L’immaginazione di Avicenna nel dibattito medievale sulla magia, »
in*Immaginario* , pp. 271-96.

**Ramón Guerrero** , Rafael, “Avicena: sobre el amor,”*Anales del
Seminario de Historia de la Filosofía* , 25 (2008): 243-60.

**Sahin** , Eyüp, “Existentialism and Ibn Sînâ (Avicenna),”*Journal of
Islamic Research* , 2.2 (2009): 101-14.

**Street** , Tony, “Medieval and Modern Interpretations of Avicenna’s
Modal Syllogistic,” in*Islamic Philosophy* , pp. 233-55 [i.e., al-Tûsî &
Thom; includes English translations of passages in al-Tûsî].

**Treiger** , Alexander,*Inspired Knowledge in Islamic Thought:
Al-Ghazâlî’s Theory of Mystical Cognition and Its Avicennian Foundation*
(Culture and Civilization in the Middle East). London & New York:
Routledge, 2012, xii-182 pp., ISBN 9780415783071.

**-------** , “Avicenna’s Notion of Transcendental Modulation of
Existence (*tashîk al-wudjûd, analogia entis* ) and Its Greek and Arabic
Sources,” in*Islamic Philosophy* , pp. 327-63 [Aristotle, Alexander of
Aphrodisias, Porphyry, Elias, Ibn al-Tayyib, al-Fârâbî, al-Shahrastânî].

**Watt** , John W., “Aristotle’s*Rhetoric* and Political Thought in the
Christian Orient and in al-Fârâbî, Avicenna and Averroes,” in*Well
Begun* , pp. 17-47.

**Yavuz** , Zikri, “Divine Knowledge and Human Freedom,”*Journal of
Islamic Research* , 1.2 (2008): 65-73.

Baghdad Philosophers

**Watt** , John W., “The strategy of the Baghdad philosophers: the
Aristotelian tradition as a common motif in Christian and Islamic
thought,” in Watt,*Rhetoric* , XV [originally 2005].

Bahmanyar Ibn al-Marzuban

**Sebti** , Meryem, “Intellection, imagination et aperception de soi
dans le*Livre du résultat* (*Kitâb al-Tahsîl* ),”*Chora* , 3-4
(2005-2006): 189-210.

al-Bîrûnî

**Samian** , A.L., “Reason and Spirit in al-Biruni’s Philosophy of
Mathematics,” in R*reason, Spirit and the Sacral* , pp. 137-46.

**Azarnûsh** , Azartâsh &**Farzâneh** , Bâbak. “Notes on Some Persian
Words in the Works of al-Djâhiz,”*Arabica* , 58.5 (2011): 436-45.

al-Fârâbî

***L’armonia delle opinioni dei due sapienti il divino Platone e
Aristotele*** , intro., ed., transl. & commentary by Cecilia Martini
Bonadeo; Foreward by Gerhard Endress (Greco, Arabo, Latino. Le vie del
sapere). Pisa: Plus-Pisa University Press, 2008, xviii-270 pp., ISBN
978-88-8492-547-3 [rejects the view that this text isn’t by al-Fârâbî].

***The Attainment of Happiness*** , transl. by Muhsin Mahdi, in*Medieval
Political Philosophy* , pp. 56-71 [partial translation].

***The Book of Religion*** , transl. by Charles E. Butterworth,
in*Medieval Political Philosophy* , pp. 24-35

**The Enumeration of the Sciences** , ch. 5, transl. by Charles E.
Butterworth, in Medieval Political Philosophy, pp. 18-23.

***Plato’s Laws*** , introduction, transl. by Muhsin Mahdi, in*Medieval
Political Philosophy* , pp. 72-73.

***The Principles of Existing Things*** , transl. by Jon McGinnis &
David C. Reisman, in*Philosophy in the Middle Ages* , pp. 223-38 [only
the first part of the*Siyâsat* ].

***The Political Regime*** , transl. by Charles E. Butterworth,
in*Medieval Political Philosophy* , pp. 36-55 [only the second part of
the*Siyâsat* ].

**Al-Fârâbî** ,*De l’obtention du bonheur* , transl. by Olivier Sedeyn &
Nassim Lévy, intro. by Olivier Sedeyn. Paris: Allia, 2010, 135 pp., ISBN
284485186x [in fact simple reprint of 2005, same transl. etc.].

**Burnett** , Charles, “Two approaches to Natural Science in Toledo of
the twelfth century,” in*Christlicher Norden* , pp. 69-80.

**Çevik** , Mustafa, “Farabi’s Utopia and its Eschatological
Relations,”*Journal of Islamic Research* , 3.2 (2010): 173-78.

**Deniz** , Gürbüz, “Al-Farabi on Divine Knowledge,”*Journal of Islamic
Research* , 2.2 (2009): 24-33.

**Fidora** , Alexander, « Aristotelische Wissenschaft als Netzwerk von
Wissenschaften: Die Rezeption der aristotelischen Wissenschaftstheorie
bei al-Fârâbî und Dominicus Gundissalinus, » in*Albertus Magnus* , pp.
77-96 + 442-51.

**Günther** , Sebastian, “The Principles of Instruction are the Grounds
of our Knowledge: Al-Fârâbî’s Philosophical and al-Ghazâlî’s Spiritual
Approaches to Learning,” in*Trajectories of Education in the Arab World:
Legacies and Challenges* , ed. by Osama Abi-Mershed (London & New York:
Routledge), 2010, pp. 15-35.

**Hasnawi** , Ahmad, „Topique et syllogistique: la tradition arabe
(al-Fârâbî et Averroès),“ in*Les Lieux de l’argumentation. Histoire du
syllogisme topique d’Aristote à Leibniz* , ed. by J. Biard & F.
Mariani-Zini (Turnhout: Brepols, 2009), pp. 191-226.

**Janos** , Damien, “Al-Fârâbî on the Method of Astronomy,”*Early
Science and Medicine* , 15.3 (2010): 237-65.

**Lizzini** , Olga, “L’angelologia di al-Fârâbî: il cosmo, l’anima,
l’uomo,” in*Angeli* , pp. 1779-1843 [transl. from*Libro dei principi
delle opinioni degli abitanti della città eccelente* & from*Libro del
governo della città* ].

**Mian** , Ali Altaf, “Muslim Political Philosophy & the Affective Turn:
Farabi on Language, Affect, and Reason,”*Journal of Shi’a Islamic
Studies* , 4,1 (2011): 47-70.

**Ramón Guerrero** , Rafael, “La “Ciudad Excellente” de al-Fârâbî,”
in*Medievo utópico: sueños, ideales y utopías en el imaginario medieval*
, ed. by Martín Alvira Cabrer & Jorge Díaz Ibáñez (Madrid: Silex, 2011),
pp. 127-40.

**-------** “Al-Fârâbî. El silencio de la imagen o el no ser de lo que
es,” in Imagem e silêncio. Atas do I Simpósio Ibero-Americano de Estudos
Neoplatónicos. Tomo I. Do Neoplatónismo pagâo ao Neoplatónismo medieval
(Natal, RN (Brasil): Editora do UFRN, 2009), pp. 239-347.

**Sweeney** , Michael, « Greek Essence and Islamic Tolerance :
Al-Farabi, Al-Ghazali, Ibn Rush’d, »*The Review of Metaphysics* , 65.1
(Sept. 2011) : 41-61.

**Watt** , John, “Aristotle’s*Rhetoric* and Political Thought in the
Christian Orient and in al-Fârâbî, Avicenna and Averroes,” in*Well
Begun* , pp. 17-47.

**-------** . “From Themistius to al-Fârâbî: Platonic political
philosophy and Aristotle’s*Rhetoric* in the East,” in Watt,*Rhetoric* ,
XI [originally 1995].

**-------** , “From Synesius to al-Fârâbî: philosophy, religion, and
rhetoric in the Christian Orient,” in Watt,*Rhetoric* , XII [originally
1998].

**-------** ,*Al-Farabi and the History of the Syriac Organon* (Analecta
Gorgiana 129). Piscataway N.J.: Gorgias Press, 2009, 29 pp., ISBN
978-1-60724-041-9 [a reprint of the same in*Malphono* : Studies in Honor
of Sebastian P. Brock, same press, 2008, pp. 751-78 but with 1 page of
addenda et corrigenda].

**-------** , “Christianity in the Renaissance of Islam: Abû Bishr
Mattâ, al-Fârâbî, and Yahyâ ibn ‘Adî,” in Watt,*Rhetoric* , XVI
[originally 2007].

**Woerther** , Frédérique, “La*Rhétorique* d’Aristote comme moyen de
diffusion des idées politiques aristotéliciennes dans la philosophie
politique arabe: les*Disdascalia in Rethoricam ex glosa Alpharabii* ,”
in*Well Begun* , pp. 49-71.

**-------** , “Les passions rhétoriques chez Aristote et Al-Farabi:
formes discursives et mécanismes d’induction,”*Organon* , n. 36 (*La
logique des émotions)* (2007): 55-74 [based only on the*Didascalia* ].

Hunayn ibn Ishâq

**Budelli** , Rosanna**,** “L’epistola di Hunayn Ibn Ishâq e la critica
alle fonti arabe della medicina,” in*La Letteratura* , pp. 205-24.

**Swanson** , Mark N., “A Curious and Delicate Correspondence:
the*Burhân* of Ibn al-Munajjim and the*Jawâb* of Hunayn ibn
Ishâq,”*Islam and Christian-Muslim Relations* , 22,2 (2011): 173-83.

Ibn ‘Adî

**Baffioni** , Carmela, “Le cosidette “mawjûdât” in Yahyâ Ibn ‘Adî,”
in*La Letteratura* , pp. 245-71.

**Lizzini** , Olga, “Critica dell’emanazione e creazione dal nulla in
Yahyâ Ibn ‘Adî,” in*La Letteratura* , pp. 225-44 [also speaks of
Avicenna].

**Nahli** , Ouafae, “Yahyâ ibn ‘Adî sulla differenza fra la logica e la
grammatica araba,”*Studia graeco-arabica* , 1 (2011): 47-67.

**Ramón Guerrero** , “Aproximación a la literatura cristiana oriental en
árabe. Yahya b. ‘Adi, teólogo y filósofo cristiano,” in*Cristianismo e
Islam. Génesis y actualidad* , ed. by M. Lázaro Pulido (Cáceres:
Instituto Teológico San Pedro de Alcántara, 2009), pp. 141-63.

**Watt** , John W., “Christianity in the Renaissance of Islam: Abû Bishr
Mattâ, al-Fârâbî, and Yahyâ ibn ‘Adî,” in Watt,*Rhetoric* , XVI
[originally 2007].

**Wisnovsky** , Robert, “New Philosophical Texts of Yahyâ ibn ‘Adî: A
Supplement to Endress’*Analytical Inventory* ,” in*Islamic Philosophy* ,
pp. 307-26.

**Zilio-Grandi** , Ida, “Il “Kitâb tahdhîb al-akhlâq” di Yahyâ Ibn ‘Adî
(d. 974/363): riflessioni sul tema dell’etica nel periodo abbaside,”
in*La letteratura* , pp. 273-83.

Ibn Bâjjah (Avempace)

***The Governance of the Solitary*** **,** 1, 7, 12, 13, 17, partial
transl. by Lawrence Berman, in*Medieval Political Philosophy* , pp.
97-104.

**Abbès** , Makram, “Le statut de la raison pratique chez
Avempace,”*Arabic Sciences and Philosophy* , 21 (2011): 85-109.

**Douib** , Sarhan, « Das gute Leben in der arabisch-islamischen
Philosophie. Die Glückseligheit des Einzelnen bei Ibn Bajja,» in Gutes
Leben als humanisiertes Leben in den Kulturen und ihre Bedeutung für
Politik und Gesellschaft heute. Good life as Humanized Life. La vida
buena come vida humanizante. Dokumentation des VIII. Internationalen
Kongresses für Interkulturelle Philosophie [Seoul, 1-4 Juli 2009], ed.
by Raúl Fornet-Betancourt (Denktraditionen in Dialog. Studien zur
Befreiung und Interkulturalität 30). (Achen: Wissenschaftverlag Mainz,
2010), pp. 101-16.

**Forcada** , Miquel, “Ibn Bâjja on Medicine and Medical
Experience,”*Arabic Sciences and Philosophy* , 21 (2011): 111-48.

**Janssens** , Jules, „Ibn Rushd et sa critique d’Ibn Bâjja (dans le
Grand Commentaire sur le*De anima* ),“ in*La lumière de l’intellect* ,
p. 405-18.

**-------** , „Ibn Bâjja and Aristotle’s Political Thought,“ in*Well
Begun* , pp. 73-95.

**Wirmer** , David, “Das natürliche Begehren des einsamen Philosophen.
Bildung durch Wissenschaft bei Ibn Bâjja und Ibn Tufail,” in*Albertus
Magnus* , pp. 206-40 + 482-86.

Ibn al-Haytham

**Bellosta** , Hélène, “Averroès commentateur d’Aristote ou lecteur
d’Alhazen,” in*La lumière de l’intellect* , pp. 23-37.

**Masoumi-Hamedani** , Hossein, “La voie lactée: Ibn al-Haytham et Ibn
Rushd,” in*La lumière de l’intellect* , pp. 39-62.

**Rashed** , Roshdi, « Le concept de lieu : Ibn al-Haytham, Averroès, »
in*La lumière de l’intellect* , pp. 3-9.

Ibn Jamâ’ah

**A Memorandum for Listeners and Lecturers: Rules of Conduct for the
Learned and the Learning** (abridged), transl. by Michael Fishbein, in
Classical Foundations, pp. 156-207+156-207 Arabic.

Ibn Kammûna

**Naji** , Hamed, “Ibn Kammûna: A Jewish Philosopher in the School of
Illumination,”*Ishrâq* , 2 (2011): 144-49.

**Roggema** , Barbara, “Epistemology as Polemics: Ibn Kammûna’s
Examination of the Apologetics of the Three Faiths,” in*The Three Rings*
, pp. 47-68.

Ibn Khaldûn

***Selections from the Muqaddimah*** , transl. by Franz Rosenthal,
in*Classical Foundations* , pp. 208-241+210-41 Arabic.

**Calasso** , Giovanna, “Penser le changement: Ibn Khaldûn et ses
contemporains. Analyse historique et mentalités,”*Al-Qantara* , 32.1
(2011): 109-28.

**Fromherz** , Allen James,*Ibn Khaldun, Life and Times* . Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press, 2011, xiv-190 pp., ISBN 9780748644834.

**Vivanco Saavedra** , Luis, “Las diversas clases de percepcíon según
Abderrahmán Ibn Jaldún,”*De las Pasiones* , pp. 223-32.

**Whittingham** , Martin, « The Value of*tahrîf ma’nawî* (Corrupt
Interpretation) as a Category for Analysing Muslim Views of the Bible :
Evidence from*Al-radd al-jamîl* and Ibn Khaldûn, »*Islam and
Christian-Muslim Relations* , 22,2 (2011) : 209-22.

Ibn Masarra

**Garrido Clemente** , Pilar, “aEra Ibn Massara de Córdoba un
filósofoa,”*Anaquel de Estudios Árabes* , 21 (2010): 123-40.

**Stroumsa** , S. &**Sviri** , S., “The Beginnings of Mystical
Philosophy in al-Andalus: Ibn Masarra and his*Epistle on Contemplation*
,”*Jerusalem Studies in Arabic and Islam* , 36 (2009): 201-54.

Ibn al-Muqaffa’

**Puig Montada** , Josep, “Ibn al-Moqaffa’ y el orgullo
sasánida,”*Anales del Seminario de Historia de la Filosofia* , 24
(2007): 85-94.

Ibn Ridwân

**Reisman** , David C., « Professional Medical Ethics from a Foreign
Past, » in*Islamic Philosophy* , pp. 25-39.

Ibn Sab’în

**Akasoy** , Anna, « The*muhaqqiq* as Mahdia Ibn Sab’în and Mahdism
Among Andalusian Mystics in the 12th/13th Centuries, » in*Endzeiten.
Eschatologie in den monotheistischen Weltreligionen* , ed. by Wolfram
Brandes & Felicitas Schmieder (Millenium-Studien 16) (Berlin : Walter de
Gruyter, 2008), pp. 313-37.

Ibn Sahnûn

**The Book of Rules of Conduct for Teachers** , transl. by Michael
Fishbein, in Classical Foundations, pp.1-19+1-19 Arabic.

Ibn Tufayl

***Hayy the Son of Yaqzan*** , partial transl. by George N. Atiyeh,
in*Medieval Political Philosophy* , pp. 105-22.

**Ben-Zaken** , Avner,*Reading* Hayy Ibn-Yaqzân*: A Cross-Cultural
History of Autodidacticism* . Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University
Press, 2011, xvi-191 pp., ISBN 9780801897399 [deals 1. with struggles
over mysticism in twelfth-century Marrakesh, 2. with controversy over
pedagogy in fourteenth-century Barcelona; 3. with quarrels over
astrology in Renaissance Florence and 4. with debates over
experimentalism in seventeenth-century Oxford].

**Deniz** , Gürbüz, “Hayy ibn Yaqzan and its Qur’anic
References,”*Journal of Islamic Research* , 1.2 (2008): 33-50.

**Kukkonen** , Taneli, “Ibn Tufayl and the Wisdom of the East: On
Apprehending the Divine,” in*Late Antique Epistemology: Other Ways to
Truth* , ed. by Panayiota Vassilopoulou & Stephen R.L. Clark (New York:
Palgrave Macmillan, 2009), pp. 87-102.

**Puerta Vílchez** , J.M. &**Lirola Delgado** , J., “Ibn Tufayl, Abû
Bakr,” in*Biblioteca de al-Andalus: De Ibn Sa’âda a Ibn Wuhayb* , vol.
5, ed. by Jorge Lirola Delgado (Almería: Fundación Ibn Tufayl de
Estudios Árabes, 2007), pp. 498-503.

**Wirmer** , David, “Das natürliche Begehren des einsamen Philosophen.
Bildung durch Wissenschaft bei Ibn Bâjja und Ibn Tufail,” in*Albertus
Magnus* , pp. 206-40 + 482-86.

Ikhwân as-Safâ’

***The Epistles of the Brethern of Purity*** ,*On Music* , an Arabic
Critical Edition and English Translation of*EPISTLE 5* , ed. and transl.
by Owen Wright. Oxford: Oxford University Press with The Institute of
Ismaili Studies, 2011, xvii-224 pp., ISBN 978-0-19-959398-9.

The Seventh Epistle of the Propaedeutical Part on the Scientific Arts
and What they Aim At, transl. by Rüdiger Arnzen, in Classical
Foundations, pp. 20-37+20-37 Arabic.

**Baffioni** , Carmela, “Ibda’, Divine Imperatiev and Prophecy in
the*Rasâ’il* Ikhwan as-safa,” in*Fortresses of the Intellect* , pp.
213-26.

**Hamdani** , Abbas, “The Ikhwan as-Safa’: Between al-Kindi and
al-Farabi,” in*Fortresses of the Intellect* , pp. 189-212, plus table
200.

**Lizzini** , Olga, “L’angelologia nelle Epistole dei Fratelli della
purezza: l’esempio della natura,” in*Angeli* , pp. 1965-2012 [transl.
of*Sulla quiddità della natura* , epistle 20].

**Maukola** , I., “Creation in Miniature: Varieties of the Microcosm in
the Rasâ’il Ikhwân as-Safâ’,”*Studia Orientalia* (Finnish Oriental
Society), 107 (2009): 229-56.

**Quintern** , Detlev, “On the Harmony of Spirituality and Rational
Wisdom According to the Opus Rasâ’il Ikhwân as-Safâ’:*A Path to Overcome
the Crisis in Sciences* ,” in*Reason, Spirit and the Sacral* , pp.
51-67.

Jâhiz al-Basrî

**Azarnûsh** , Azartâsh &**Farzâneh** , Bâbak. “Notes on Some Persian
Words in the Works of al-Djâhiz,”*Arabica* , 58.5 (2011): 436-45.

**Llamas** **Fraga** ,Laura &**Ramón Guerrero** , Rafael, “Algunas
técnicas modernas de traducción en un texto árabe del siglo IX: un
pasaje del Kitâb al-Hayawân de al-Jâhiz al-Basrî,” Revista Española de
Filosofía Medieval, 17 (2010): 103-13 [includes a translation of the
passage].

al-Kindî

**al-Kindî** ,*Die Erste Philosophie* , Arabisch-Deutsch, transl. and
intro. by Anna Akasoy (Herders Bibliothek der Philosophie des
Mittelalters 26). Freiburg-Basel-Vienna: Herder, 2011, 198 pp., ISBN
9783451340383].

**Endress** , Gerhard, “Höfischer Stil und wissenschaftliche Rhetorik:
al-Kindî als Epistolograph,” in*Islamic Philosophy* , pp. 289-306.

**Groff** , Peter S, “Al-Kindî and Nietzsche on the Stoic Art of
Banishing Sorrow,”*Journal of Nietzsche Studies* , n. 28 (2004): 139-73.

**Lizzini** , Olga, “La cosmologia di al-Kindî,” in Angeli, pp. 1741-78
[transl. of Sull’esistenza delle sostanze incorporee; Sulla
prosternazione del corpo estremo dell’universo davanti a Dio e sulla
obbedienza a Dio & Sull’agente vero, primo e completo e sull’agente
manchevole che è tale per estensione (o metafora)].

**Stephan** , Nouha, « La théorie pharmacologique d’Ibn Rushd d’après
le*Kitâb al-Kulliyyât fî al-tibb* , V : principaux points de convergence
et de divergence avec la théorie pharmacologique d’al-Kindî, » in*La
lumière de l’intellect* , pp. 147-55.

Mîr Dâmâd

**Rizvi** , Sajjad H., « Mîr Dâmâd in India : Islamic Philosophical
Traditions and the Problem of Creation, »*Journal of the American
Oriental Society* , 131.1 (2011) : 9-23.

Miskawayh

**From the Second Discourse of The Refinement of Character** , transl.
by Constantine K. Zurayk, in Classical Foundations, pp. 75-87+75-87
Arabic.

**Miskawayh** ,*Traité d’Ethique* , transl. intro. & notes by Mohammed
Arkoun, reprint (Textes philosophiques). Paris: Vrin, 2010, ISBN
9782711622795 [original ed. 1969 & 1982].

**Ramón Guerrero** , Rafael, “*Al-Hikma al-jâlida (La sabiduría eterna)*
de Miskawayh come fuente de literatura sapiencial,” in*Memorabilia.
Boletín de literatura sapiencial* , 12 (2009-2010): 351-59.

Mullâ Sadrâ

**Sadr al-Din al-Shirazi** ,*Conception and Belief in Sadr al-Dîn
al-Shîrâzî* (ca 1571-1631).*Al-risâla fî tasawwur wa-l-tasdîq* , Intro.,
transl. & commentary by Joep Lameer. Tehran: Iranian Institute of
Philosophy, 2006, xiii-281 pp., ISBN 9648036284.

**Verifikation der Platonischen Formen und Urbilder** (Asfâr, Maslak I:
Marhala 4, Fasl 9) in**Arnzen** , Rüdiger, Platonische Ideen in der
arabischen Philosophie. Texte und Materialien zur Begriffsgeschichte von
suwar aflâtûniyya und muthul aflâtûniyya (Scientia Graeco-Arabica 6).
Berlin & Boston: Walter de Gruyter, 2011, pp. 371-406.

**Ashtari** , Hossain Kalbasi, „Spiritual Paradigm as Origin of the
Life’s Capacity in the Sadraian Philosophy,“ in*Reason, Spirit and the
Sacral* , pp. 93-107.

**Burrell** , David B., “Mullâ Sadrâ’s Ontology Revisited,”*Journal of
Islamic Philosophy* , 6 (2010): 45-66.

**Dakake** , Maria Massi, “Hierarchies of Knowing in Mullâ Sadrâ’s
Commentary on the*Usûl al-kâfî* ,”*Journal of Islamic Philosophy* , 6
(2010): 5-44.

**Eshots** , Yanis, “ “Substantial Motion” and “New Creation” in
Comparative Context,”*Journal of Islamic Philosophy* , 6 (2010): 79-92.

**Haidar** , Mahmoud, “La grande sagesse dans la sagesse
transcendante—le rôle du Coran dans la philosophie de Sadr ad-Dîn
ash-Shîrâzî,”*al-Machriq* , 85,1 (2011): 46-69 [in Arabic].

**Jambet** , Christian, “ “L’essence de Dieu est toute chose”: identité
et différence selon Sadr al-Dîn Shîrâzî (Mullâ Sadrâ),” in*Shî’isme
Imâmite* , pp. 269-92.

**Kamada** , Shigeru, “Mullâ Sadrâ’s*imâma/walâya* : An Aspect of His
Indebtedness to Ibn ‘Arabî,”*Journal of Islamic Philosophy* , 6 (2010):
67-78.

**Khamenei** , Seyyed Mohammed, “In the Name of God, The Compassionate,
The Merciful: Reason and Spirit,” in*Reason, Spirit and the Sacral* ,
pp. 71-81.

**Marcotte** , Roxanne D., “*Al-Masâ’il al-qudsiyya* and Mullâ Sadrâ’s
Proofs for Mental Existence,”*Journal of Islamic Studies* , 22.2 (2011):
153-82.

**Moris** , Zailan, “Mullâ Sadrâ’s Eschatology in*al-Hikma al-‘arshiyya*
,”*Journal of Islamic Philosophy* , 6 (2010): 93-107.

**Rezazadeh** , Reza, “Thomas Aquinas and Mulla Sadra on the Soul-Body
Problem: A Comparative Investigation,”*Journal of Shi’a Islamic Studies*
, 4.4 (2011): 415-28.

**Rustom** , Mohammed, “The Nature and Significance of Mullâ Sadrâ’s
Qur’ânic Writings,”*Journal of Islamic Philosophy* , 6 (2010): 109-30.

al-Nayrîzî

**Pourjavady** , Reza,*Philosophy in Early Safavid Iran: Najm al-Dîn
Mahmûd al-Nayrîzî and His Writings* (Islamic Philosophy, Theology and
Science 82). Leiden-Boston: Brill, 2011, xii-224 pp., ISBN
9789004191730.

al-Qâbisî

A Treatise Detailing the Circumstances of Students and the Rules
Governing Teachers and Students (abridged), transl. by Michael Fishbein,
in Classical Foundations, pp. 38-74+38-74 Arabic.

al-Râzî

**Saruhan** , Mufit Selim, “Praise for Reason and Love in Zakariyâ
al-Râzî,’*Hamdard Islamicus* , 33, 1 (2010): 21-29.

al-Shahrazûrî

**Cottrell** , Emily, “Adam and Seth in Arabic Medieval Literature. The
Mandean Connections in al-Mubashshir Ibn Fâtik’s*Choicest Maxims* (11th
Century) and Shams al-Dîn al-Shahrazûrî al-Ishrâqî’s*History of the
Philosophers* (13th Century),”*ARAM* , 22 (2010): 509-47.

al-Suhrawardî

**Aawani** , Gholamreza, “A Comparative Analysis of the Method of
Historiography of Philosophy, As Envisaged by Suhrwardi, Aristotle and
Hegel,”*Ishrâq* , 2 (2011): 189-201.

**Aminrazavi** , Mehdi, “How Avicennian was Suhrawardî’s Theory of
Knowledgea,”*Ishrâq* , 2 (2011): 119-30.

**Eskhevari** , Mohammad Fanaei, “Sohravardi and the Question of
Knowledge,”*Ishrâq* , 2 (2011): 131-43.

**Hämeen-Anttila** , Jaakko, “Suhrawardî’s*Western Exile* as Artistic
Prose,”*Ishrâq* , 2 (2011): 105-18.

**Hathem** , Jad, “Suhrawardi’s Phenomenology of Ipseity,”*Ishrâq* , 2
(2011): 61-67.

**Marcotte** , Roxanne D., “Suhrawardî’s Realm of the Imaginal,”*Ishrâq*
, 2 (2011): 68-79.

**Pazouki** , Shahram, “The East of Suhrawardî and the West of
Heidegger: A Comparative Study of Heidegger and Suhrawardî’s Views on
the Ancient Philosophers,”*Ishrâq* , 2 (2011): 98-104.

**Walbridge** , John, “The Devotional and Occult Works of Suhrawardî the
Illuminationist,”*Ishrâq* , 2 (2011): 80-97.

al-Tûsî

**Street** , Tony, “Medieval and Modern Interpretations of Avicenna’s
Modal Syllogistic,” in*Islamic Philosophy* , pp. 233-55 [i.e., al-Tûsî &
Thom; includes English translations of passages in al-Tûsî].

al-Zarnûjî

***Instruction of the Student: The Method of Learning*** , transl. by
G.E. von Grunebaum & Theodora M. Abel, in*Classical Foundations* , pp.
108-55+108-55 Arabic.

Modern and Current Scholars

**Ali-de-Unzaga** , Omar, “A Biographical Sketch [of**Farhad Daftary**
],” and “A Bibiography of the Works of Farhad Daftary,” in*Fortresses of
the Intellect* , pp. 1-31 & 33-57.

**Stewart** , Frank H., “**Etan Kohlberg** ,” and “Works of Etan
Kohlberg,” in*Shî’isme Imâmite* , pp. 11-23 & 25-31.

**Schmidtke,** S., “**Moshe Perlmann** (1905-2001): A Scholarly
Biography,” and “A Biliography,”*Jerusalem Studies in Arabic and Islam*
, 36 (2009): 1-31 & 33-62.

Section II. Kalâm

General Studies

**Adang** , C., “Intra- and Interreligious Controversies in 3rd/9th
Century Qayrawân: The Polemics of Muhammad b. Sahnûn,”*Jerusalem Studies
in Arabic and Islam* , 36 (2009): 281-310.

**Akoglu** , Muharrem, “Major Breaks in the History of Mutazilism,”*The
Islamic Quarterly* , 54.3 (2010): 191-205.

**Almbladh** , Karin, “The “*Basmala* ” in Medieval Letters in Arabic
Written by Jews and Christians,”*Orientalia Suecana* , 59 (2010): 45-60.

**Amir-Moezzi** , Mohammad Ali, “Persian, the Other Language of Islam:
Some Brief Notes,” in*Fortresses of the Intellect* , pp. 59-75.

**-------** , “Note bibliographique sur le*Kitâb Sulaym b. Qays* , le
plus ancien ouvrage shi’ite existant,” in*Shî’isme Imâmite* , pp. 33-48.

**Ansari** , Hassan, “Une version incomplète du*Kitâb al-nubuwwa*
d’al-Sadûq,” in*Shî’isme Imâmite* , pp. 49-53.

**Bar-Asher** , Meir M., “Le rapport de la religion nusayrite-‘alawite
au shi’isme imamite,” in*Shî’isme Imâmite* , pp. 73-93.

**Bertaina** , David,*Christian and Muslim Dialogues: The Religious Uses
of a Literary Form in the Early Islamic Middle East* (Gorgias Eastern
Christian Studies 29). Piscataway, NJ: Gorgias Press, 2011, xii-285 pp.,
ISBN 9781617199417.

**-------** , “Science, Syntax, and Superiority in Eleventh-Century
Christian-Muslim Discussion: Elias of Nisibis on the Arabic and Syriac
Languages,”*Islam and Christian-Muslim Relations* , 22,2 (2011):
197-207.

**Block** , C. John, “Philoponian Monophysitism in South Arabia at the
Advent of Islam with Implications for the English Translation of
‘*Thalâtha’* in Qur’ân 4.171 and 5.73,”*Journal of Islamic Studies* ,
23.1 (2012): 50-75.

***Christian-Muslim Relations: A Bibliographical History, Volume 2
(900-1050)*** , ed. by David Thomas & Alex Mallett with Juan Pedro
Monferrer Sala, Johannes Pahlitzsch, Mark Swanson, Herman Teule & John
Tolan (The History of Christian-Muslim Relations 14). Leiden-Boston:
Brill, 2010, xvi-782 pp., ISBN 9789004169760.

***Christian-Muslim Relations: A Bibliographical History, Volume 3
(1050-1200)*** , ed. by David Thomas & Alex Mallett with Juan Pedro
Monferrer Sala, Johannes Pahlitzsch, Mark Swanson, Herman Teule & John
Tolan (The History of Christian-Muslim Relations 15). Leiden-Boston:
Brill, 2011, xiv-785 pp., ISBN 978904195158.

**Crone** , Patricia, “’No complusion in religion’: Q. 2:256 in medieval
and modern interpretations,” in*Shî’isme Imâmite* , pp. 131-78.

**Décobert** , Christian, “Ascéticisme et*jihâd* ,”*Mélanges de
l’Université Saint-Joseph* , 62 (2009): 253-82.

**De Smet** , Daniel, “L’impuissance de Dieu. Un débat récurrent en
théologie musulmane,”*Revue philosophique de la France et de l’étranger*
, 135, t. CXCX (2010): 321-37.

**-------** , « Adam, premier prophète et législateur a La doctrine
chiite des*ulû al-‘azm* et la controverse sur la pérennité de
la*sharî’a* , » in*Shî’isme Imâmite* , pp. 187-202.

**-------** , « The Sacredness of Nature in Shi’i Isma’ili Islam, »
in*The Book of Nature in Antiquity and the Middle Ages* , ed. by Arjo
Vanderjagt & Klaas van Berkel (Groningen Studies in Cultural Changes 16)
(Leuven-Paris, Dudley, MA: Peeters, 2005), pp. 85-96.

**El Omari** , Racha, “*Kitâb al-Hayda* : The Historical Significance of
an Apocryphal Text,” in*Islamic Philosophy* , pp. 419-51.

**Gay-Canton** , R., “Lorsque Muhammad orne les autels. Sur
l’utilisation de la théologie islamique dans la controverse autour de
l’Immaculée Conception de la fin du XIVe au début du XVIIIe
siècle,”*Revue des Sciences philosophiques et théologiques* , 94.2
(2010): 201-48.

**Goldstein** , M., « Sa’adya’s*Tafsîr* in Light of Muslim Polemic
against Ninth-Century Arabic Bible Translations, »*Jerusalem Studies in
Arabic and Islam* , 36 (2009): 173-200.

**Jackson** , Sherman A., «*Jihâd* : Between Law, Fact and Orientalism,
»*Mélanges de l’Université Saint-Joseph* , 62 (2009): 307-24.

**Keating** , Sandra Toenis, “Some Reflections on the Early Discussion
Concerning the*sifât Allâh* : ‘Cross-fertilization and Cooperation in
the Islamic Milieu’,”*Islam and Christian-Muslim Relations* , 22,1
(2011): 23-35 [Jahm ibn Safwân, Ibn Hanbal & Abû Râ’ita al-Takrîtî].

**Lahoud** , Nelly, « The Early Kharijites and their Understanding
of*Jihâd* , »*Mélanges de l’Université Saint-Joseph* , 62 (2009):
283-305.

**Lev** , Y., “The*jihâd* of Sultan Nûr al-Dîn of Syria (1146-1174):
History and Discourse,”*Jerusalem Studies in Arabic and Islam* , 35
(2008): 227-84.

**Lory** , Pierre, “Souffrir pour la vérité selon l’ésotérisme chiite de
Rajab Borsî,” in*Shî’isme Imâmite* , pp. 315-23.

**Madelung** , Wilferd &**Schmidtke** , Sabine,*Rational Theology in
Interfaith Communication: Abu l-Husayn al-Basrî’s Mu’tazilî Theology
among the Karaites in the Fâtimid Age* (Jerusalem Studies in Religion
and Culture 5). Leiden-Boston: Brill, 2006, x-144 pp., ISBN
9789004151772 [includes: 1. Yûsuf al-Basîr’s Refutation of Abu l-Husayn
al-Basrî’s Proof for the Existence of God, Arabic & English, pp. 37-59;
2. Excerpt from Part II of Sahl b. al-Fadl al-Tustarî’s Response to ‘Alî
b. Sulaymân al-Maqdisî, Arabic & English, pp. 67-73; 3. Excerpt from
al-Tustarî’s Book of Intimation, Arabic & English, pp. 83-90; and 4.
Excerpt from the Book of Revision of the Book of Aristotle on
Metaphysics by al-Tustarî, Arabic & English, pp. 100-07].

**Madelung** , Wilferd &**Walker** , Paul E., “*The Kitab al-Rusum
wa’l-izdiwaj wa’l-tartib* Attributed to ‘Abdan (d. 286/899): Edition of
the Arabic Text and Translation,” in*Fortresses of the Intellect* , pp.
103-65.

**Mourad** , Suleiman A.,”The Revealed Text und the Intended Subtext:
Notes on the Hermeneutics of the Qur’ân in Mu’tazila Discourse As
Reflected in the*Tahdhîb* of al-Hâkim al-Ghishumî (d. 494/1101),”
in*Islamic Philosophy* , pp. 367-95.

**-------** , “The Survival of the Mu’tazila Tradition of Qur’anic
Exegesis in Shî’î and Sunnî tafâsîr,”*Journal of Qur’anic Studies* , 12
(2010): 83-108.

**Noble** , Samuel &**Treiger** , Alexander, “Christian Arabic Theology
in Byzantine Antioch: ‘Abdallâh ibn al-Fadl al ‘Antâkî and his*Discourse
on the Holy Trinity* ,”*Le Muséon* , 124.3-4 (2011): 371-417.

**Ramón Guerrero** , Rafael, “ “Por qué Dios sólo quiere salvar a los
sarracenos o a los que saben árabea” Algunos hitos en la visión
histórica del Islam,” in*Miradas a los otros. Dioses, culturas y
civilizaciones* , ed. by José Carlos Bernal Pastor (Madrid: Arena
Libros, 2011), pp. 291-323.

**Reinink** , Gerrit J., “From Apocalyptics to Apologetics: Early Syriac
Reactions to Islam,” in*Endzeiten. Eschatologie in den monotheistischen
Weltreligionen* , ed. by Wolfram Brandes & Felicitas Schmieder
(Millenium-Studien 16) (Berlin : Walter de Gruyter, 2008), pp. 75-87.

**-------** , “The ‘Book of Nature’ and Syriac Apologetics against
Islam. The Case of Job of Edessa’s*Book of Treasures* ,” in*The Book of
Nature in Antiquity and the Middle Ages* , ed. by Arjo Vanderjagt &
Klaas van Berkel (Groningen Studies in Cultural Changes 16)
(Leuven-Paris, Dudley, MA: Peeters, 2005), pp. 71-84.

**Schmidtke** , Sabine, “The Doctrinal Views of the Banû al-‘Awd (early
8th/14th century): An Analysis of MS Arab. F. 64 (Bodleian Library,
Oxford),” in*Shî’isme Imâmite* , pp. 373-96.

**Simelidis** , Christos, “The Byzantine Understanding of the Qur’anic
Term*al-Samad* and the Greek Translation of the Qur’an,”*Speculum* ,
86.4 (2011): 887-913.

**Soffer** , Yossef, “The Theological*Majlis* and Religious Otherness in
Medieval Islam,” in*The Quest for a Common Humanity : Human Dignity and
Otherness in the Religious Traditions of the Mediterranean* , ed. by
Katell Berthelot & Matthias Morgenstern (Numen Book Series, Studies in
the History of Religions 134) (Leiden : Brill, 2011), pp. 219-35.

**Szilágyi** , K., « A Prophet like Jesusa Christians and Muslims
Debating Muhammad’s Death, »*Jerusalem Studies in Arabic and Islam* , 36
(2009): 131-72.

**Thiele** , Jan,*Kausalität in der mu’tazilitischen Kosmologie. Das*
Kitâb al-Mu’aththirât wa-miftâh al-mushkilât des Zayditen al-Hasan
ar-Rassâs (st. 584/1188) (Islamic Philosophy, Theology and Science 84).
Leiden-Boston: Brill, 2011, xii-155+57 pp., ISBN 9789004207479 [includes
critical edition].

“Errata” to “Propagating Mu’tazilism in the VIth/XIIth Century
Zaydiyya,”*Arabica* , 58 1/2 (2011): 165 [applies to article published
in*Arabica* , 57 (2010): 536-58].

**Thomas** , D., “Christian Voices in Muslim Theology,”*Jerusalem
Studies in Arabic and Islam* , 36 (2009): 357-80.

**Tolan** , John V., “ “Ipsius gladio occidere”: The Use and Abuse of
Scripture in Iberian Religious Polemics,” in*Christlicher Norden* , pp.
201-13 [Ibn Hazm, Petrus Alfonsi & Dominicans].

**Tumer** , J.P., “The End of the Mihna,”*Oriens* , 38 (2010): 89-106.

**Vishanoff** , David R.,*The Formation of Islamic Hermeneutics: How
Sunni Legal Theorists Imagined a Revealed Law* (American Oriental Series
93). New Yorka: American Oriental Society, 2011, 344 pp., ISBN
9780940490314 [‘Abd al-Jabbâr, al-Bâqillânî, Ibn Hazm]..

Abd al-Jabbâr

**Boudignon** , Christian, “Logique aristotélicienne et*kalâm
alâ-l-nasârâ* : la Réponse à Abû Qurra dans le*Mugnî* de Abd
al-Djabbâr,”*Arabica* , 58.6 (2011): 519-544.

**Chiesa** , B., “’Abd al-Jabbâr on Christianity according to the
original*Kitâb al-muhît* ,”*Jerusalem Studies in Arabic and Islam* , 36
(2009): 255-80.

**Heemskerk** , Margaretha, “A Mu’tazilite Refutation of Christianity
and Judaism: Two Fragments from ‘Abd al-Jabbâr’s*al-Mughnî fî abwâb
al-tawhîd wa-‘l-‘adl* ,” in*The Three Rings* , pp. 183-201.

Abu l-Husayn al-Basrî

***Tasaffuh al-adilla*** ,extant parts introduced and ed. by Wilferd
Madelung & Sabine Schmidtke (Abhandlungen für die Kunde des Morgenlandes
lvii,4). Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 2006, xxiii-145 pp.,
ISBN978-3-447-05392-1.

Abû al-Mundhir Bashîr

**Abû l-Mundhir Bashîr b. Muhammad b. Mahbûb** ,*Early Ibâdî
Literature:* *Kitâb al-Rasf fî l-Tawhîd, Kitâb al-Muhâraba* and*Sîra* ,
intro. and ed. by Abdulrahman al-Salimi & Wilferd Madelung (Abhandlungen
für die Kunde des Morgenlandes 75). Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 2011,
xii-80 pp., ISBN 978-3-447-06435-4.

Abû Qurrah

**Boudignon** , Christian, “Logique aristotélicienne et*kalâm
alâ-l-nasârâ* : la Réponse à Abû Qurra dans le*Mugnî* de Abd
al-Djabbâr,”*Arabica* , 58.6 (2011): 519-544.

**Burnett** , Charles &**Bohak** , Gideon, “A Judaeo-Arabic Version of
Tâbit ibn Qurra’s*De Imaginibus* and Pseudo-Ptolemy’s*Opus Imaginum* ,”
in*Islamic Philosophy* , pp. 179-200.

**Nasry** , Wafik, ‘The Place of Reason in an Early
Arab-Christian-Muslim Dialogue,’ in*La Letteratura* , pp. 179-89.

**Pizzo** , Paola, “La geografia religiosa a Edessa al tempo di Teodoro
Abû Qurrah. Notizie dal “Trattato sull’esistenza del creatore e sulla
vera religione”,” in*La Letteratura* , pp. 163-78.

Abû Râ’ita al-Takrîtî

**Keating** , S.T., “An Early List of*sifât Allâh* in Abû Râ’ita
al-Takrîtî’s “First*risâla* ‘On the Holy Trinity’,”*Jerusalem Studies in
Arabic and Islam* , 36 (2009): 339-56.

al-‘Ash’arî

***Contra heterodoxos (al-Luma’). O lo que deben creer los musulmanos***
, ed. & transl. by Carlos A. Segovia (Clásicos del pensamiento 38).
Madrid: Biblioteca Nueva, 2006, 253 pp., ISBN 84-9742-522-7.

al-Ghazâlî

***The Deliverer from Error*** , partial transl. by Richard J. McCarthy,
in*Medieval Political Philosophy* , pp. 89-96.

***The Incoherence of the Philosophers*** , On the Eternity of the
World, transl. by Jon McGinnis & David C. Reisman and Concerning the
Natural Sciences, transl. by Arthur Hyman, in*Philosophy in the Middle
Ages* , pp. 268-84.

***O Son!*** , transl. by David C. Reisman, in*Classical Foundations* ,
pp. 88-107+88-107 Arabic.

**Al-Ghazâlî** ,***L’éducation de l’âme (Kitâb riyadat an-nafs wa tahzîb
al-‘akhlâq wa mu’âlajat ‘amrâd al-qalb)*** , transl. & notes by Idrîs De
Vos (Revivification des sciences de la religion 22). Paris: Dar
Albouraq, 2011, 103 pp., ISBN 978-2-84161-494-3.

**Al-Ghazâlî** ,***Les merveilles du coeur (‘ajâ’ib al-Qalb)*** ,
transl. & notes by Idrîs De Vos (Revivification des sciences de la
religion 21). Paris: Dar Albouraq, 2010, 141 pp., ISBN
978-2-84161-464-6.

**Al-Ghazâlî,** ***De la condamnation de la vanité*** , transl. & notes
by Lyess Chacal (Revification des sciences de la religion 20). Paris:
Dar Albouraq, 2010, 95 pp., ISBN 978-2-84161-414-1.

**Altintas** , Hayrani, “Is There any Similarity between “al-Munqidh min
al-Dalâl” and ‘Discourse on the Method”,”*Journal of Islamic Research* ,
3.2 (2010): 66-81.

**Beaumont** , Mark, “Appropriating Christian Scriptures in a Muslim
Refutation of Christianity: The Case of*Al-radd al-jamîl* attributed to
al-Ghazâlî,”*Islam and Christian-Muslim Relations* , 22,1 (2011): 69-84.

**Çapak** , Ibrahim, “The Formation of Knowledge and Disputation
(al-Jadal) in Ghazâlî’s Logic,”*Journal of Islamic Research* , 3.2
(2010): 129-42.

**Ceylan** , Hadi Ensar, “Ghazali’s Account of Signification,”*Journal
of Islamic Research* , 3.2 (2010): 98-114.

**Deniz** , Gürbüz, “The Method of Understanding Ghazali,”*Journal of
Islamic Research* , 3.2 (2010); 5-21.

**Farid** , Wajdi, “La méthode d’al-Ghazalî pour traiter
l’hypocondrie,”*al-Machriq* , 84.2 (2010): 427-37 [in Arabic].

**Görmez** , Mehmet, “Ghazali’s Understanding of the Sunnah,”*Journal of
Islamic Research* , 3.2 (2010): 22-35.

**Günther** , Sebastian, “The Principles of Instruction are the Grounds
of our Knowledge: Al-Fârâbî’s Philosophical and al-Ghazâlî’s Spiritual
Approaches to Learning,” in*Trajectories of Education in the Arab World:
Legacies and Challenges* , ed. by Osama Abi-Mershed (London & New York:
Routledge), 2010, pp. 15-35.

**Hozien** , Muhammad, “Ghazali and his Early Biographers,”*Islam &
Science* , 9.2 (2011): 95-122.

**Iqbal** , Muzaffar, “Al-Ghazali’s Enduring Legacy” & “Visiting the
Grave of Imam al-Ghazali,”*Islam & Science* , 9.2 (2011): 91-94 &
123-30.

**Kock** , Ilona, „The Debate about God’s Simplicity: Reason and Spirit
in the Eighth Discussion of al-Ghazali’s*Tahafut al-falasifa* and Ibn
Rushd’s*Tahafut t-tahafut* ,“ in*Reason, Spirit and the Sacral* , pp.
157-83.

**Kukkonen** , Taneli, “The Self as Enemy, the Self as Divine: A
Crossroad in the Development of Islamic Anthropology,” in*Ancient
Philosophy of the Self* , ed. by Pauliina Remes & Juha Sihvola (The New
Synthese Historical Library 64) (New York: Springer, 2008), pp. 205-24.

**Macit** , Muhittin, “Some Remarks on Ghazâlî’s Crisis in*The Rescuer
from Error* (*al-Munqidh min al-dalâl)* ,”*Journal of Islamic Research*
, 3.2 (2010): 36-50.

**Okumus** , Mesut, “The Influence of al-Ghazzali on the Hermeneutics of
Ibn Rushd,”*Der Islam* , 86.2 (2011): 286-311.

**-------** , “On the Authenticity of al-Ghazâlî’s*al-Madnûn al-Kabîr*
,”*Journal of Islamic Research* , 3.2 (2010): 115-28.

**Ramón Guerrero** , Rafael, “Algazel: Crisis del califato abasí y
teoría del poder,” in*Historia del análisis político* , ed. by Pablo
Sánchez Garrido & Consuelo Martínez-Sicluna Sepúlveda (Madrid: Tecnos,
2011), pp. 189-99.

**Rayan** , Sobhi, “Al-Ghazali’s Concepts of Ceertitude of the Intellect
versus Certitude of the Post-Intellect,”*Islamic Quarterly* , 55.2
(2011): 141-60.

**Saruhan** , Müfit Selim, “On the Ethical Rationalism of
al-Ghazali,”*Journal of Islamic Research* , 3.2 (2010): 51-65.

**Shu’ayb** , Fiazuddin, “Al-Ghazzali’s Final Word on Kalam,”*Islam &
Science* , 9.2 (2011): 151-72.

**Sidiropoulou** , Chryssi, « Aquinas, Ghazali, and Averroes on the Age
of the Universe. Response to Massey, »*Divinatio* , 28 (2008): 171-94.

**Sweeney** , Michael, « Greek Essence and Islamic Tolerance :
Al-Farabi, Al-Ghazali, Ibn Rush’d, »*The Review of Metaphysics* , 65.1
(Sept. 2011) : 41-61.

**Terkan** , Fehrullah, “Revisiting the Conflict between Religion and
Philosophy in Islam: al-Ghazâlî’s Diagnosis of Onto-Theology,”*Journal
of Islamic Research* , 1.2 (2008): 5-22.

**Treiger** , Alexander,*Inspired Knowledge in Islamic Thought:
Al-Ghazâlî’s Theory of Mystical Cognition and Its Avicennian Foundation*
(Culture and Civilization in the Middle East). London & New York:
Routledge, 2012, xii-182 pp., ISBN 9780415783071.

**van Leeuwen** , Richard, “ “*Yâ Rahîl!”* : Reasons for Travelling in
al-Ghazâlî’s*Ihyâ’ ‘ulûm al-dîn* ,”*Annali di Ca’ Foscari* (3 9s. or.
40), 2009: 165-79.

**Vural** , Mehmet, “Classic Logic of al-Ghazâlî’s Methodology” &
“Al-Ghazâlî’s Letter to Abdul Hassan Mas’ud bin Muhammad bin
Ghanam,”*Journal of Islamic Research* , 3.2 (2010): 143-66.

**Wan Abdullah** , Wan Suhaimi, “Al-Ghazzali’s Method of Proof in
His*Al-iqtisad fi-l-i’tiqad* ,”*Islam & Science* , 9.2 (2011): 131-150.

**Whittingham** , Martin, « The Value of*tahrîf ma’nawî* (Corrupt
Interpretation) as a Category for Analysing Muslim Views of the Bible :
Evidence from*Al-radd al-jamîl* and Ibn Khaldûn, »*Islam and
Christian-Muslim Relations* , 22,2 (2011) : 209-22.

**-------,** “Al-Ghazâlî on Jews and Christians,” in*The Three Rings* ,
pp. 203-16.

**Yazicioglu** , Isra, “Redefining the Miraculous: al-Ghazâlî, Ibn Rushd
and Said Nursi on Qur’anic Miracle Stories,”*Journal of Qur’anic
Studies* , 13.2 (2011): 86-108.

Ibn al-Fadl

**Daiber** , Hans, “Graeco-Arabica Christiana: The Christian Scholar
‘Abd Allâh ibn al-Fadl from Antiochia (11th c. A.D.) as Transmitter of
Greek Works,” in*Islamic Philosophy* , pp. 3-9.

Ibn Hazm

**Tolan** , John V., “ “Ipsius gladio occidere”: The Use and Abuse of
Scripture in Iberian Religious Polemics,” in*Christlicher Norden* , pp.
201-13.

Ibn Khallâd

Basran Mu’tazilite Theology: Abû ‘Alî Muhammad b. Khallâd’s Kitâb
al-usûl and Its Reception: A Critical Edition of the Ziyâdât Sharh
al-usûl by the Zaydî Imâm al-Nâtiq bi-l-haqq Abû Tâlib b. al-Husayn b.
Hârûn al-Buthhânî (d. 424/1033) ed. by Camilla Adang, Wilferd Madelung &
Sabine Schmidtke (Islamic History and Civilization 85). Leiden-Boston;
Brill, 2010, iv-318 pp., ISBN 9789004188723.

**Ansari** , Hassan &**Schmidtke** , Sabine, “The Zaydî Reception of Ibn
Khallâd’s*Kitâb al-Usûl* . The*Ta’lîq* of Abû Tâhir b. ‘Alî
al-Saffâr,”*Journal Asiatique* , 298.2 (2010): 275-302.

Ibn al-Munajjim

**Swanson** , Mark N., “A Curious and Delicate Correspondence:
the*Burhân* of Ibn al-Munajjim and the*Jawâb* of Hunayn ibn
Ishâq,”*Islam and Christian-Muslim Relations* , 22,2 (2011): 173-83.

Ibn al-Qayyim al-Jawziyya

**Accad** , Martin, “Muhammad’s Advent as the Final Criterion for the
Authenticity of the Judeo-Christian Tradition: Ibn Qayyim
al-Jawziyya’s*Hidâyat al-hayârâ fî ajwibat al-Yahûd wa-‘l-Nasârâ* ,”
in*The Three Rings* , pp. 217-36.

**Hoover** , Jon, “The Apologetic and Pastoral Intentions of Ibn
al-Qayyim al-Jawziyya’s Polemic against Jews and Christians,”*The Muslim
World* , 100.4 (2010): 476-89.

Ibn Qutayba

**Schmidtke** , Sabine, “The Muslim Conception of Biblical Materials;
Ibn Qutayba and his*A’lam al-nubuwwa* ,”*Islam and Christian-Muslim
Relations* , 22.3 (2011): 249-74.

Ibn Taymiyyah

**Ibn Taymiyyah** (1263-1328), “Participazione al djihâd,” transl. by
Euginia di Gregorio in*Al-Fatâwâ al-islâmiyya: Les Consultations
Juridiques Islamiques* (Etudes Arabes 106-107). Rome: PISAI Pontificio
Istituto di Studi Arabi e d’Islamistica, 2010, pp. 80-84 [includes
Arabic text].

**Michot** , Yahya, “From al-Ma’mûn to Ibn Sab’în*via* Avicenna: Ibn
Taymîya’s Historiography of*Falsafa* ,”*Islamic Philosophy* , pp. 453-75
[includes translations].

**-------** , “Ibn Taymiyya’s “New Mardin Fatwa.” Is Genetically
Modified Islam (GMI) Carcinogenica,”*The Muslim World* , 101,2 (2011):
125-368.

**Rayan** , Sobhi, “Ibn Taymiyya’s Criticism of Aristotelian
Definition,”*American Journal of Islamic Social Sciences* , 27.4 (Fall
2010): 68-91.

**Sarrio** , Diego R., “Spiritual Anti-elitism: Ibn Taymiyya’s Doctrine
of Sainthood (walaya),”*Islam & Christian-Muslim Relations* , 22.3
(2011): 275-91.

**Sarrió Cucarella** , D.R., “La fetua sobre los monjes de Ibn
Taymiyya,”*Miscelánea de Estudios árabes y hebraicos, sección
árabe-islam* , 59 (2010): 171-90.

Ibn Tumart

**Norris** , H.T., “Ibn Tumart and the Almoravides: ‘The Evil Deeds of
the*mujassimûn* from Kâkudam’, Selected Passages from Ibn Tumart’s*A’azz
mâ yutlab* ,”*Journal of Qur’anic Studies* , 13.2 (2011): 155-64.

al-Lawkarî

**Marcotte** , Roxanne D., “Preliminary Notes on the Life and Work of
Abû al-‘Abbâa al-Lawkarî (d. ca. 517/1123),*Anaquel de Estudios Árabes*
, 17 (2006): 133-57.

Shaykh Mufîd

**Bayhom-Daou** , Tamima,*Shaykh Mufid* (Makers of the Muslim World).
Oxford: Oneworld, 2005, x-149 pp., ISBN 1-85168-383-6.

al-Nîsâbûrî

**Ansari** , H. &**Schmidtke,** , S., “Mu’tazilism after ‘Abd al-Jabbâr:
Abû Rashîd al-Nîsâbûrî’s*Kitâb Masâ’il al-khilâf fî l-usûl* (Studies on
the Transmission of Knowledge from Iran to Yemen in the 6th/12th and
7th/13th C., I),”*Studia Iranica* , 39.2 (2010): 225-76 [includes ed.].

al-Nu’mân

**Daftary** , Farhad, “Al-Qâdî al-Nu’mân, Ismâ’îlî law and Imâmî
Shi’ism,” in*Shî’isme Imâmite* , pp. 179-86.

**De Smet** , Daniel, “The*Risala al-Mudhhiba* Attributed to al-Qadi
al-Nu’man: Important Evidence for the Adoption of Neoplatonism by
Fatimid Ismailism at the Time of al Mu’izza,” in*Fortresses of the
Intellect* , pp. 309-41.

**Poonawala** , Ismail K., “Al-Qadi al-Nu’man and His Refutation of Ibn
Qutayba,” in*Fortresses of the Intellect* , pp. 275-307.

al-Rassâs

**Thiele** , Jan,*Kausalität in der mu’tazilitischen Kosmologie. Das*
Kitâb al-Mu’aththirât wa-miftâh al-mushkilât des Zayditen al-Hasan
ar-Rassâs (st. 584/1188) (Islamic Philosophy, Theology and Science 84).
Leiden-Boston: Brill, 2011, xii-155+57 pp., ISBN 9789004207479 [includes
critical edition].

al-Râzî (Fakhr al-Dîn)

**Elkaisy-Friemuth** , Maha, “God and the Trinity in Fakhr al-Dîn
al-Râzî,”*Islam and Christian-Muslim Relations* , 22,2 (2011): 113-26.

**Nickel** , Gordon, “’Self-evident Truths of Reason’: Challenges to
Clear Thinking in the*Tafsîr al-kabîr* of Fakhr al-Dîn al-Râzî,”*Islam
and Christian-Muslim Relations* , 22,2 (2011): 161-72.

**Opwis** , Felicitas, “Attributing Causality to God’s Law: The Solution
of Fakhr ad-Dîn ar-Râzî,”*Islamic Philosophy* , pp. 397-418.

**Pagani** , Samuela, “Esegesi coranica,” in*Angeli* , pp. 1645-1740
[*Gli angeli e la creazione di Adamo* , transl. from*Tafsîr* ].

al-Saffâr

**Ansari** , Hassan &**Schmidtke** , Sabine, “The Zaydî Reception of Ibn
Khallâd’s*Kitâb al-Usûl* . The*Ta’lîq* of Abû Tâhir b. ‘Alî
al-Saffâr,”*Journal Asiatique* , 298.2 (2010): 275-302.

al-Shahrastânî

**Lewisohn** , Leonard, “From the ‘Moses of Reason’ to the ‘Khidr of the
Resurrection’: The Oxymoronic Transcendent in Sharastani’s*Majlis-i
maktub…dar khwarazm,”* in*Fortresses of the Intellect* , pp. 416-29.

al-Tarsûsî

**Eddé** , Anne-Marie, “ “Le paradis à l’ombre des sabres”. Discours sur
le*jihâd* à l’époque de Saladin,*Mélanges de l’Université Saint-Joseph*
, 62 (2009): 325-52 [with partial ed. and transl.].

Yahyâ ibn ‘Adî, see Falsafa, Ibn ‘Adî


