


The Author
DR. MUHAMMAD TAHIR-UL-QADRI is in need of no introduction to those
affiliated to the many fields, which he has mastered during a small
period of time. He is the founding leader of Minhaj-ul-Quran
International (MQI), which exists in over 80 countries of the world. Its
main aims are working for global peace and human rights, reviving
Islamic values, teachings and traditions and striving for the unity of
the Ummah through a social, educational and spiritual struggle.

As Dr. Tahir-ul-Qadri is presenting the true peaceful message of Islam
pure from innovations added into it and internal and external political
influences, his work, message and call are accepted with open arms. The
main reasons being that he has portrayed Islam as a truly moderate faith
in its original form, free from any form of extremism, fanaticism and
terrorism. As part of his vast struggle for equality, equity and equal
human rights for all, he has written over three hundred books on all
kinds of modern, religious, spiritual and secular issues in English,
Urdu and Arabic.

Dr. Tahir-ul-Qadri is accepted as one of the highest authorities in the
world on Islam, Islam and the West, Islam and Science and many other
subjects, which is why he has delivered over 5000 lectures in
international conferences, universities and institutions all over the
world on all types of issues which are available on DVDs, Video/Audio
cassettes and VCDs.

Although he is a scholar and a religious leader for whom there is no
match, his educational and social efforts have also penetrated society.

Unlike any other religious personality, Dr. Tahir-ul-Qadri and his
mission have attracted people from varying sects and religions. He and
his organisation are the sole hope for inter-sect and interfaith peace,
harmony and unity.

In a growing international atmosphere of anti-Islamism, political
conflicts between Western and Muslim countries and the distance between
the West and Islam seeming to be increasing, Dr. Tahir-ul-Qadri is the
one man who can bridge the gap between the West and Islam. Not only can
he solve the problems of the Muslim world but in doing so he will also
solve the problems faced by Western nations.

The entire income of Dr. Muhammad Tahir-ul-Qadri’s books, recorded
audio/video cassettes and CDs of his lectures/addresses, is donated on
his behalf to Minhaj-ul-Quran International (MQI).

Minhaj-ul-Quran International (MQI):

365-M, Model Town, Lahore, Pakistan

Phone: 0092 42 5169111-3 Fax: 0092 42 5168184

www.minhaj.org Email: tehreek@minhaj.org


