


Introduction
In this day and age Muslims are fully inundated upon the biographies of
celebrities, sports stars and actors yet do they have the same amount of
information about the members of the Prophet’s family, companions and
other important Islamic personalities? The sad fact is that Muslims,
particularly in the West, are unfamiliar with even the names of such
great people let alone have a detailed account of their lives which they
can use as guides on how to perfect their own life styles.

To put an end to this alienation of important personalities of Islam,
Shaykh-ul-Islam Dr. Muhammad Tahir-ul-Qadri has compiled a series of
hadith books on them. This book is one of those collections of
traditions.

The status of Sayyedah Fatimah*(Salam-u-Allah Alaiha)* [Peace Be Upon
Her], the blessed daughter of the Prophet Muhammad*(Salla-a-Allahu
Alaihi Wa Sallam)* [Peace and Blessings Be Upon Him] , is so great that
those who are oblivious to it are not only doing injustice to themselves
by depriving themselves from her teachings but are also unknowingly
showing disregard to the Prophet*(Salla-a-Allahu Alaihi Wa Sallam)*
[Peace and Blessings Be Upon Him] .

At a time when Muslim women are flooded with so-called female role
models, who rather than encouraging a modest and pure lifestyle,
practice and preach the contrary, it is indeed time for Muslim women to
adopt the life style of Sayyedah Fatimah*(Salam-u-Allah Alaiha)* [Peace
Be Upon Her] who received divine praise for her morality.

People will be shocked to learn of the high esteem which she was held by
the Prophet*(Salla-a-Allahu Alaihi Wa Sallam)* [Peace and Blessings Be
Upon Him] and how divine commandments were revealed to the
Prophet*(Salla-a-Allahu Alaihi Wa Sallam)* [Peace and Blessings Be Upon
Him] which were specifically regarding Sayyedah Fatimah*(Salam-u-Allah
Alaiha)* [Peace Be Upon Her].

One of the main reasons for the downfall of the Muslims over the past
centuries is that they have forgotten their true models and ideals
instead adopting bogus and imperfect ones. Shaykh-ul-Islam Dr.
Tahir-ul-Qadri, in this book and many others in the series, has
presented a cure for this cancer. The choice is now ours whether we want
the true cure or opt for artificial ones.

General Note
For the ease of common readers the following formula has been used for
Arabic words and names.

Various transliteration symbols which are commonly used have not been
used in this book as not everyone is familiar with exactly what they
stand for. For a few words where there has been no other way but to use
an apostrophe, it has been used such as Ka‘b and Mu‘adh.

Other than the omission of transliteration symbols, all other rules of
transliteration have been applied.

The Arabic form of names has been used rather than the European ones
such as Ibrahim and not Abraham.


