EPILOGUE INSTEAD OF CONCLUSIONS
===============================

Viorica Ramba Varga

The futures research (futures studies) has started in the second part of
the 20th century, the bloodiest, violentest and most intolerant century.

The post-second war period was intensively*future-obsessive* in Europe.
For mainly two reasons: one of them was caused by the geneal aspire to a
peaceful world. Another was generated by the huge more and more
accelerated scientific and technological development and its
real/potential implication on society.

The end of the WW2 gave a rise to a*historical optimism* that
impregnated the European mental, sentimental and comportamental
structures. The future was perceived as the time/space bearing hopes and
wishes for a better, peaceful, fraternal and free world.

By the end of the after-war reconstrution period, at the beginning of
the 60s, the future has strongly installed in the current
preoccupations.

*In Western Europe* , it was especially the explorative researches
versus “possible futures” (B. Jouvenel) connected to the rapidly
progressed science and technological development that generated the
double attitude of the technological optimism and already the
technological pessimism.

*In Central and Eastern European socialist countries* it was manifested
mainly as future-oriented, interconnected
explorative-normative-operative phases that subordinated the explorative
studies to the centralised planning. The planning was aiming to attend
an accelerated higher development for the countries considered. The
prognostics in these countries marked by the spirit of the historical
and technological optimism presented a sort of planning euphoria of that
age. All these have been used up by the reality in the first part of the
90s. But the memory and the advices of these cultural-historical
experiences deserve to be considered.

From the blood-soaked ground of the WW2 sprang the
rationalist-humanist-enlightened spirit of the first post-war futures
research. It*tacitly excluded* from its approach
the*political-ideological criteria* , it practiced human*solidarity* and
focussed on*criticism* against any jeopardy to the future of the*entire
mankind* .

This trend’s spirit bred a new cultural phenomenon in the Cold War
decades. The phenomenon’s originality was revealed in the emergence of
a*specific state of mind* within the WFSF. This specificity stemmed from
the fact that inside it such rational-emotional elements were
amalgamated, in various dosages, as:

The criticism of Western researchers towards the “establishment”;

The implicit (seldom explicit) non-conformism of researchers in the
former socialist countries as to the centralized uniqueness of the
socialist planning, as well as the acceptance of Bertrand de Jouvenel’s
idea of “possible futures”;

Establishing rationalist-humanist friendships between researchers from
different social systems, even at the risk of unpleasant consequences in
their countries of origin recorded in many cases;

the research and debates of these generous humanists on mankind’s future
were conducted outside commercial/financial criteria and of the state’s
intervention.

**This was the way and the state of mind in which the 1960-1990
generation of futures researchers scanned the roots that events stemmed
from. It is this generation’s precious cultural acquisition.**

***Why is a history, written from the inside, of futures research in
Central and Eastern European countries in the period 1960-1990 and
1990-2000 of interest, as part of the post-war European culture?***

**There is no univocal response, but several hypotheses may be proposed
that could work as adequate answers. One would be that** ***in
reality*** **the centralized State “socialism” (up to 1990) was an
economic development strategy based on the Western model of**
***modernization by classic industrial revolution*** **, a strategy
“clothed” in a different ideological “frock”.**

*Elements of the industrial civilization code* could support the
hypothesis, such as: standardization (mass production), specialization,
synchronization, concentration, maximization, centralization. They were
used both in the socialist East and in the liberal West,*regardless* of
the dominant ideology and/or the modernizing social-political forces.
Along with these elements, the modernization code included the usage of
powerful and “tough” technologies: material-intensive (large),
energy-consuming, cost-intensive and polluting. Massification of the
media and the uniforming mass education contributed to spreading
the*basic concept* of industrial civilization,*identifying the idea of
exponential* , quantifiable,*economic growth* with the*principle of
progress* . In both systems.

From a cultural perspective, another likeness may be noted, concerning
an aspect pertaining to the history of the futures research*uncertainty*
, regardless of the social-politic system. We will only note two
similarities:

although the socialist state redistribution society promoted*planned
research and programming*  while the futures research institutes were
state-funded, the collapse was not foreseen;

the similarity with the “mishap” of the futures research institutes in
the West, who did not foresee the first major oil crisis (1973-74), nor
the “domino effect” in 1989 is striking.

Despite of the uncertainty of futures researches one may affirm
the*certainty of the need to revive* *and deepen futures researches
world-wide* , at least in the following aspects: evidence of
local-global connections and balancing the forces of globalization and
localization; the transition to a new post-industrial civilisation and
its implications; the law and ethical aspects of the new, astonishing
evolution of the science, especially of genetics and bioengineering; the
centralization and decentralization of connections, as well as those of
diversification and standardization that appear in the context of the
technology revolution in IT and communications; connections
poverty-wealth; natural-artificial and so forth.

Such new set of problems - much vaster than the aspects mentioned
above - is now*felt* as a*profanely* inspired*millennarism* that
impregnates the spirituality of the second millennium’s end in
a*different* fashion than the*religious millennarism* that dominated the
end of the first millennium. The profane millennarism as a dimension of
today’s spirituality claims to observe humankind at its essential
turn-points. This millennarist pulsation responds to an intellectual and
also an “existentialist” need and it expresses a truth. Such
established, felt or fathomed*truth* draws attention on the fact that we
participate in an ample*mutation* at the end of which things will never
again be exactly as they used to be.

And how will they be? The possible answers should be approximated
through new futures studies, which will be*different* from the ones up
to 1990.

*Who* should carry through researching the future of the aspects in the
new problems set that, in point of fact, pertain to “palpating”,
grasping, diagnosing the essence of the unfolding new civilization at
the passage from the “old” into the “new” millennium?

The question is less naive than it seems. It deliberately ignores the
political and economic bodies having precise interests. Equally, it
supposes that numerous institutes, NGOs, specialized journals that have
focused their attention over the years on futures research, would
continue to do so. One may hope they will do it with a larger public
accessibility and clearer democratic transparency than up to now.

*The question points to youth* . A “change of guard” is taking place
within the considered countries. Just a few futures oriented aged
thinkers are acting now. Fortunately the young catch up.

W*hat* should we convey to our young at the outset of the new
millennium, from the intellectual abilities and cultural sensitivities
accumulated over time, so that the cultural diversity, not exclusively
focused on Western conformity, should*not be annihilated* , but
rather*harmonized* ?*What* and*how* should we tell our children from the
common heritage, so that it becomes a basis for*continuing* the
civilization’s survival relay?*What* should we convey to convince them
that man is*more* spirit than body,*more* and*other than* just belly and
sex, other than*“hic et nunc”* ?

The hypothesis that might act as valid answer is*respecting the
diversity of life* and exercising*human solidarity* . Even though it may
seem utopian in the new context of globalization and re-polarization.
Beyond its possible utopian shade, remains the obvious fact that the set
of queries/reflections above encompasses the hard core of the cultural
challenge of the new millennium and of its new civilization. Let us face
it together. Although futures research may now seem like a blind man in
a dark room looking for a black cat that is not there, we must still go
on. We have no other “Globe”.


