FUTURES STUDIES IN THE CZECH REPUBLIC
=====================================

Frantisek Petrasek

1. Some features of local futures studies ideology
--------------------------------------------------

A paradigmatic base from which the local futures studies can derive
their ideology, has some specific cultural features created in the
history of the nation.  Such features can be labelled by the term
“futurosophy” (like reasoning the logic used for thinking about the
future or, in another words, like reasoning the ”futurology”) (1). The
Czech futurosophy manifests via discrete ideas, generated in longer
cultural history of the nation.

The first feature can be represented by teaching of Jan Amos Komenskì
(Latin name Comenius, 1592-1670, the last bishop of the local protestant
Christian church, expelled by Hapsburgs after defeating Czechs and their
state, later acting in the northern and middle Europe like teacher and
theoretician of pedagogy). His teaching involves the thesis, that all
ideas, which we create by learning, represent good information for the
human being in case, that they are generated simultaneously with doing
things. Doing things must be oriented by the Christian morality,
otherwise ideas generated by that “learning by doing things” can
motivate human being to act against himself. His message represents
challenges for various political reformers as far as they have to
consider the future of the society strongly dependent not only on actual
practice of doing things, but also on the “world of values”, which
people implement in their contemporary decisions. Futures studies,
according to Comenius thinking, can bring adequate information for human
survival in the case, that they lead not only to the creation of new
structure of backlogs of knowledge suitable for exploitation in
contemporary practice of doing things, but also to the establishing of
values for practice of decision-making itself.

The second cultural feature of the local futures studies relates to
democratic conceptualisation of political problems. A cosmopolitan and
humanistic trust in an active role of human mind in creation of human
future, which Comenius stressed in his idea of “pan-sophism” and which
can be found also in many considerations of the Age of Enlightenment,
was politically exploited 300 years later, by the first president of
Czech and Slovak state, Tomas Garigue Masaryk, in 1918. His project of
that state was based on the concept of humanistic democracy in which the
citizen has an active role. Inhabitants must take care about their
contributions to the public good themselves and create and protect
democratic institutions for that purpose. The causes of a catastrophic
fate of democracy in Europe and of a gradual restoration of totalitarian
political systems in the first half of the 20th century were in
Masaryk’s explanation allocated inside the human being, in his
psychology and education, rather than out of him.

Futures studies, according to that humanistic and anthropocentric
political thinking, help to illuminate the conditions for an active role
of everybody in the public life, offering the warnings and opportunities
for his or her particular cultural activities. Such an approach, typical
for the Czech cultural practice, has appeared also during so-called
Prague Spring in 1968, when new alternatives of political arrangements
were analysed and scenarios for the transition of local political
practice to the “socialism with human face” were prepared. Possibilities
of foreign interventions, coming from the contemporary “outer world”,
were allocated to the second plan of that project.

The third historically important cultural feature of local futures
studies relates to the conception of technical skill. In the thinking of
“technocrats” is that skill often conceptualised like a creative
process, rather than an exploitation of artefacts for various cultural
activities. Starting the 19th century was that technocratic concept
intensively elaborated by engineering experience while the adaptation of
human being to new technology remained as a task for humanistic thinkers
and their historical and actual experience dealing with the human
behaviour. The care about social and cultural impacts of a new
technology, which has appeared in futures studies practice in the second
half of the 20th century, has been manifested in the Czech history by
visions derived from humanistic and democratic ideology. The known
novelist Karel Capek has introduced an idea of the “robot” in the world
awareness. The possibility of the subjugation of human beings by
“robots” like products of human technological creativity which have got
out of the control of their creators, he declared twenty years earlier,
than analytical warnings of ecologists and biological engineers had
appeared.

Futures studies, according to the mentioned above features of local
thinking, help to conceptualise the human cultural activities by
watching the production and consumption activities in the contemporary
cultural practice of human societies and by the interpretation and
prediction of their technological forms and their many-sided impacts on
the human life. The watching may not be separated from processes of
evaluation of cultural activities. Therefore the futures studies fill an
active role in creating the attitudes and morality of particular men and
women by appropriate methodology of the reorganization of their backlogs
of knowledge and help them to reshape their value attitudes and
understanding the world, which are they living in.

Also the concepts of “deep futurology” and “futurology as a social
movement” suits well to the recently manifested concepts of futures
studies widespread mainly among members of the civic futurological
movement in the Czech Republic.

2. Last fifty years of the futures studies
------------------------------------------

If evaluating the knowledge about the methodology of futures studies,
then the Czech practice does not represent different backlog of
knowledge in comparison with the world “state of the art”. Differences
originate thanks to peculiar ways of implementation of futures studies
in the decision-making and are caused by the local demand for the
knowledge about the future. Discrete periods of futures studies can be
distinguished from that viewpoint. In the post-war period, the futures
studies were stimulated by the technological policy induced by the cold
war and arms racing between two contemporary world superpowers. Futures
studies were provided by methods allowing to establish future values of
main output characteristics of technological systems and gradually also
of those systems, which were used by the state government and by
enterprisers for innovation and production of new products and services.
The Czechoslovak Communistic government exploited such practice for
whole time, during which the system of centrally planned economy in
Czechoslovakia was provided (practically till the end of its political
power). That period has brought methodology of technological forecasting
by historical trend analyses and by an extrapolation of values of
particular output characteristics. Concept of managing the society
according to the state plan allowed to exploit all methods suitable for
controlling the behaviour of the society like a behaviour of “determined
automaton”. Productive and consumption activities of inhabitants were de
facto predetermined by extrapolated volumes of output indicators in the
central state plan. In sixties many futurologists spoke about that
practice like about “forecasting, when the future is known”. However,
analyses and assessment of future development of human values and
attitudes and forecasting their impacts in the cultural practice of the
society, were completely missing there.

The mentioned above post-war period of futures studies practice
development was finished in the democratic part of industrially
developed countries in the fifties. Time extrapolation and trend
analyses represented too narrow means for answering questions of those
users, who felt unpleasant side impacts of innovative activities, either
on the nature or on the human being itself. Today we can look back at
first wonderful collections of forecasting methods, elaborated namely by
Erich Jantsch (2) in sixties, and we can understand that contemporary
futures studies like “science in statu nascendi”. Careful descriptions
of methods were done, but an explanation how to choose the adequate
method for given task of the user, was still missing in that time.

A strong innovative competition on world markets and also in arms racing
induced new futures studies practice in sixties. Predicting the future
values of discrete qualities of the “world” has become a mean for
optimisation of particular developmental or capital investment projects
(3). So called “technology assessment”, “need assessment” and
subsequently “social assessment” have entered the managerial and
governmental practice as a new device by which futures studies help to
formulate less risky goals for economic, social, environmental, foreign
or other policies.

In that period we can speak also about futurology like newly born
science discipline, which explores the arrangement of the cognitive
activity of the decision-maker when he prepares goals for his actions
and develops future oriented thinking for that purpose. During that
period also university curricula dealing with forecasting methodology
for decision-making have appeared and strategic or integrative studies
have been cultivated with wider exploitation of already known
forecasting methods. Social and natural impacts of new technologies in
the cultural practice were evaluated by the development and
implementation of new methods for the multi-access evaluation of
“complex” social projects and developmental programs, also in the Czech
academic practice in the late sixties. One of those projects, known
under the title “Civilisation on the Crossroads” was provided by the
interdisciplinary research team of the Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences,
headed by the philosopher Radovan Richta. More than 80 experts
elaborated the scenarios of the future development of industrial
society, under the presumption, that its political regime could follow
the practice of socialistic regime. In 1968 and 1969 were the results
published in France, Italy and contemporary Russia and stimulated wide
professional discussions among politicians and future oriented thinkers.

Futures studies in seventies and eighties, when so-called normalization
process continued and the country was occupied by the Soviet army, were
definitively divided. An “official prognostics” was methodologically
subordinated to the state five years planning mechanism and was provided
by forecasting services at the State planning committees for economy and
for technological development. After 1978 also the Czechoslovak Academy
of Sciences was engaged in forecasting the future development of
scientific branches for the central planning system needs. The second
stream represented by “unofficial prognostics” was subordinated to the
civic interest in the renewal of democracy. Its institutional form was
shaped mainly by private and academic initiatives.

An official stream stimulated evidence, measuring and extrapolation
methods of forecasting values of all indicators, by which planned
volumes of production were controlled. As a result namely Ministry of
Technology has elaborated a system of forecasting of all main products,
with respect to their expected quantities and innovations in the
forthcoming 15 years. Analogically, the Academy of Sciences elaborated
the list of most promising fields of scientific researches including
their expected equipment by professionals and experimental technology
for next 15 years. Finally State Planning Committee elaborated its
visions of long-term development, in which expected innovations together
with preferences of the Communist party were taken like goals for all
productive and consumer activities of the population. The market economy
analyses and social assessment of expected structural changes of the
national economy were absent in that practice and only marginal studies
of environmental impacts of planned technological changes were made by
authors of forecasts.

Unofficial futurologists concentrated their endeavour to gathering
knowledge about forecasting methodology from abroad and on critics of
the official policy. Their results helped to formulate alternative
strategies for political decisions what was publicly appreciated namely
after “velvet revolution” in 1989, when many members of unofficial
prognostics became active politicians.

After the Soviet invasion in 1968 continued unofficial prognostics in
the Czechoslovak Futurological Society (established by Milos Zeman in
1968). Its working team provided also future research, namely synoptic
simulation models were developed and implemented for occasional users
(machinery, regional management of water economy, electrical network,
farming or physical culture and sport activity management, etc.). The
implementation of those models was provided in seventies and tested in
the local practice by private initiatives of authors (4) in cooperation
with some institutes, whose management was ready to carry the adequate
political risk. Authors often lost their job, when elaborated
alternatives distinguished from those, which were made officially. In
1985 an unofficial activities were strengthened by establishing an
autonomous department for forecasting at the more academically acting
institution, Czechoslovak Scientific and Technological Society. Twice a
month, more than hundred intellectuals were discussing alternatives to
the existing political scene and their impacts on the life of Czech
population. Their sessions were officially forbidden in 1987, but their
leaders succeeded by renewing public conference and editorial activity
in 1988, when best contributions from panel discussions were published
by an unofficial journal “Prognostika”. Thanks to that practice, a new
independent and civic society for cultivation of futures studies and for
the dissemination of their results into the society could be quickly
established in 1990 .The Civic Futurological Society joined endeavour of
various specialist oriented to the future. Its educational, conference
and editorial activities were widened in 1992 by an institution of ”The
Inter-university Futures Studies Programme” and by establishing its
Centre at the University of Economics in Prague. That professional
institution coordinated futurological research at Czech and Slovak
universities and organised conferences and editorial activity including
research reports and textbooks. The Civic Futurological Society
publishes futurological revue “Dialogues with the Future” since 1991 and
holds international colloquium “Designing the Future in Europe” in a
form of biennial, since the same year.

Evaluating last ten years of futures studies from the methodological
viewpoint, a gap can be seen in comparison with an implementation of
futures studies in institutionally stabilised industrial societies. The
political implementation of futures studies in seventies and eighties
was stimulated there by the existence of ecological, cultural and global
problems in decision-making of local institutions. However, the needs of
anticipation in domestic Czech official practice were in the same time
generated mainly by short time interest in providing five-year plans. In
the last ten years after velvet revolution, problems of performance of
newly established democratic institutions caused, that the interests of
the state government and enterprises were concentrated again on the
short time decision-making. Futures studies at the Czechoslovak Academy
of Sciences were interrupted. No research or pedagogical unit existed up
to 2000, when the Center for social and economic strategies at the
Charles University was established. (12).

The political stimulation of more long-term and complex thinking has
appeared when Czech government have initiated project of strategic
management for the governmental socio-economic policy, in 1999. Futures
studies for establishing national interests and dispositions for joining
the EU are presupposed for that aim, together with strategic support of
state region policy. In the Czech Republic continues also the
cultivation of civic future oriented initiatives, namely for the support
of an ecological movement and movement for sustainable life on the
planet. They represent new and young energy, which stimulates futures
studies and their implementation in the public policy (6), (7).

Futures studies are also supported by initiatives of Czech president
Vaclav Havel. He has initiated an international conference Forum 2000,
at which communicate prominent scientists and statesmen and provide wide
intercultural dialogue dealing with global problems and with
perspectives of their solution by wide inter-human and
inter-institutional cooperation all over the world (8).

3. Challenges to futures studies
--------------------------------

Futures studies represent a specific part of contemporary thinking.
Unfortunately, the daily “agenda” of our thinking changes rapidly, as
plenty of innovations must be interpreted and evaluated if we want to
formulate goals for our cultural activities. Our cultural environment is
in a steady transformation. However, our psychological dispositions for
thinking remain relatively constant for long historical periods and
represent solid base for various ways of speculations and also for
forecasting methodology. The question is: how to exploit our mind,
mainly its logic, imagination, memory and other mental gifts for
generation of such concepts about our future, which represent adequate
information for contemporary decisions in that “fluid” cultural
environment? A new culture of thinking seems to become necessary for
establishing of information feedback loops, which are necessary for
adapting the society to the changing social and natural environment.
Relevant problems, involving question of appropriate sets of values,
question of an arrangement of evaluative processes in the society,
question of construction of new paradigm of the growth or the
development of the society, seem to become future topics of the applied
futurological research.

New way of future oriented thinking calls for a new approach to the data
collection, and their outworking by the exploitation of an artificial
intelligence. A “virtual reality” and operations with it seems to become
a basic tool for good future research, if successful solution of serious
political task will be wanted.

Pentti Malaska has pointed out that main structural changes in a regime
of the information exchanges between human beings and their environment,
have passed during transformation of a neolith to an industrial society
and that another massive transformation passes recently, when
”information” societies providing planned operations with mental
artefacts have appeared in the human history. Futures studies were in a
fast methodological development during the second half of the twentieth
century, but it seems, that main changes are still on the horizon of
today’s cultural practice and that new logical device and new tasks will
be formulated in a near future by those who try to solve their
uncertainties by their minds.

A serious symptom of a growing demand for changes of our thinking about
the future of public affairs represent uncertainties of participants of
world markets. An absence of knowledge necessary for the control of
market exchange operations is often caused by their inability to get the
“right” information in a “right” time and to predict what will happen if
the participation will be realised. The strategic thinking became
impossible under such circumstances and governments or businessmen
usually under-optimise their activities and often make hazards instead
of creative behaviour (9).

Recent futures studies try to find the answer by an exploitation of the
scientific methodology of analyses, modelling and forecasting, mainly.
It means, that we are concentrated on data gathering and their
systematic outworking by mental activities well established in “nature
science” practice and widely implemented also in engineering sciences,
including economics. An advantage of such mental “technology” of futures
studies is, that under certain stable configuration of human attitudes
to things and subjects of physical treatment, one could compute some
features of future events. However, fast changing “world of values” of
members of innovative societies, disqualify such methodology of futures
studies for becoming an only source of adequate information for the
survival. Some additional methodology of inter-human communication of
knowledge, which will efficiently help to coordinate the information
exchanges between particular knowledge and value sets used for selection
of particular cultural activities, is needed.

In 1994 the author’s research team tried to develop a strategic
counselling system for deputies (10) under the presumption, that
disciplinary structured knowledge about contemporary state of cultural
practice will be systematically gathered and updated by teams of
experts, and deputies will formulate their problems under the influence
of their political experience and knowledge involved in the counselling
system. In the same time deputies will help experts by dialogue to
reformulate original disciplinary established interpretation of a given
problem situation, in order to get more adequate information for
practical political purpose. An experience with the implementation of
that counselling system leads to the conclusion, that communication the
knowledge between participants of the dialogue and the communication
between disciplinary specialised experts, represent methodologically
more complicated problem, than gathering and outworking the data about
the subject of decision (11). In another words, the information benefits
resulting from the futures studies are limited by existing technology of
inter-human communication of empirically verified knowledge. Our ability
to cope with variety of human attitudes in multicultural society and to
reach consensus and common understanding the content of problem
situation in a quickly changing information networks in our culture
practice, need to be strengthened by some appropriate mental technology.

Are there on the horizon of our futurological activities some ideas
about such “technologies” by which energetic and social disequilibria
caused by failures of inter-human communication of knowledge can be
reduced? It seems, that the idea of “doing by learning” can be accepted
like a serious recommendation for that purpose. Let us join to establish
common care about that problem, not only on the base of gathering the
knowledge about outer world of human being (by building external
artificial memories), but also on the base of common evaluation and
common understanding subjects participating on our existence. The
“technology” of such joining memory for data storing, the actualisation
of decision criterions and the understanding the existential sense of
the decision for the decision-maker, seems to represent the main
challenge for tomorrow’s futures studies.

That problem cannot be simplified by its reduction on ecumenism,
economism, scientism or on any other specific cognitive practice. “To be
in” means to reside in information networks, in which the “doing things”
by cultural activities is provided and consciously managed by particular
people and by their particular institutions. Tomorrow’s futures studies
practice look like a cultural service for creating and sharing
expectations for particular cultural activities, rather than the
practice of modelling the possible futures for an “universal” usage,
only.

The futurology for human and humanistic expectations? Is it the right
“futurosophy” for tomorrow? Anyway, futurologists can add serious
information for those who try to build the regime of inter-human
cognitive exchanges and who want to understand and to accept their
mission like a cognitive engineering under specific cultural conditions!

### References

###

(1) Skalicky, K.: A relevance of the Futurology for the Policy-making.
In: Proceedings of the 4th International Colloquium “Designing the
Future in Europe’97”, ed. Civic Futurological Society, Prague, 1997 (in
Czech)

(2) Jantsch, E.: Technological Forecasting in Perspective, OECD, Paris,
1966

(3) Hetman, F.: Society and the Assessment of Technology, OECD, Paris,
1973

(4) Team of authors: A Complex Modelling (ed. by the Ministry for
Industry), Prague, 1978 (in Czech)

(5) Petrasek, F.: Starting Points to the Strategic Outlook Methodology.
In: Collection of Analytical Studies, ed. by the Council of the Czech
Government for the Socio-economic Strategy, Prague, February 2000 (in
Czech)

(6) Novacek, P.: An Evaluation of Main Studies on the Global Development
of Human Civilization. In: see (5) (in Czech)

(7) Team of authors: Threshold 21, The Czech Republic: Model of the
Sustainable Development, ed. by The University of Palacky, Olomouc, May,
1999

(8) The Conference FORUM 2000, Prague Castle, October 10-13, 1999
(contributions in English, published for participants by the Forum 2000
Foundation, editor in Chief: Jeff Lovitt)

(9) Giarini, O., Stahel, W. R.: The Limits to Certainty, ed. Kluwer,
Drodrecht, 1989

(10) Project: Parliamentary Counselling by Integrative Studies of the
National Economy. Report on IFSP-ICEG co-project by F. Petrasek,
presented in Budapest world meeting of correspondent institutions of
ICEG, June 1994, ed. by Interuniversity Futures Studies Programme Center
at the University of Economics, Prague, 1994

(11) Petrasek, F.: Strategic Counselling for Deputies: a Case Study. In
the collection: Centralised Political Decisions in the Czech Republic,
I. part, ed. by Faculty of Social Sciences of The Charles University,
ed. series: Public and Social Policy No. 8/1998 (in Czech)

(12) Team of authors: A Vision of the Czech Republic Development till
2015. In “Dialogues with the Future” No 9, April 2001

web site: http://vize-cr.fsv.cuni.cz


