Commentary : Verse 5.6
======================

5. وَقَالُوا أَسَاطِيرُ الاَوَّلِينَ اكْتَتَبَهَا فَهِيَ تُمْلَي
عَلَيْهِ بُكْرَةً وَأَصِيل

6. قُلْ أَنزَلَهُ الَّذِي يَعْلَمُ السّـِرَّ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ
وَالاَرْضِ إِنَّهُ كَانَ غَفُوراً رَّحِيم

5. "And they say: '(Qur'an is) the stories of the ancients he has got
them written, so they are dictated before him morning and evening'."

6. " Say: 'He sent it down Who knows the secrets in the heavens and the
earth. Verily He is ever Forgiving, Merciful'."

**Commentary:**

Pagans both found fault with the content of the Holy Qur'an, that these
are old fables, and expressed doubt about the holy Prophet (p.b.u.h.),
that he had made copy and they considered some unreal companions for him
("... they are dictated to him ..."). The purpose of 'old fables' is
whether they believed that some persons wrote for him,or they said the
Prophet(p.b.u.h.) was literate and negated his being uneducated.

In these holy verses, one of their derivative analyses and meaningless
pretexts about the holy Qur'an is talked about. It says:

" And they say: '(Qur'an is) the stories of the ancients he has got
them written,..."

This means that he, in fact, has nothing by himself. He has no
knowledge and innovation, let alone revelation and prophethood. Some
persons have helped him to gather some old legends and named it heavenly
book.

In order to achieve this aim, he is helped by others every day. The
verse continues saying:

"...so they are dictated before him morning and evening'."

He is helped in the morning and evening when there are few people
out.

This is, in fact, explanation of the false accusations that were
mentioned in the previous verse.

By these short sentences, they intend to impose some weak points on the
holy Qur'an: First, the holy Qur'an has got no new matter or subject and
it is some old legends. Second, the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) can not continue
his job without others' help and every morning and evening matters must
be read out to him and he writes them. Third, he can write and read and
if he says that he is not educated, he is lying.

As a matter of fact, they intended to break up people who were with the
Prophet (p.b.u.h.), but all wise persons who had lived for a time in
that society knew well that the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) had not been educated
by anybody and had nothing to do with the Jews and the People of the
Book. If he were inspired by others every day and night, how would it be
possible to remain hidden from others? Moreover the verses of Qur'an
were revealed to him in journey, among people, in solitude and in all
conditions.

Additionally, the holy Qur'an was a collection of doctrinal teachings,
religious ordinances, laws and some part of the story of the prophets.
When all of the holy Qur'an was sent down, it was not like what was in
Old and New Testaments as well as Arab superstitious legends. If we
compare both of them, we see what the truth is, because those scriptures
were full of superstitions while these verses were free from any
superstition.

Therefore, answering these groundless accusations, the last concerned
verse says:

"Say: 'He sent it down Who knows the secrets in the heavens and the
earth...."

It refers to this matter that the content of this Book and its various
mysteries that are about sciences, the history of former nations, laws,
man's needs, even some secrets of nature and news about the future, all
indicate that it is not the product of man's mind and it is not compiled
by the help of such and such persons. It is in fact generated by One Who
knows mysteries of heavens and the earth and nothing is out of His
knowledge realm.

Nevertheless, the path of return is open to those who are liar and evil
thinkers, and, in the end of the verse, it says:

"... Verily He is ever Forgiving, Merciful'."

In agreement with His Mercy, He has sent prophets and heavenly Books,
and in agreement with His forgiveness, He pardons our countless sins in
the light of faith and penance.


**Commentary : Verse 6.7.8**

7. وَقَالُوا مَالِ هَذَا الرَّسُولِ يَأْكُلُ الطَّعَامَ وَيَمْشِي فِي
الاَسْوَاقِ لَوْلآ اُنزِلَ إِلَيْهِ مَلَكٌ فَيَكُونَ مَعَهُ نَذِير

8. أَوْ يُلْقَي إِلَيْهِ كَنزٌ أَوْ تَكُونُ لَهُ جَنَّةٌ يَأْكُلُ
مِنْهَا وَقَالَ الظَّالِمُونَ إِن تَتَّبِعُونَ إِلاَّ رَجُلاً
مَّسْحُور

7." And they say: 'What sort of a Messenger is this that he eats food
and he walks about in the markets? Why has not an angel been sent down
to him, to be a warner with him?"

8. " Or why has not a treasure been bestowed on him, or why has he not
a garden to eat of it?' And the unjust say: 'You follow none other than
a man bewitched'."

**Occasion of Revelation:**

Imam Hassan 'Askara (a.s.) said that he asked his father, the tenth
Imam, whether the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) argued against seeking pretext and
reproaches of the Jews and pagans. His father said: "Yes, it happened
many times, including the day when the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) was sitting
beside Allah's house and 'Abdullah Ibn Abi-Omayah Makhzumi came to him
and, standing in front of him, said: 'Oh! Muhammad, you have made a
great claim and are stating terrible words!

You think that you are the messenger of the Lord of the peoples, but it
is not appropriate for the Creator of all creatures and people to have a
messenger like you, a human like us. You eat like us and walk in markets
as we do!' The Prophet (p.b.u.h.) said: 'Oh Allah! You hear all words
and speeches and know all things. You know what Your servants say. (You
Yourself answer them.)' At this time the above verses were revealed and
their seeking pretext were answered."[^1]

**Commentary:**

Since the former holy verses mentioned pagans' objections about the
Glorious Qur'an and they were answered in them, the concerned verses
bring about another part that is about the mission of the Prophet
(p.b.u.h.) and it is also answered. The verse says:

" And they say: 'What sort of a Messenger is this that he eats food and
he walks about in the markets? ..."

They wanted to say that what a prophet he is. He needs food as other
people need. He walks in markets for business and buying what he needs.
This is neither the tradition of the messengers nor the custom of the
kings, while he wants both to declare Divine invitation and to rule
us!

They fundamentally believed that the outstanding persons must not go by
themselves to market for buying what they need, but they must send
servants and agents for this matter.

Then they said:

"... Why has not an angel been sent down to him, to be a warner with
him?"

Very well! Suppose that a man can be a messenger of Allah, but why is
he poor and destitute?

The verse says:

" Or why has not a treasure been bestowed on him, or why has he not a
garden to eat of it?'..."

They did not get satisfied only with these and finally they accused him
of insanity. In the end of the verse we read:

[^1] Nur-uth-Thaqalyn, Vol. 4, p. 6

" ... And the unjust say: 'You follow none other than a man
bewitched'."

They believed that sorcerers can influence the intellect and
intelligence of individuals and own the faculty of reasoning!

It is understood from the above holy verses that they found some
illusive faults with the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) and in every phase they
retreated from their views.

They first believed that the messenger must be an angel. That he eats
food and walks in markets shows that he is not an angel.

Then they said that if he is not an angel, an angel must be sent by
Allah for helping him.

Again they took retrograde step and said that supposing Allah's prophet
is a man, a treasure must be sent down to him from the heaven, so that
it will be a reason for the matter that he is supported by Allah!

In the last phase they said supposing he has none of these, but he must
be at least not a poor man. Like a wealthy farmer he must have a garden
for marinating him. But he has none of these and still he is saying that
he is a prophet.

As a conclusion, they said that his great claim in such conditions is
the sign of insanity!!


