26
==

Chapter Twenty-Six: Test of the Shia during Occultation of Imam Zamana (a.s.) and prohibition of fixing the time of reappearance
================================================================================================================================

<p dir="rtl">
جَعْفَرُ بْنُ مُحَمَّدٍ عَنْ إِسْحَاقَ بْنِ مُحَمَّدٍ عَنْ أَبِي هَاشِمٍ
عَنْ فُرَاتِ بْنِ أَحْنَفَ قَالَ قَالَ أَمِيرُ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ ع وَ
ذَكَرَ الْقَائِمَ فَقَالَ لَيَغِيبَنَّ عَنْهُمْ حَتَّى يَقُولَ
الْجَاهِلُ مَا لِلَّهِ فِي آلِ مُحَمَّدٍ حَاجَةٌ
</p>

**1-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Ja’far bin Muhammad from
Ishaq bin Muhammad from Abi Hashim from Furat bin Ahnaf that he said:
Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said about the Qaim:

“Imam Mahdi (a.s.) will remain in occultation till an ignorant person
says: What does Allah have to do with Aale Muhammad (a.s.)?”

**2-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Himyari from
his father from Ibne Yazid from Hammad bin Isa from Ibrahim bin Umar
Yamani from a man from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said:

“O Shia of Muhammad’s progeny, you are going to be tested like the kohl
in the eye. One knows when the kohl is put into his eye, but he does not
know when it gets out of it. Just in the same way that one believes in
our matter in the morning and recants it in the evening or he believes
in it in the evening and when morning comes, he recants it…

**3-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Muhammad Himyari from his
father from Ayyub bin Nuh from Abbas bin Aamir from Rabi bin Muhammad
Musalli that he said: Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said to me:

“By Allah, people will be broken up like glass, however glass can be
joined together again. By Allah, people will be broken up like earthen
pots; which if once broken cannot be joined again. By Allah, you people
shall be crushed; by Allah, you shall be sieved like wheat is sieved
from the chaff.”

**4-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Ali Ibne Yaqtin that he
said: Imam Musa Kazim (a.s.) said to me:

“O Ali, the Shia have been brought up with hopes since two hundred
years.”

Yaqtin said to his son, Ali: “What is the matter?! What had been said
(by the infallible Imams) to us occurred, but what had been said to you
did not occur - he meant the fate of the Abbasids.”

Ali said: “What had been said to you and what had been said to us were
from the same source but the time of your matter came and it occurred as
it had been said to you whereas the time of our matter did not come yet
so we justified that by hopes and wishes. If it was said to us that this
matter would occur after two hundred or three hundred years, our hearts
would be hard and then most of people would apostatize, but they said to
us that it would be so near in order to attract the hearts of people and
to make them feel that deliverance was about to come.”

**5-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Ghazairi from Bazufari
from Ali bin Muhammad from Fadhl bin Shazan from Ahmad bin Muhammad and
Ubais bin Hisham from Karaam from Fudhail that he said:

I asked Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) if a time has been fixed for
reappearance of Imam Zamana (a.s.) and he replied: “Those who fix a time
for it are liars. Those who fix a time for it are liars. Those who fix a
time for it are liars.”

**6-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Fadhl bin Shazan from
Husain bin Yazid Sahhaf from Mudhir Jawwaz from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
that he said:

“Those who fix a time for it are liars. We have not timed what has
passed and we will not time what is to come.”

**7-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from the same chains from
Abdur Rahman bin Kathir that he said:

I was with Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) when Muhzim Asadi entered and asked:
May I be sacrificed on you, please tell me when the reappearance is? It
has been delayed too much.” Abu Abdullah (a.s.) said: “O Muhzim, the
ill-wishers have told lies, the hasteners will perish and the believers
will be saved and will be with us.”

In*Ghaibat Nomani* also this report is mentioned through two other
chains from the same Imam. Ali Babawayh has also quoted it in*Imamate wa
Tabsira* through another chain of reporters.

**8-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Fadhl bin Shazan from
Ibne Abi Najran from Safwan bin Yahya from Abu Ayyub Kharraz from
Muhammad bin Muslim from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“One who fixes the time of reappearance for you, do not pay attention to
his falsification, because we have not specified its time for anyone.”

**9-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Fadhl bin Shazan from
Umar bin Aslam Bajali from Muhammad bin Sinan from Abul Jarud from
Muhammad bin Bashar Hamadani from Muhammad bin Hanafiyah in a tradition
condensed as follows that he said:

“The rule of Bani so-and-so will continue till a fixed time. When they
get peace and security they will think that their kingdom will never
decline. Meanwhile suddenly a divine command will arrive and no king
will be able to remain in power. Thus the Almighty Allah says:

<p dir="rtl">
حَتَّىَ إِذَا أَخَذَتِ الأَرْضُ زُخْرُفَهَا وَازَّيَّنَتْ وَظَنَّ
أَهْلُهَا أَنَّهُمْ قَادِرُونَ عَلَيْهَآ أَتَاهَا أَمْرُنَا لَيْلاً أَوْ
نَهَارًا فَجَعَلْنَاهَا حَصِيدًا كَأَن لَّمْ تَغْنَ بِالأَمْسِ كَذَلِكَ
نُفَصِّلُ الآيَاتِ لِقَوْمٍ يَتَفَكَّرُون
</p>

***“…until when the earth puts on its golden raiment and it becomes
garnished, and its people think that they have power over it, Our
command comes to it, by night or by day, so We render it as reaped seed-
produce, as though it had not been in existence yesterday; thus do We
make clear the communications for a people who reflect.” (Surah Yunus
10:24)***

The narrator says: I said: May I be your ransom, is some time fixed for
the arrival of divine command?

He replied: No, because the knowledge of Allah dominates the knowledge
of those who fix the time. The Almighty Allah promised thirty nights to
Prophet Musa (a.s.) and then increased ten nights; but neither Prophet
Musa (a.s.) was aware of it nor Bani Israel. Thus when the time

expired, they said that Prophet Musa (a.s.) has deceived us. And they
began to worship the calf.

Hence when famine and deprivation increases and people begin to deny
each other, you should expect the arrival of divine command day and
night.”

**10-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Fadhl bin Shazan from
Muhammad bin Ali from Sadan bin Muslim from Abu Basir that he asked the
Imam (a.s.):

“Is there a fixed time for reappearance; so that we can sit quietly till
that time?”

He replied: “It was fixed; but you people publicized it and it was
postponed.”

**11-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Fadhl from Hasan bin
Mahbub from Abu Hamza Thumali that he said:

“I asked Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.): O son of Allah’s Messenger, Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) used to say: There will be sedition till 70 A.H. and
after that there will be peace and prosperity; but 70 A.H. has passed
and we are still in problems?”

Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) said: “O Thabit, it was initially fixed as 70
A.H. but meanwhile Imam Husain (a.s.) was martyred and the Almighty
Allah postponed it to 140 A.H. When we informed you about it, you
publicized it and the Almighty Allah postponed it further and even we
don’t know about the definite time.”

<p dir="rtl">
يَمْحُو اللّهُ مَا يَشَاء وَيُثْبِتُ وَعِندَهُ أُمُّ الْكِتَابِ
</p>

***“Allah makes to pass away and establishes what He pleases, and with
Him is the basis of the Book.” (Surah Raad 13:39)***

Abu Hamza Thumali says that when he asked Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) about
it he also verified that it was true.

The same tradition is reported in*Al-Kafi* from Ibne Mahbub from Abu
Hamza Thumali from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.).

**12-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Fadhl from Muhammad bin
Ismail from Muhammad bin Sinan from Abu Yahya Tamtaam Salmi from Uthman
Nawa that he said: I heard Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) say:

“Initially this task was entrusted to me; but later on the Almighty
Allah postponed it and kept it in my progeny.”

**13-** ***Tafsir Ayyashi:*** It is narrated from Abu Lubaid Makhzumi
that he said: Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) said:

“O Abu Lubaid, there will be twelve rulers in the Abbaside dynasty; the
last four will be assassinated. They will have very short life spans and
their rule will also be brief. They will be of a very evil character.
Among them will be the transgressor having the titles of Hadi, Natiq and
Ghawi (guide, talking one and fraudster).

O Abu Lubaid, great treasure is there in the code letters of the Holy
Quran (*Muqattiaat* ).”

**14-** ***Tafsir Ayyashi:*** It is narrated from Hisham bin Salim from
some of his associates from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said in the
interpretation of the verse:

<p dir="rtl">
أَتَى أَمْرُ اللّهِ فَلاَ تَسْتَعْجِلُوهُ
</p>

***“Allah’s commandment has come, therefore do not desire to hasten it…”
(Surah Nahl 16:1)***

“When the Almighty Allah informed His Messenger (s.a.w.s.) that this
would occur at such and such time, He also stressed that he must make
haste in it and that he should know that once the Almighty Allah has
said that something is about to occur, it is as if it has occurred.”

**15-** ***Ghaibat Nomani*** **:** It is narrated from Abdul Wahid bin
Abdullah from Muhammad bin Ja’far from Ibne Abil Khattab from Muhammad
bin Sinan from Abul Jarud that Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) said:

“You still wait until you become like frightened goats that the butcher
does not care on which of he puts his hand. You will be of no honor and
no supporter, to whom you refer your affairs.”

**16-** ***Qurbul Asnad:*** It is narrated from Ibne Abil Khattab from
Bazanti that he said:

I asked Imam Ali Reza (a.s.) about a dream, he said after being silent
for a while:

“Indeed if you are told about what you are asking, it is harmful for you
and also the master of the affair will be responsible for it. You have
seen the Firons of Iraq and how they were given respite. Therefore it is
obligatory on you to continue to fear the Almighty Allah and do not be
deceived by the world and neither should you be deceived by those who
have got respite and you should think as if the master of the affair has
reached you.”

**17-** ***Qurbul Asnad:*** From the same chains of narrators it is
narrated from Bazanti that I said to Imam Ali Reza (a.s.):

“Maula, may I be your ransom, our associates have narrated from Shahab
who has in turn narrated from your respected grandfather that he said:

The Almighty Allah did not want to confer rule to the one whom the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) had appointed as his successor.

If Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) had said this, it is very much true.

I said: May I be your ransom, you also comment on it.

He said: Patience and anticipation of Faraj is the best. Have you not
heard the statement of the righteous servant of Allah?

<p dir="rtl">
وَارْتَقِبُواْ إِنِّي مَعَكُمْ رَقِيبٌ
</p>

***“…and watch, surely I too am watching with you.” (Surah Hud 11:93)***

<p dir="rtl">
فَانتَظِرُواْ إِنِّي مَعَكُم مِّنَ الْمُنتَظِرِينَ
</p>

***“Wait then, I too with you will be of those who wait.” (Surah Araaf
7:71)***

Thus you should adopt patience, because after disappointment a
prosperous time is sure to come and those who have preceded you were
more patient than you.

Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) said: By Allah, the practices of nations
correspond to each other. Thus it is necessary that you also have
corresponding happenings as the past nations. Thus if you all had
consensus on anything, it would have opposed the practice of the past
nations.

If scholars (Imams) had managed to get followers capable of maintaining
secrets, they would bestowed them treasures of wisdom, but the problem
is that the Almighty Allah has made you infected with the malady of
divulging

confidential matters. You are a nation that is devoted to us sincerely,
but your action is opposed to us. What has happened to you that you
can’t control yourself and wait for the Almighty Allah to bring what you
want. See this matter will not be advanced by public demand. It is a
divine matter, which depends on His intention and He is not hasty. Only
one who fears the expiration of a matter makes haste.”

**18-** ***Ilalush Sharai:*** Shaykh Saduq (r.a.) has narrated from his
father from Himyari from his chains of narrators directly from Ali bin
Yaqtin that he said:

I asked Imam Musa Kazim (a.s.): “How come the predictions about you are
never fulfilled whereas all the predictions about your opponents are
fulfilled?”

He said: “The predictions about our enemies, since they are true they
are fulfilled. And with regard to us it is not predictions; on the
contrary they are your aspirations and hopes. Thus their result is
obvious.”

**19-** ***Ihtijaaj:*** It is narrated from Kulaini from Ishaq bin Yaqub
that it was told to Muhammad Ibne Uthman Amari:

“As for the reappearance of Imam Mahdi (a.s.), it is subject to the will
of Allah and one who predicts a time for it, is a liar.”

**20-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq (r.a.) has narrated from his
father from Ali from his father Muhammad bin Fadhl from his father from
Mansur bin Saiqal that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said:

“That time (of reappearance) shall not come to pass but after you have
become despondent and hopeless. No, I swear by Allah, till you are
separated from each other. No I swear by Allah, till you are severely
tested. No I swear by Allah, till the time that the unfortunate ones
become unfortunate, while the fortunate ones become fortunate.”

**21-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq has narrated from his father and
Ibne Walid together from Himyari from Yaqtini from Salih bin Muhammad
from Hani Tammar that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said:

“There will be occultation for the master of this affair. During this
those who remain attached to their religion will be like those who rub
their hands on a thorny branch. Then he gestured and said: There is
occultation for the master of this affair and every person is duty-bound
to fear Allah and remain attached to his religion.”

This report is also mentioned in the*Ghaibat* of Shaykh through another
chain of reporters.

**22-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq (r.a.) has narrated from his
father from Saad from Ibne Abil Khattab from Ibne Yazi from Abdullah
Asim from Husain bin Mukhtar Qalanasi from Abdur Rahman bin Siyabah that
Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said:

“What will be your condition at that time when you shall be without an
Imam or guide and you will be disgusted with each other? At that time
you shall be severely examined and you shall be differentiated and
sieved. There will be famines. A person will become a ruler in the
morning and put to death in the evening.”

**23-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Ghazairi from Bazufari
from Ahmad bin Idris from Ibne Qutaibah from Ibne Shazan from Ibne Abu
Najran from Muhammad bin Mansur from his father that he said:

“Once I came to Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) and there were some people with
him. While we were talking with each other, he turned to us and said:
“What are you talking about? How far! How far! That, which you look
forward to, will not be until you are tested. How far! That, which you
look forward to, will not be until you are sieved. How far! That, which
you look forward to, will not be until you are sifted. That, which you
look forward to, will not be except after despair. That, which you look
forward to, will not be until he, who is to be wretched, becomes
wretched and he, who is to be happy, becomes happy.”

In*Ghaibat Nomani* , this report is also narrated from Ahmad bin
Muhammad bin Saeed that he saw it in the book of Abu Abdullah Ja’far bin
Muhammad Muhammadi from Mansur bin Saiqal from Imam Muhammad Baqir
(a.s.) in 268 A.H.

Also Nomani has narrated from Muhammad bin Mansur from his father that
he said: “I and Harth bin Mughira with a group of Shia scholars were
present in the assembly of Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.). The Imam heard
our conversation and then he narrates the previous tradition with the
addition that every time the Imam said: No, by Allah, that which you
look forward to is not to your right. No by Allah, that which you look
forward to will not be revealed except that you are distinguished among
yourself.”

**24-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ahmad bin Idris from
Ibne Qutaibah from Ibne Shazan from Ahmad bin Abi Nasr Bazanti that he
said: Imam Musa Kazim (a.s.) said:

“By Allah, that to which you look forward to, will not come about except
after you are distinguished and you are subjected to a test till except
for a few, none of you Shia will remain… then he recited the following
verses:

<p dir="rtl">
أَمْ حَسِبْتُمْ أَن تُتْرَكُواْ وَلَمَّا يَعْلَمِ اللّهُ الَّذِينَ
جَاهَدُواْ مِنكُمْ وَلَمْ يَتَّخِذُواْ مِن دُونِ اللّهِ وَلاَ رَسُولِهِ
وَلاَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ
</p>

***“What! do you think that you will be left alone while Allah has not
yet known those of you who have struggled hard and have not taken anyone
as an adherent besides Allah and His Apostle and the believers…” (Surah
Taubah 9:16)***

**25-** ***Qurbul Asnad:*** The same is narrated from Ibne Isa from
Bazanti with the following addition:

“…till you are subjected to a test, and from every ten persons some
persons go out of the pale of faith and will not remain on their
original faith.”

**26-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Saad bin Abdullah from
Husain bin Isa Alawi from his father from his grandfather from Ali bin
Ja’far from his brother, Musa bin Ja’far that he said:

“You must continue to protect your religion for the sake of Allah till
the fifth descendant of the seventh Imam does not go into occultation.
You must lose it in any case. Occultation is definite for the master of
this affair and it

will be such an occultation that even those who have faith in it will
recant it. It will be a time of a tough examination from the Almighty
Allah.”

**27-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Asadi from Sahal from
Muhammad bin Husain from Ibne Abi Umair from Abu Ayyub from Muhammad bin
Muslim and Abu Basir that they said: We heard Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
say:

“This will not occur till two-third population of the world is not
destroyed.”

I asked: “Then what would be left of the human population?”

He replied: “Are you not pleased to be of the survivors?”

**28-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Jabir Jofi that he said:

I asked Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.): “When will you come to power?”

He replied: “It’s a pity that it will not be so till you are all sieved
like grain is sieved to separate it from chaff. And then you are sieved
again and again till there does not remain any impurity and only the
clean grain is left.”

**29-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Ahmad from
Ubaidullah bin Musa from Musa bin Muhammad from Ahmad bin Abi Ahmad from
Ibrahim bin Halil that he said:

“I said to Abul Hasan Imam Musa Kazim (a.s.): May I be sacrificed on
you! My father died while still believing in this matter (the Imamate)
and I became so old. Shall I die and you do not tell me of anything?”

He said: “O Abu Ishaq, you hasten (to hasten the will of Allah).”

I said: “Yes, by Allah, I hasten. Why do I not hasten where I became so
old as you see?”

He said: “O Abu Ishaq, by Allah that does not occur until you are tried
and clarified until none of you remains save the least. (And he shrank
his hand.)”

**30-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Ahmad from
Ubaidullah bin Musa from Muhammad bin Husain from Safwan bin Yahya that
Imam Ali Reza (a.s.) said:

“By Allah, That, which you look forward to, will not be until you are
tested and clarified and until none of you remains, save the least and
the least.”

**31-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Husain from
Muhammad Attar from Muhammad bin Hasan Raazi from Muhammad bin Ali Kufi
from Ibne Mahbub from Abil Mughra from Ibne Abi Yafur from Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“Woe unto the arrogants of the Arabs from a soon evil.”

I said: “May I be your ransom! How many of the Arabs will be with the
Qaim (a.s.)?”

He said: “Very few.”

I said: “By Allah, those who talk about this matter among the Arabs are
too many!”

He said: “People must be tried, sifted and purified. Much many people
will be thrown away from the sieve.”

In that book this report is mentioned through another chain from Ibne
Abi Yafur from the same Imam. And through another chains it is mentioned
in*Dalail Imamah* of Tabari Shii.

**32-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Ahmad from
Ubaidullah bin Musa from Ahmad bin Muhammad from Husain bin Ali bin
Ziyad from Bataini from Abu Basir that he heard Imam Muhammad Baqir
(a.s.) say:

“By Allah, you are going to be tested, clarified and sifted like sifting
out the bitter grain from wheat.”

**33-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Qasim
bin Muhammad bin Husain from Ubais bin Hashim from Ibne Jabla from
Miskeen Rahhal from Ali bin Mughira from Umair bin binte Nufail that she
said: Imam Hasan Mujtaba (a.s.) said:

“The matter that you are expecting will not occur until a time comes
that you disavow each other, spit at the face of each other, declare
unbelief against each other and curse each other.”

**34-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Muhammad and Ahmad,
sons of Hasan from their father from Thalaba from Abi Khamas from Imran
bin Mitham from Malik bin Zumra that Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said:

“O Malik, how about you when the Shia disagree like this?” He interlaced
the fingers of his two hands.

I said: “O Amirul Momineen, there will be no any goodness then.”

He said: “O Malik, all the goodness will be then! At that time our Qaim
will appear. He will be presented seventy men as liars, fabricating lies
against Allah and His Messenger (a.s.) and he will kill them. Then Allah
will make people agree unanimously upon one thing.”

**35-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Kulaini from some of
our associates from Ahmad bin Muhammad from Moammar bin Khallad that he
said: I heard Imam Musa Kazim (a.s.) reciting:

الم {1} أَحَسِبَ النَّاسُ أَن يُتْرَكُوا أَن يَقُولُوا آمَنَّا وَهُمْ
لَا يُفْتَنُونَ

***“Alif Lam Mim. Do men think that they will be left alone on saying,
We believe, and not be tried?” (Surah Ankabut 29:1)***

…and then he asked: What is sedition?”

I said: “May I be your ransom! We think that sedition is in religion.”

He said: “People are tested as gold is tested. They are purified as gold
is purified.”

**36-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Kulaini from Ali bin
Ibrahim from Muhammad bin Isa from Yunus from Sulaiman bin Salih
directly from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said:

“Your talk (about Qaim) disgusts the hearts of men. Say it to them
forcefully. Say more to whoever accepts it and leave aside whoever
denies it. There must be a sedition, by which companions, kin and even
those who split a hair into two (who are so strict and accurate) fall
until no one remains, save us and our sincere Shia (followers).”

**37-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ahmad bin Hawza from
Abi Hirasa Bahili from Ibrahim bin Ishaq Nahawandi from Abdullah bin
Hammad Ansari from Sabah Mazani from Harith bin Haseer from Asbagh bin
Nubatah that Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said:

“Be like the bees among the birds. All the birds deem them weak, but if
they know what blessing there is inside their (the bees’) interiors,
they will not do that to them. Mix with people with your tongues and
persons and be far away from them with your hearts and deeds.

I swear by Him, in Whose hand my soul is, you will not meet what you
like until a time comes that you spit at the face of each other, call
each other as liars and until none of you remains, except like the kohl
in an eye and like the salt in food. I give you an example. It is like a
man having some food (grains). He sifts and purifies it and then he
keeps it in a store for some time.

Then he comes back to find that his food has been worm-eaten. He takes
it out, purifies it and puts it back into the store for some time. After
a time he comes to find that his food has been worm-eaten again. He
takes it out, purifies it and puts it back into the store. He does so
again and again until nothing of his food remains except the least,
which will never be harmed by the worms. So are you! You are going to be
clarified until none of you remains save a very few ones, who will never
be affected by seditions.”

The author says: The saying of the Imam to act like a bee among the
birds is to follow Taqayyah. That is you must not reveal your true faith
to the enemies, that they may eliminate you. Like the honey bee does not
reveal to the birds what it contains in its belly to they would have
destroyed it.

**38-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Abdul Wahid bin
Abdullah from Ahmad bin Rabbah from Muhammad bin Abbas Ibne Isa from
Bataini from Abu Basir that he said: Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) said:

“Our Shia (followers) are like a threshing-floor having some grains. The
grains are afflicted with worms. They are purified and then are
afflicted with worms until very little remains that will never be harmed
by the worms. So are our Shia. They are clarified and purified until a
very few of them remain, who will never be affected by seditions.

**39-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Ja’far
bin Abdullah Muhammadi from Taflisi from Samandi from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) from his respected father that he said:

“The believers are tested and purified by Allah. Allah has not assured
the believers from calamities and distresses of this life but He has
assured them from being wretched in the afterlife. Then he said: Husain
bin Ali (a.s.) on the Ashura Day, placed his dead facing each other and
said: They have killed us like the prophets and their descendants.”

**40-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Ali
bin Husain from Hasan bin Ali bin Yusuf and Muhammad Ibne Ali from Sadan
bin Muslim from Abu Basir that he said:

I said to Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.): “The reappearance of the master of
affair does not have a fixed time that we might rest assured.” He said:
“Yes, it was fixed, but you people divulged it and the Almighty Allah
postponed it.”

**41-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Ahmad from
Ubaidullah bin Musa Abbasi from Yaqub bin Yazid from Ibne Abi Umair from
Ibne Bukair from Muhammad bin Muslim that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said
to him:

“O Muhammad, whoever narrates to you a tradition from us talking about
timing, do not hesitate to consider him as a liar, because we do not
time to anyone.

**42-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from
Muhammad bin Fadhl bin Ibrahim and Sadan bin Ishaq bin Saeed from Ahmad
bin Hasan bin Abdul Malik [and Muhammad bin Husain Qitwani] together
from Ibne Mahbub from Ishaq bin Ammar that he said: I heard Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (a.s.) say:

“There has been an appointment for this matter (deliverance). It has
been determined (by the heavens) that it will occur in the year one
hundred and forty (A.H.), but when you announced the matter, Allah has
put it off.

**43-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from the same chains from
Ibne Mahbub from Ishaq bin Ammar that he said:

“This matter has been put off twice.”

**44-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Kulaini from some of
his teachers from Barqi from his father from Qasim Ibne Muhammad from
Bataini from Abu Basir that he said:

“The diviners tell lies. We, Ahlul Bayt, do not time. Allah does not
consent save to reverse the timing of the diviners.”

**45-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Kulaini from Husain
bin Muhammad from Mualla bin Muhammad from Hasan bin Ali Khazzaz from
Abdul Karim Khathami from Fadhl bin Yasar that he said:

“I asked Abu Abdullah Imam Sadiq (a.s.) if that matter (the appearance
of Qaim) had a certain appointment and he said: “The diviners tell lies!
The diviners tell lies! When Prophet Musa (a.s.) devoted himself to his
Lord, he promised his people that after thirty days, Allah would do away
with their enemy. When Allah added ten days to the thirty, the people
said that Musa had broken his promise and then they disbelieved and made
a metallic calf as their god. When we tell you of something and Allah
does as we have told you, you are to say that Allah has fulfilled His
promise and when we tell you of something but a different thing occurs,
also you are to say that Allah has fulfilled His promise. Then you will
be rewarded twice.”

**46-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Kulaini from Husain
bin Muhammad from Ja’far bin Muhammad from Qasim bin Ismail from Hasan
bin Ali from Ibrahim bin Muzhim from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that when
we mentioned the Bani Abbas regime, he said:

“People perished, because they hastened this matter (deliverance). Allah
does not become hasty just because people urge for their matters to be
achieved. This matter (the appearance of Qaim) has a precise time that
it must reach. If it reaches its time, it will occur neither an hour
sooner nor an hour later.”

**47-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Ahmad from
Ubaidullah bin Musa from Muhammad bin Ahmad Qalanasi from Muhammad bin
Ali from Abi Jamila from Hadhrami that he said: Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
said:

“We (the prophet’s progeny) do not time this matter (the appearance of
Qaim).”

**48-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Husain from
Muhammad Attar from Muhammad bin Hasan Raazi from Muhammad bin Ali from
Ibne Jabla from Ali bin Abi Hazim from Abu Basir that he said:

I asked Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.): “May I be your ransom! When will Qaim
appear?”

He said: “O Abu Muhammad (Abu Basir), we, Ahlul Bayt, do not time.
Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) has said: “May Allah damn the diviners!” O
Abu Muhammad, before this matter, there will be five signs; a call (from
the heavens) on Ramadan, the rising of Sufyani, the rising of Khurasani,
killing the pure innocent man, and a sinking in the desert.

Before the appearance of Qaim there must be two plagues; the white
plague and the red plague.”

I said: “What are they?”

He said: “The white plague is a sudden death and the red plague is
killing by the sword. Qaim does not appear until his name will be called
out from the heavens in the twenty-third night of Ramadan, which will be
a night of Friday.”

I said: “What will be called out?”

He said: “The caller will call out the name of Qaim and the name of his
father and will say: “So-and-so the son of so-and-so is Qaim of
Muhammad’s progeny. You are to listen to him, and to obey him.” Every
living creature will hear the call. The sleepers will wake up and get
out to courtyards and the virgins will get out of their veils. Then Qaim
will appear after hearing the call. It will be the call of Jibraeel
(a.s.).”

**49-** ***Al-Kafi:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Yahya from Ahmad
bin Muhammad from Ali bin Ibrahim from his father together from Ibne
Mahbub from Ibne Raab from Abu Basir from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that
he said:

“The Almighty Allah revealed to Imran: I will bestow you with a son, who
will restore sight to the blind and cure the lepers; and who will revive
the dead by the order of Allah and I will send him as a prophet to Bani
Israel.”

Imran mentioned this to Hannah, his wife and Lady Maryam’s (s.a.)
mother.

When Lady Hannah was pregnant she was thinking that she was carrying a
son but upon her delivery she remarked: My Lord, I have given birth to a
daughter and how can a daughter be equal to a son?” That is a girl
cannot be a prophet and the Almighty Allah Himself was aware what she
has given birth to. But when Lady Maryam (s.a.) gave birth to Prophet
Isa (a.s.), he was the same whose glad tidings were given to His
Eminence, Imran previously.

So know that if we Ahle Bayt (a.s.) mention something about a person and
it does appear in him, you should know that it would appear in his
children or grandchildren. You should not think that it was wrong.”

**50-** ***Kitabul Motazar:*** It is quoted from Hasan bin Sulaiman,
student of Shaheed Awwal (r.a.) that he saw in a writing of Imam Hasan
Askari (a.s.) as follows:

“Walking in the footsteps of prophethood and Wilayat, we have reached
the high peaks of realities.” Then further on it said:

“A spring of the water of life will burst forth for them at a time when
they would have burnt in the flames of calamities and years equal to the
numerical values of*Alif Laam Meem, Taa Haa* and*Taa Seen* will have
passed.”


