35
==

Chapter Thirty-five: Successors of Imam Qaim (a.s.)
===================================================

<p dir="rtl">
الدَّقَّاقُ عَنِ الْأَسَدِيِّ عَنِ النَّخَعِيِّ عَنِ النَّوْفَلِيِّ عَنْ
عَلِيِّ بْنِ أَبِي حَمْزَةَ عَنْ أَبِي بَصِيرٍ قَالَ قُلْتُ لِلصَّادِقِ
جَعْفَرِ بْنِ مُحَمَّدٍ ع يَا ابْنَ رَسُولِ اللَّهِ ص سَمِعْتُ مِنْ
أَبِيكَ ع أَنَّهُ قَالَ يَكُونُ بَعْدَ الْقَائِمِ اثْنَا عَشَرَ
مَهْدِيّاً فَقَالَ إِنَّمَا قَالَ اثْنَا عَشَرَ مَهْدِيّاً وَ لَمْ
يَقُلْ اثْنَا عَشَرَ إِمَاماً وَ لَكِنَّهُمْ قَوْمٌ مِنْ شِيعَتِنَا
يَدْعُونَ النَّاسَ إِلَى مُوَالَاتِنَا وَ مَعْرِفَةِ حَقِّنَا
</p>

**1-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Daqqaq has narrated from Asadi from Nakhai
from Naufali from Ali Ibne Abi Hamza from Abu Basir that he asked Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.):

“O son of Allah’s Messenger, I have heard from your respected father
that there will be twelve Mahdis after Imam Qaim (a.s.)?

Imam (a.s.) replied: Yes, he had said twelve Mahdis and not twelve
Imams, but they would be from our Shia and they would invite people to
our Wilayat and recognition of our rights.”

**2-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** Muhammad Himyari has narrated from his father
from Muhammad bin Abdul Hamid and Muhammad bin Isa from Muhammad bin
Fudail from Abu Hamza from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) a lengthy report, in
which he said:

“O Abu Hamza, after Imam Qaim (a.s.) there will be twelve Mahdis from
us, the descendants of Imam Husain (a.s.).”

**3-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** Fazal has narrated from Ibne Mahbub from Amr
bin Abu Miqdam from Jabir Jofi that he heard Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.)
say:

“By Allah, after Imam Qaim (a.s.) a person from us, Ahle Bayt (a.s.)
will ruler for 309 years.

I said: When will this be?

He said: After Imam Qaim (a.s.).

I asked: For how many years will Imam Qaim rule on the earth after
reappearance?

He replied: Nineteen years from his reappearance to his death.

I said: Would there will be a great confusion after that?

He replied: Yes, for fifty years. Then Muntasir will do Rajat and he
will kill his enemies and imprison them. After that Saffah will rise
up.”

**4-** ***Irshad:*** There will be no kingdom after the rule of Imam
Qaim (a.s.) except that there is a narration of one under the control of
his sons, if Allah wishes. However there is no positive assertion and
proof for that. The majority of reports maintain that the Mahdi of the
community will not depart except forty days before Qiyamat, after which
confusion will reign supreme and the dead will emerge from the graves
and Qiyamat shall be established for Reckoning and Punishment.

Note: Allamah Tabarsi (r.a.) has written in*Elamul Wara* that it is
mentioned in authentic reports that there will be no rule of anyone
after the rule of Imam Qaim and only his sons will be his successors, if
Allah wills.

And it is mentioned in most traditions that Imam Qaim (a.s.) will pass
away only forty days before Qiyamat during which the dead will emerge
from the graves and the Qiyamat will be established and Allah knows
best.

Shaykh Saduq has mentioned in*Ikmaaluddin* (Vol. 1, Pg. 339) that:
“There is always a Divine Proof on the earth who is aware of the lawful
and the prohibited and who calls the people to Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime. And the earth shall not be without Divine Proof but forty days
prior to Judgment Day. When that Divine Proof will be taken up by Allah,
the door of repentance shall be closed and the faith of those who accept
it after the going away of Divine Proof will be of no use. They shall be
the worst of creatures. The Judgment Day will be established after
that.”

Also Barqi has mentioned in*Mahasin* quoting from*Masabihuz Zulam*
(Chapter 21, Tradition 202, Pg. 236) the same with a sight difference
and this shows that Shia had the same belief in the early period also.

Thus Allamah Kulaini has narrated in*Usul Kafi* (Vol. 1, Pg. 329,
“Chapter of the names of those who have seen him” from Abdullah bin
Ja’far Himyari that: “I and ash-Shaykh Abu Amr, may Allah bless him, met
at Ahmad Ibne Ishaq’s and Ahmad Ibne Ishaq intimated to me that I should
ask him about the heir (*khalaf* ) [to Imam Askari (a.s.)], so I said to
him: ‘O Abu Amr, I wish to ask you about something - not that I have any
doubt about what I wish to ask you - for my belief and my religion is
that the earth is never bereft of a Divine Proof, except for forty days
prior to the Day of Resurrection; and when that day comes, the Divine
Proof will be taken away and the door of repentance will be shut: On the
day that one of thy Lord’s sign comes, it shall not profit a soul to
believe that never believed before, or earned some good in his belief,
and they will be the most evil of the creatures of Allah, to Whom belong
Might and Majesty, and it is in their time that the Resurrection will
rise.”

In any case these traditions prove that the earth will never remain
devoid of Divine Proof; only forty days before Qiyamat will the Divine
Proof go away from the world and that will be the awaited Mahdi, seven
years after whom the Qiyamat will be established.

Therefore it is necessary that during that Rajat of the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.s.) and the Holy Imams (a.s.) the earth should not be
devoid of Divine Proof and that the tree of Islam should remain verdant,
bearing fruits and leaves from the branches of piety and the earth may
shine with the light of its Lord. And there is no problem if he is
called as Mahdi as mentioned in traditions.

**5-** ***Tafsir Ayyashi:*** It is narrated from Jabir that he said: I
heard Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) say:

“By Allah, after the death of Imam Qaim (a.s.) a person from us Ahle
Bayt (a.s.) will rule for 309 years.”

I asked: When will this be?

He replied: After the passing away of Imam Qaim (a.s.).

I asked: For how many years will Imam Qaim rule on the earth after
reappearance?

He replied: Nineteen years from his reappearance to his death.

I said: Would there will be a great confusion after that?

He replied: Yes, for fifty years. Then Muntasir will do Rajat and he
will kill his enemies and imprison them till people will begin to say
that if he had been from the progeny of the prophets, he would not have
shed so much blood. And all the people of the world will unite against
him and attack him and he will seek refuge in Kaaba. He will have to
face severe calamities and he will be killed in this process. After his
killing, Saffah will rise up in fury and eliminate all our enemies.

And O Jabir, do you know who Muntasir and Saffah are? Muntasir is Husain
bin Ali (a.s.) and Saffah means Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.).”

The text of this tradition is present in*Tafsir Ayyashi* , Vol. 2, Pg.
326.

**6-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** A group of scholars has narrated from
Bazufari from Ali bin Sinan Musali from Ali bin Husain from Ahmad bin
Muhammad bin Khalil from Ja’far bin Ahmad Misri from his uncle Husain
bin Ali from his father from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) from his respected
father from Amirul Momineen (a.s.) from the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.) that he said on the eve of his departure from the world:

“O Abul Hasan bring a scroll and pen and ink.” Then he dictated his will
and came to the following statement:

“O Ali, after me there will be twelve Imams and after them there will be
twelve Mahdis and you are the first of them. Then he named one Imam
after another and then said: Then Hasan will entrust this post of
Imamate to his son, MHMD, who survives from Aale Muhammad (a.s.) and in
this way the twelve will be complete and after that there will be twelve
Mahdis. When the last moments of the twelfth Imam will approach, he will
hand over the leadership to his son, and in this way he will be the
first Mahdi and he will have three names: My name, name of my father and
that will be Abdullah and Ahmad and third will be Mahdi and he will the
first of the believers.”

**7-** ***Muntakhabul Basair:*** Sayyid Ali Ibne Abdul Hamid has
narrated through his chains from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“After Imam Qaim (a.s.), there will be twelve Mahdis from us, the
descendant of Imam Husain (a.s.).”

**8-** ***Kaamiluz Ziyaraat:*** Saad has narrated from Jamurani from
Husain bin Saif from his father Saif from Hadhrami from Imam Muhammad
Baqir (a.s.) and Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that they said regarding Kufa:

“There is Masjid Suhail there, such that every prophet prayed there and
from there divine justice will become apparent and the Imam Qaim will be
there and after him there will be many Qaims and that Masjid is the
abode of prophets, successors and the righteous people.”

Note: The above traditions are against the commonly believed traditions
and can be interpreted in the following way:

Firstly, the phrase ‘the twelve Mahdis’ implies the Prophet and all
Imams, except Imam Mahdi (a.s.), because their rule will come after the
Qaim. Thus what is narrated in it is that Hasan bin Sulaiman has also
applied it to all the Imams and has faith in the Rajat of all the Imams.

Secondly, these Mahdis will be the successors of Imam Qaim who will
appointed to the people during reign of the Imams, so that the world is
never devoid of Divine Proof although the successors, prophets and the
Holy Imams (a.s.) are also Divine Proofs and the Almighty Allah knows
best.


