36
==

Chapter Thirty-six: Epistles issued by Imam Mahdi (a.s.)
========================================================

<p dir="rtl">
أَخْبَرَنَا جَمَاعَةٌ عَنْ أَبِي الْحَسَنِ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ أَحْمَدَ بْنِ
دَاوُدَ الْقُمِّيِّ قَالَ وَجَدْتُ بِخَطِّ أَحْمَدَ بْنِ إِبْرَاهِيمَ
النَّوْبَخْتِيِّ وَ إِمْلَاءِ أَبِي الْقَاسِمِ الْحُسَيْنِ بْنِ رَوْحٍ
رَضِيَ اللَّهُ عَنْهُ عَلَى ظَهْرِ كِتَابٍ فِيهِ جَوَابَاتٌ وَ مَسَائِلُ
أُنْفِذَتْ مِنْ قُمَّ يُسْأَلُ عَنْهَا هَلْ هِيَ جَوَابَاتُ الْفَقِيهِ ع
أَوْ جَوَابَاتُ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ عَلِيٍّ الشَّلْمَغَانِيِّ لِأَنَّهُ
حُكِيَ عَنْهُ أَنَّهُ قَالَ هَذِهِ الْمَسَائِلُ أَنَا أَجَبْتُ عَنْهَا
فَكَتَبَ إِلَيْهِمْ عَلَى ظَهْرِ كِتَابِهِمْ بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمنِ
الرَّحِيمِ قَدْ وَقَفْنَا عَلَى هَذِهِ الرُّقْعَةِ وَ مَا تَضَمَّنَتْهُ
فَجَمِيعُهُ جَوَابُنَا وَ لَا مَدْخَلَ لِلْمَخْذُولِ الضَّالِّ
الْمُضِلِّ الْمَعْرُوفِ بِالْعَزَاقِرِيِّ لَعَنَهُ اللَّهُ فِي حَرْفٍ
مِنْهُ وَ قَدْ كَانَتْ أَشْيَاءُ خَرَجَتْ إِلَيْكُمْ عَلَى يَدَيْ
أَحْمَدَ بْنِ هِلَالٍ وَ غَيْرِهِ مِنْ نُظَرَائِهِ وَ كَانَ مِنِ
ارْتِدَادِهِمْ عَنِ الْإِسْلَامِ مِثْلُ مَا كَانَ مِنْ هَذَا عَلَيْهِمْ
لَعَنَةُ اللَّهِ وَ غَضَبُهُ فَاسْتَثْبَتُّ قَدِيماً فِي ذَلِكَ فَخَرَجَ
الْجَوَابُ أَلَا مَنِ اسْتَثْبَتَ فَإِنَّهُ لَا ضَرَرَ فِي خُرُوجِ مَا
خَرَجَ عَلَى أَيْدِيهِمْ وَ إِنَّ ذَلِكَ صَحِيحٌ
</p>

**1-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** A group of scholars has narrated from Abul
Hasan Muhammad bin Ahmad bin Dawood Qummi that he said:

“I found the following in the manuscript of Ahmad bin Ibrahim Naubakhti,
dictated by Abul Qasim Husain bin Rauh. It was mentioned behind the book
that contained replies to questions sent from Qom and it was asked if
the replies were written by the Faqih (Imam Qaim) or Muhammad bin Ali
Shalmaghani? The reason of this query is that people say: Shalmaghani
says: I have written replies to these questions, so it was mentioned
behind it:

In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. We were informed
about this letter and its matter and all these are our replies. Not a
single letter belongs to the condemned and deviated and the deviating
one. Before this, some points reached you through Ahmad bin Hilal and
other people like him but all of them also apostasied like Shalmaghani
and may Allah send chastisement on them.

The inquirer wrote at the end: I have had this verified before also.

Thus in its reply it was mentioned that the epistle that was verified to
you if you have received the same from those people, there is no harm in
it; and it is correct.”

And regarding some scholars of Ahle Bayt (a.s.), it is an old practice
that they were asked in the same manner about someone who was condemned
by Allah. So they replied that knowledge is with us and whoever denies
it may continue to do so. What is the effect of this on you? If you
receive some traditional report through him, which has been verified by
your authorities, you must thank Allah and accept it and that in which
you doubt or that traditional report, which has reached you through a
trustworthy authority, you must refer to us about it. We will inform you
whether it is right or

wrong. And there are many names of the Almighty Allah. His praise and
glorification is majestic and He is sufficient for us in all matters and
He is the best of the helpers.

Ibne Nuh has said that first of all Abul Husain Muhammad bin Ali bin
Tamam has narrated that he quoted this epistle from the manuscript that
was in the possession of Abul Hasan bin Dawood and when he came, I read
out that copy to him and he also said that the same copy was sent by the
people of Qom to Husain bin Rauh and its reply arrived written on its
back by Ahmad bin Ibrahim Naubakhti and this copy was obtained from Abul
Husain bin Dawood.

Questions of Muhammad bin Abdullah bin Ja’far Himyari:

In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. May the Almighty
Allah grant you honor and help you and may He continue to send His
blessings and increase blessings on you. May He send you the best care
and if you are going to reach some harm, the same may come to us. People
want to compete each other in seeking proximity and honor, but whoever
you accept is acceptable and whoever you reject will be degraded. We
seek Allah’s refuge from this. May Allah bless you. Our city also has a
group of generous and responsible citizens, who compete each other for
(divine) proximity.

Also, may the Almighty Allah continue to support you. This letter was
received by some of them. (Reply): This is right.

Also Ali bin Muhammad bin Husain bin Malik alias Malik Baduka showed a
writing which aggrieved him and he has asked to inform you what grief
was caused to him. If this is a sin on my part, I seek the forgiveness
of Allah and if not I should talk to him in such a way that he is
satisfied.

**Epistle:** We correspond only with our regular correspondents.

**Question:** Also may the Almighty Allah bless you, you have made me
habituated to your kindness, so please forgive my audacity. There are
jurisprudents in your view. Please ask them and tell us that we are told
that Imam Musa Kazim (a.s.) was asked: An Imam of the congregation was
leading the prayers and during the prayers something happened to him and
he died. So what should the people do?

**Epistle:** He will be moved to the rear and a person from the
followers will step forward and complete the prayer and the one who has
touched the deceased Imam will perform the Ghusl of touching the dead.

Those who moved him to the rear should only wash their hands and if no
invalidator has occurred, the same Imam will complete the prayers with
the people.

**Question:** Also it is narrated from Imam Musa Kazim (a.s.) that one
who touches a corpse when it has yet to cool down, he should wash his
hands and if he has touched it after it has cooled, the Ghusl of
touching the Mayyit becomes obligatory on him and this Imam of
congregation will definitely have some warmth remaining and thus he will
be touched in that condition only, so only washing of the hands will be
required. And most probably he will be lifted along with his clothes so
how can the Ghusl of touching the Mayyit will become obligatory on him?

**Epistle:** When the Mayyit is touched while warmth remains in it, one
just has to wash the hands and that is all.

**Question:** If a person reciting Prayer of Ja’far Tayyar forgets the
recitation in standing, sitting, bowing or prostrating; and recalls its
later; should he recite it at that point? Or leave it and go ahead?

**Epistle:** When he has forgotten in some of these conditions and he
recalled it in the same prayer, he should do it when he remembers.

**Question:** A husband of a woman has died; can she participate in his
last rites?

**Epistle:** Yes, she can.

**Question:** Can she visit the grave of the husband during Iddah
(waiting period)?

**Epistle:** Yes, but she must spend the night at her home.

**Question:** Can she go out of her house to fulfill an obligatory duty
or she must stay the period of Iddah at home?

**Epistle:** She may fulfill any duty incumbent on her. On the contrary
even if she has a need she can leave the house; but she must spend the
night at her home.

**Question:** It is narrated from Imam Musa Kazim (a.s.) regarding the
rewards of reciting the Quran during obligatory prayers that he said: I
am surprised at the one who does not recite Surah Qadr in his prayer.
How can his prayer be accepted and it is mentioned in another report
that the prayer of one who does not recite Surah Ikhlas in it cannot be
purified. It is mentioned in the third report that one who recites Surah
Humazah will get the world.

Now the question is: Is it allowed to recite Surah Humazah and leave the
other chapters, whereas it is mentioned in traditional reports that his
prayer will not be accepted or his prayer will not be purified?

**Epistle:** The reward mentioned in traditional reports for recitation
of Surahs is correct, but if one leaves them and recites Surah Ikhlas
and Surah Qadr, about which report has come down, he will get the reward
of the Surah he has recited and also he will get the reward of the Surah
he has left. It is also allowed to leave other Surahs although his
prayer will be correct; only that he should have left it for a
preferable deed.

**Question:** When is the farewell to the month of Ramadhan? There is
difference of opinion among our associates. Some say that the
supplication of the farewell to the month of Ramadhan should be recited
on its last night. Some say it should be recited after sighting the moon
of Shawwal.

**Epistle:** The Aamaal of Ramadhan are performed in its nights,
therefore the supplication of farewell to the month of Ramadhan will be
on its last night. Although if one fears that there would be deficiency,
one should recite on last two nights.

**Question:**

<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّهُ لَقَوْلُ رَسُولٍ كَرِيمٍ
</p>

***“Most surely it is the Word of an honored messenger…” (Surah Takwir
81:19)***

It implies the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.).

ذِي قُوَّةٍ عِندَ ذِي الْعَرْشِ مَكِينٍ {20} مُطَاعٍ ثَمَّ أَمِينٍ

***“The processor of strength, having an honorable place with the Lord
of the Dominion. One (to be) obeyed, and faithful in trust.” (Surah
Takwir 81:20-21)***

And what the power is and what that being is and where it is?

May Allah, the Mighty and Sublime exalt your honor, please ask these
questions to a trustworthy jurisprudent and inform me and also write in
detail about Muhammad bin Husain bin Malik so that he may be satisfied
and pray for the well being of the world and the hereafter from me and
the brothers.

**Epistle:** May the Almighty Allah gather the good of the world and the
hereafter for you and your brothers.

May Allah maintain your honor, help you and be kind to you and may He
complete His favor on you and if some harm is to reach you, may it come
to me instead. And praise be to Allah, the Lord of the worlds and may
Allah bless Muhammad and his progeny, all of them.

**2-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** In another book, a letter is mentioned
containing the following question, which were written to one of the
special envoys of Imam Zamana (a.s.):

**Question:** May the Almighty Allah continue your respect and honor,
ask the Faqih (Imam Qaim) following questions and inform me:

When a worshipper gets up after reciting the first Tashahud to recite
the third Rakat, is it obligatory for him to recite the Takbeer? Because
some of our associates say that it is not obligatory, on the contrary he
is allowed to say*Bihawlillaahi Quwwatihi aqoomo wa aqud.*

**Reply:** There are two traditions in this connection: the first is
that when the worshipper lifts his head from Sajdah he recites the
Takbeer, then he sits and then he stands up; thus he does not need to
recite the Takbeer for standing up after sitting. The same is with the
case of the first Tashahud. One can choose any of the options.

**Question:** Also please inquire if one can pray wearing a ring of
Hadid?

**Reply:** It is Makruh.

**Question:** A person bought a sacrificial animal on behalf of a person
who was not present as the latter had told him to sacrifice in Mina on
his behalf; but when he wanted to slaughter the animal he forgot the
name of that person and he remembered it only after the sacrifice; is it
a proper procedure for the person who delegated the ritual?

**Reply:** There is no problem; the sacrifice was complete.

**Question:** There are some Majusi weavers among us who eat carrion and
don’t perform Ghusl Janabat; can we pray in the clothes weaved by them
without purifying them?

**Reply:** There is no problem in it.

**Question:** A person is reciting Midnight Prayers in dark; when he
goes into Sajdah, his forehead falls on something other than the place
of prostration; that is the floor etc. Now when he raises his head, he
finds the Turbah; does he have to count that Sajdah?

**Reply:** Till he does not sit upright, he can raise his head to search
for the Turbah.

**Question:** A person who is wearing Ihram removes the covering of the
canopy, but leaves the frame. Is it allowed?

**Reply:** There is no problem if he leaves the frame.

One of the things a person in Ihram has to avoid is shade. Thus if he
rides a camel with a canopy or a bus with roof he has to pay the
Kaffarah (Penalty) of sacrificing a sheep. But if the covering of the
canopy or the bus is removed, leaving the frame and walls, there is no
problem in it.

**Question:** If a person wearing Ihram shades himself with a sack or
with something else to protect himself or his seat from getting soaked
in rain, is it allowed for him to do so?

**Reply:** If he does this on the way with canopy, the Kaffarah is
obligatory on him. The penalty of a goat is due to the fact that the
person has shaded himself from rain and to shade oneself is an omission
for a person wearing Ihram.

**Question:** Is it necessary for a person doing Hajj as proxy, to
mention the name of the one whose Hajj he is doing at the time of Ihram?
Is it obligatory that he must make separate sacrifice for himself as
well as whose Hajj he is performing?

**Reply:** It is not necessary to recite it in details and one sacrifice
is sufficient on behalf of the one whose Hajj he is performing.

**Question:** Is it permitted for man to tie up the Ihram with a sheet
of fur?

**Reply:** There is no problem, righteous and decent people have been
Muhrim with it.

**Question:** Is it permitted for man to keep with himself an iron knife
or an iron key while praying?

**Reply:** It is allowed.

**Question:** A man goes for Hajj with a group of Sunni and they do not
tie up the Ihram at Maslakh. Whether this man is allowed to delay his
Ihram till Zaat-e-Arq so that he becomes Muhrim with them at that place?

**Reply:** It is necessary to become Muhrim from the Miqaat and say the
Talbiyah softly and when he reaches the Miqaat with them, he should make
it obvious.

**Question:** How is wearing leather slippers, because people say that
it is Makruh to wear them?

**Reply:** It is permissible and there is no problem.

**Question:** A man is a treasurer in endowments, and he is careless. He
considers as permissible for himself the endowments, which are under his
control, and he does not abstain from them. Often when I enter his
office and he is present or I enter his house and he is present he
invites me to eat and if I don’t eat at his place, he would become
inimical to me and say: such and such has not considered my food lawful
that is why he has not eaten it. Now please tell me if it is allowed for
me to eat with him and then later pay Sadaqah for it. And how much
Sadaqah should I pay? Or whether it is allowed for me to accept a gift
that he gives to me?

**Reply:** If this man is having other property in addition to the
endowments he holds and has other occupations also you may eat with him

and accept his gifts. If it is not so, you must neither eat at his place
nor accept any gift from him.

**Question:** A man is a Shia and considers Mutah and temporary marriage
permissible and also believes in the Rajat (return) and all his family
members are united. This man has made a vow that he would neither take a
second wife nor do Mutah. And he has spent 19 years with this vow. Now
if he breaks his vow, does he become liable for a penalty or sin?

**Reply:** It is Mustahab (recommended) for him to do Mutah at least
once for obedience of Allah so that the sin of the vow is removed from
him.

Vow and oath becomes valid when it is with relation to a preferable
thing and not for something inferior and unlawful. Thus if the action or
leaving the action is inferior, oath and vow shall not be valid in it.
And Mutah, as it is legal and lawful in the view of Quran, to leave it
through a vow or an oath is not allowed. But the prohibition of Mutah is
an opinion in comparison to textual command and therefore it is of no
value. Although, regarding this, we have a detailed discussion and its
lawfulness and legality has been proved on the basis of Quran and
traditions.

**3-** ***Ihtijaaj:*** In another book of Muhammad bin Abdullah Himyari,
question posed to Imam Zamana (a.s.) in the year 307 A.H. are mentioned.

**Question:** Is it allowed for the Muhrim to tie the apron (lungi) from
his back to the neck in length and then to bring its ends upto his loins
and then to gather them at the waist and tie them there. Then to bring
out the other ends through his legs and tie them up to his hip; thus it
would become like a Shalwar as in the case of the lungi, his legs are
exposed when he is riding etc.?

**Reply:** It is allowed as far as it retains the form of a lower
garment, but it is not allowed if it comes out of the limit, however it
is preferable to tie it up in the usual manner.

**Question:** Is it allowed to tie it at the waist with a cummerbund?

**Reply:** It is not allowed to tie the lower apron with anything other
than a cummerbund.

**Question:** A person who is praying, in the beginning of the prayer
when he recites the verse:

<p dir="rtl">
إِنِّي وَجَّهْتُ وَجْهِيَ لِلَّذِي فَطَرَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأَرْضَ
حَنِيفًا وَمَا أَنَاْ مِنَ الْمُشْرِكِينَ
</p>

***“Surely I have turned myself, being upright, wholly to Him Who
originated the heavens and the earth, and I am not of the polytheists.”
(Surah Anam 6:79)***

Is it necessary for him to add: Upon the religion of Ibrahim and the
faith of Muhammad? May Allah bless the religion of Muhammad (s.a.w.s.).
As some people have said that whoever recites, “Upon the religion of
Muhammad” has committed an innovation, as we have not found it in the
books of prayer. And only the tradition in the book of Qasim from his
grandfather from Hasan Ibne Rashid is there, that His Eminence, Imam
Sadiq (a.s.) asked Hasan: How do you recite the Verse of Tawajjoh?[^17]
Hasan replied: I say:*Labbaik wa Saadaik* . Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said: My
question was not that. On the contrary, I asked you how you recite the
verse:

<p dir="rtl">
إِنِّي وَجَّهْتُ وَجْهِيَ لِلَّذِي فَطَرَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأَرْضَ
حَنِيفًا وَمَا أَنَاْ مِنَ الْمُشْرِكِينَ
</p>

***“Surely I have turned myself, being upright, wholly to Him Who
originated the heavens and the earth, and I am not of the polytheists.”
(Surah Anam 6:79)***

Hasan said: I recite that only.

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said: “When you say thus, after that you must add:
Upon the religion of Ibrahim and the faith of Muhammad and the way of
Ali bin Abi Talib and following the progeny of Muhammad, the upright,
the submissive and we are not from the polytheists. May Allah bless the
religion of Muhammad (s.a.w.s.).”

**Reply:** Actually the verse of Tawajjoh and saying: “Surely I have
turned myself, being upright, wholly to Him Who…” is not obligatory. It
is an emphasized recommended deed like a unanimous view, as no one has
opposed it:

“Surely I have turned myself, being upright, wholly to Him Who
originated the heavens and the earth, upon the religion of Ibrahim and
the faith of Muhammad and the guidance of Amirul Momineen and I am not
of the polytheists. Surely my prayer and my sacrifice and my life and my
death are (all) for Allah, the Lord of the worlds. No associate has He;
and this am I commanded, and I am the first of those who submit. O Allah
make me among the Muslims. I seek refuge in Allah the All-hearing the
All-knowing from the accursed Shaitan. In the name of Allah, the
Beneficent, the Merciful.” After that recite the Surah Hamd.

These supplications and recitals are recommended practices and are not
from the obligatory rituals of prayers and the Imam (a.s.) has explained
its method.

**Question:** Can a person in an obligatory prayer pass his hands over
his face and chest after reciting the Qunut; because it is mentioned in
a tradition that Allah, the Mighty and Sublime is much beyond that He
should turn away His servant empty-handed. On the contrary, He fills
with mercy the hands of one who supplicates. Or it is unlawful, because
some of our associates say that it is an additional act in Prayers?

**Reply:** After the Qunut of obligatory prayer, it is not allowed to
pass the hands over the face. What is allowed is that he can pass his
hands from his chest and pass it till his knees. Then he should say
Takbeer and go into Ruku. The above tradition is correct, but it applies
to the recommended daily prayers and not for obligatory prayers.

**Question:** According to some of our associates to perform Sajdah
Shukr after obligatory prayers is an innovation. Please tell us if it is
lawful? If once can perform it after the three rakats of Maghrib or
after the four rakats of Nafila of Maghrib?

**Reply:** Sajdah Shukr is the most recommended Sunnah; one who says it
is an innovation, himself intends to spread innovation in religion. And
the tradition narrated about it is that Sajdah Shukr should be performed
after Maghrib prayers although there is difference whether it should be
after the three rakats of Maghrib or after the four rakats of Nafila.
Like the obligatory prayer is having preference over Nafila, in the same
way, reciting Tasbih and supplication after obligatory prayer is having
preference over Tasbih and supplication after Nafila. And it is better
to perform Sajdah Shukr after

obligatory prayers. Although it is allowed even if one performs it after
Nafila.

**Question:** One of our believer brothers owns some agricultural land
and just next to that is barren land owned by the government, which is
uninhabited; it contains ditches and holes. Sometimes seeds fall on that
portion also and the government officials harass the person and do not
allow him to pick the fruits, even though the land is worthless as it is
barren since twenty years. And this believer brother is also hesitating
whether to purchase it or not, because it is generally believed that it
was Waqf land that the government has seized. Is it allowed to purchase
that land from the government to avoid the harassment of officials?

**Reply:** No land can be purchased without the permission of its owner.

**Question:** You are requested to pray for a person.

**Reply:** May the Almighty Allah grant him that which he deserves and
reform all the affairs of his world and religion, because He is the
potent guardian.

**4-** ***Ihtijaaj:*** A letter was sent to Imam Zamana (a.s.) in 308
A.H., in which some religious questions were posed as follows:

In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. May the Almighty
Allah bestow you a long life with respect, honor and greatness. May He
bless you in every way and keep you safe from all harms and may He
sacrifice me upon you.

**Question:** Some old men and women fast during the month of Rajab and
Shaban and connect them to Ramadhan; but some of our associates have
told them that it is not lawful?

**Reply:** At the most, keep fifteen fasts in Rajab, except that he or
she should keep three Qada fast, because it is mentioned in traditions
that Rajab is best for keeping Qada fasts.

**Question:** A person is riding on a camel and there is so much of snow
that it is as high as a man and he is afraid to dismount and pray. Is it
allowed for him to recite the Prayer on the camel?

**Reply:** If it is necessary, there is no problem in it. The condition
for praying the Prayer on the ground is superseded by the difficulty
present there, hence praying on the ground is given exemption in this
case.

**Question:** A person joined Congregation Prayer when the Imam was in
Ruku and counted it as his Rakat, but some people say that if he did not
hear the Takbeer of Ruku that Rakat will not be counted for him?

**Reply:** If he joins even one recitation of the Imam that Rakat will
be counted for him, whether he heard the Takbeer of Ruku or not.

**Question:** After completing the Zuhr prayer, a person began to pray
the Asr prayer, but after reciting two rakats, he realized that he had
prayed only two rakats for Zuhr; what should he do?

**Reply:** If something occurred between the two prayers to discontinue
the prayer, he will have to pray the Zuhr prayer again and if it is not
so, he will regard the last two rakats as the balance of the two rakats
of Zuhr. Then he should repeat the Asr prayer.

**Question:** Would the folks of Paradise have sexual relations and have
offspring?

**Reply:** No woman in Paradise will have pregnancy, childbirth, Haiz,
Nifas and they will not have to bear the hardship of bringing up
children. Only that will happen which the Almighty Allah has said and
they will get everything just by wishing for it.

Thus if a believer desires a child, the Almighty Allah will give him one
without pregnancy and childbirth, like He created Adam (a.s.).

**Question:** Is the testimony of a leprous person allowed? Because it
is mentioned in traditional reports that they cannot lead the healthy?

**Reply:** If that disease has struck them because of some accident,
their testimony is allowed and if it is from birth, their testimony is
not allowed.

**Question:** A person claimed a thousand dirhams from another and
presented proof for that; then he made another claim for 500 dirhams and
also presented documents and proofs for it; then he made another claim
for 300 dirhams and also presented documents and proofs for it. Then he
made another claim for 200 dirhams and also presented documents and
proofs for it. But the defendant says that all these amounts totals 1000
dirhams and the plaintiff refuses it. Is the defendant responsible for
1000 dirhams or the full amount?

**Reply:** The plaintiff will get the amount of 1000 dirhams without any
doubt, as for the different amounts totaling 1000; regarding that the
defendant will have to swear; if he refuses it, he has not right.

**Question:** Is it lawful to put the dust of Kerbala with the dead in
the grave?

**Reply:** It is lawful to put the dust of Kerbala with the dead in the
grave and that dust should also be included with the Hunut of the
Mayyit.

**Question:** There is a report about Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he
wrote on the shroud of his son, Ismail: Ismail testifies that there is
no deity except Allah. Are we allowed to write something on the shroud?

**Reply:** It is allowed.

**Question:** Is it allowed to recite Tasbih on a rosary of
Khak-e-shifa?

**Reply:** There is no rosary better than the rosary of Khak-e-Shifa and
one of its excellence is that if someone forgets to recite anything and
merely turns the beads, he will get the reward of reciting Tasbih.

**Question:** Is it lawful to do Sajdah on Khak-e-Shifa and is there any
merit in it?

**Reply:** It is lawful to do Sajdah on Khak-e-Shifa and there is merit
in it also.

**Question:** Is it allowed to prostrate on the grave for one who
performs the Ziyarat of the graves of the Holy Imams (a.s.)? One who
prays besides the graves of the Holy Imams (a.s.); is it allowed for him
to stand behind the grave or he should pray besides the head or stand at
the feet? Can he stand ahead of the grave and pray?

**Reply:** Sajdah on the grave is not allowed, neither in obligatory nor
recommended prayer or Ziyarat. What is allowed however is to place the
right cheek on the grave.

As for the prayers; he should keep the grave in front and stand behind.
To keep it behind or to stand at its right or left is not allowed.
Because neither can one stand ahead of the Imam nor at the side on him.

**Question:** Is it lawful to do hold the Tasbih and turn its beads
during obligatory or recommended prayers?

**Reply:** It is lawful if one fears that one will forget.

**Question:** Is it lawful to turn the beads of the rosary with the left
hand?

**Reply:** It is lawful and the praise is from Allah.

**Question:** Is it lawful to dispose Waqf property if all trustees
agree? What if some agree and some do not? Which Waqf property cannot be
sold?

**Reply:** If the Waqf is for the Imam of Muslims it is not allowed to
sell it; if it is for some Muslims, each of them can sell it
individually or jointly.

**Question:** Is it lawful for a Muhrim to keep some litharge or blue
vitriol in order to suppress body odor?

**Reply:** It is lawful.

**Question:** There was a person who witnessed a document when he
possessed eyesight; after that he became blind; so he cannot see the
signature and recognize his testimony. Is it lawful to accept his
testimony?

**Reply:** It is lawful if he remembers his testimony and its time.

**Question:** Is it lawful to consume the potion for throat pain, which
is prepared as follows?

A syrup is prepared from walnuts in which some raw walnuts are ground
into a soft powder, then juice is extracted from them and sieved. Then
it is half cooked and left for twenty-four hours. After that it is
boiled with one-sixth part of honey and its foam etc. is removed. Then
half mithqal of sal ammoniac and half mithqal of alum is powdered in
water along with a dirham of saffron; all this is added to the potion
and then it is cooked on fire till it boils to thickness like honey.
Then it is cooled and taken in small quantities? Is it lawful?

**Reply:** If its consumption in large quantity makes one intoxicated,
it is prohibited; whether taken in large or small quantities.

**Question:** If a person cannot make up his mind whether to do a
particular thing; he takes two rings and writes on one Yes and on the
other No, then he recites the supplication of Istikhara and makes a draw
and acts according to it; is it lawful?

**Reply:** On such occasions, Imam Musa Kazim (a.s.) has said that
drawing lots through Istikhara and prayers are recommended.

**Question:** When is it recommended to pray Namaz Ja’far Tayyar? Is
there Qunut in it? In which rakat?

**Reply:** The best time for this prayer is Friday and in the beginning
of the day. Other times are also allowed. There are two Qunuts in it: In
the second Rakat and the fourth Rakat.

**Question:** A person made an intention to give some money to his
particular believer brother; but later he found that one of his
relatives was in need. Can he give the money to him?

**Reply:** Of the two, the one closest to his faith should be preferred
and Imam Musa Kazim (a.s.) has said that the Almighty Allah will not
accept the charity given to someone else leaving the needy of ones
relatives. He should divide the amount between them in order to earn
both the rewards.

**Question:** Our scholars have differed about the dower amount and some
say that if the husband has consummated the marriage, the dower is null.

Now he is not responsible for anything and some say that the dower is
necessary to be paid in the world and the hereafter. What is the correct
solution and what is obligatory?

**Reply:** If there is some writing about dower, in which it is
mentioned as a debt, its payment is obligatory in the world as well as
the hereafter. And if only the amount is mentioned and it is not
mentioned as a debt; then it becomes null after consummation of
marriage. And if there is no such writing, even then it will be null
after consummation of marriage.

**Note:** It is so because during that time, consummation of marriage
did not take place before payment of dower and consummation of marriage
implied that dower is paid.

**Question:** On which foot should Masah be done first? Is it lawful to
do Masah on both feet together?

**Reply:** It can be done on both feet together or the right foot should
be wiped first.

**Question:** Is it lawful to recite Namaz Ja’far Tayyar during a
journey?

**Reply:** It is lawful.

**Question:** A person recited Allahu Akbar more than 34 times in the
Tasbih of Lady Fatima (s.a.). Should he recite it 34 times again? And if
he forgetfully says Subhan Allah 34 times, should he recite Subhan Allah
again?

**Reply:** If one forgetfully recited Allahu Akbar more than 34 times,
he should come back to 34 and there is no need to recite it again 34
times. And if he forgetfully recited Subhan Allah more than 33 times he
should come back to it and continue and there is no need for him to
recite it again. And the same order applies to the recitation of Alhamdu
Lillah.

**5-** ***Ihtijaaj:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Abdullah bin
Ja’far Himyari that he said that an epistle arrived from Imam Zamana
(a.s.), in which after replies to some questions, it was mentioned:

“If you intend to make us as a medium and address us, you should recite
say what the Almighty Allah has said:

Ziyarat Aale Yasin
------------------

Peace be upon (the) progeny of Yasin. Peace be upon you, O the caller of
Allah and place of manifestation of His signs. Peace be upon you, O the
door of Allah and the devout one of His religion. Peace be upon you, O
the vicegerent of Allah and the helper of His truth. Peace be upon you,
O the proof of Allah and the Guide of His intention. Peace be upon you,
O the reciter of Allah’s book and its interpreter. Peace be upon you in
your night and in your day. Peace be upon you, O the remnant of Allah on
His earth. Peace be upon you, O the covenant of Allah, which He took it
and He fastened it. Peace be upon you, O the promise of Allah, which He
guaranteed. Peace by upon you, O the manifested flag and the one who is
filled with knowledge and the help and the far-reaching mercy, a promise
which is not a lie. Peace be upon you while you are standing. Peace be
upon you while you are sitting. Peace be upon you when you are reading
and explaining. Peace be upon you when you are praying and supplicating.
Peace be upon you when you are bowing and prostrating. Peace be upon

you when you are saying ‘There is no God except Allah’ and (when) you
are saying ‘Allah is greater (than what He is described).’ Peace be upon
you when you are praising (Allah) and seeking forgiveness. Peace be upon
you when you enter the morning and the evening. Peace be upon you in the
night when it envelops and the day when it becomes manifest. Peace be
upon you, O the leader, the protected one. Peace be upon you, O the
prior hoped one. Peace be upon you by the collections of the
salutations. I call you as a witness, O my Master, certainly I testify
that there is no god except Allah, He is alone, there is no partner with
Him. And indeed I testify that Muhammad is His servant and His
messenger; there is no beloved except him and his progeny. And I call
you as a witness, O my Master certainly Ali, the commander of the
believers is His proof. And Hasan is His proof. And Husain is His proof.
And Ali, son of Husain is His proof. And Muhammad, son of Ali is His
proof. And Ja’far, son of Muhammad is His proof. And Musa, son of Ja’far
is His proof. And Ali, son of Musa is His proof. And Muhammad, son of
Ali is His proof. And Ali, son of Muhammad is His proof. And Hasan, son
of Ali is His proof. And I testify that indeed you are the proof of
Allah. All of you, the first and the last. And surely your return is a
truth, there is no doubt in it. The day when belief of none will benefit
himself who previously did not believe or acquired a goodness through
his belief. And indeed death is a truth. And indeed Naakir and Nakeer is
a truth. And I testify that indeed the scattering (stage of Qiyamat) is
a truth and the raising is a truth. And indeed the bridge (over hell) is
a truth and the watching place is a truth. And the balance is a truth
and the gathering is a truth. And the accounting (of deeds) is a truth
and Paradise and the hell is a truth. And the promise (of reward) and
the threat (of the punishment) in them is a truth. O my Master, one who
opposes you is unlucky. And one who obeys you is lucky. Then testify
whatever I made you a witness upon. And I am a friend for you, acquitted
from your enemy. So the truth is whatever you are satisfied with. And
the untrue is whatever you are angry with. And the goodness is whatever
you ordered. And the evil is whatever you have prohibited. So I am a
believer in Allah, He alone, there is no partner with Him. And (I am a
believer) in His messenger and in the commander of the believers. And in
you O my Master, the first among you and the last among you. And my help
is intended for you. And my love is purely for you. Amen! Amen! (Accept!
Accept!)

Dua to be recited after Ziyarat
-------------------------------

O Allah, surely I ask You that You send blessings upon Muhammad
(s.a.w.s.). The prophet of Your mercy and the word of your light. And
fill my heart with the light of certainty. And my chest with light of
faith. And my thinking with the light of intentions. And my
determination with the light of knowledge. And my strength with the
light of action. And my tongue with the light of truthfulness. And my
religion with the light of understanding from You. And my vision with
brightness. And my hearing with the light of wisdom. And my love with
the light of friendship for Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) and his progeny. Peace
be upon (all of) them until I meet You. And certainly I discharged Your
promise and Your covenant. So You cover me with Your mercy, O Master! O
Praiseworthy. O Allah send

Your blessings upon Muhammad, Your proof on Your earth. And Your
vicegerent of Your cities. And the caller towards Your way. And the
upright by Your justice. And the one who arises by Your command. The
master of the believer. And the perdition of the disbelievers. And the
enlighter of the darkness. And the illuminator of the truth. And the
speaker with the wisdom and the truth. And Your complete word on Your
earth. The anxious anticipator and the counseling Master, the ark of
salvation. And the flag of guidance and the light of the sight of
mankind. And best of he who was attired and was clothed and the
illuminator of the blind. The one who will fill the earth with justice
and equity just as it was filled with injustice and oppression. Surely
You are powerful over everything. O Allah, send Your blessings upon Your
friend and son of Your friends. Those whom You have ordered (for)
obeying them. And You made (the observation of) their rights compulsory.
And You removed from them the uncleanness and purified them a thorough
purifying. O Allah, help him and come to the aid of Your religion
through him. And help Your friends and his friends and his followers and
his helpers through him. And place us among them. O Allah, protect him
from the evil of every tyrant and despot. And from the evil of all Your
creatures. And protect him from his front and his back and his right and
from his left. And protect him and prevent from him the reaching of any
evil. And protect Your messenger and the progeny of Your messenger
through him. And make the justice manifest through him. And support him
by the victory. And help his helpers and abandon his deserters. And
break up his dividers and break up the giants of disbelief through him.
And through him, kill the disbelievers and the hypocrites and all the
heretics. Wherever they be, in the east of the earth and its west, its
land and its sea. And fill the earth with justice through him. And
manifest the religion of your prophet; blessings be upon him and his
progeny through him. And place me, O Allah, among his helpers and his
aiders and his followers and his partisans. And show me in the progeny
of Muhammad, peace be upon them, whatever they are hoping. And in their
enemies whatever the enemies are afraid (of). O God of the truth, Amen
(Accept). O the possessor of splendor and honor! O the most merciful of
all the mercifuls.

**6-** The author of*Mazaar Kabeer* says: Ahmad bin Ibrahim narrated
that once he asked Abu Ja’far Muhammad bin Uthman for the Ziyarat of
Imam Zamana (a.s.) and he asked me if I really wanted to see him and I
replied in the affirmative.

“He said: May Allah reward you for this desire and may He allow you to
view his countenance; but don’t ask for meeting, because during the
period of occultation one can only see him and not demand to meet him as
this is the will of Allah and we all have to submit to it and it is the
best way. But you must recite the Ziyarat that I have dictated to
Muhammad bin Ali and you take it from him. It is a Ziyarat of Imam Mahdi
(a.s.), which should be recited after twelve rakats prayers in units of
two and in every rakat after Surah Fatiha, recite Surah Ikhlas. After
that invoke Durood on Muhammad and Aale Muhammad (a.s.) and then say
which Allah has said:*Salamun Alaa Ilyasin.* This is a clear excellence
bestowed on Aale Muhammad (a.s.) and the Almighty Allah is the owner of
all blessings. His Imam is one who

guides to the straight path. O Aale Yasin, the Almighty Allah has given
His Caliphate to you.”

**7-** ***Ihtijaaj:*** In Safar, 410 A.H. the following epistle arrived
from Imam Zamana (a.s.) addressed to Shaykh Abi Abdullah Muhammad bin
Muhammad bin Noman and the messenger said that it was from Hijaz. Its
text is as follows:

This letter is for the worthy brother and righteous friend, Shaykh
Mufeed Abu Abdullah Muhammad Ibne Muhammad Noman, may Allah always
maintain his honor, it is from the position achieved due to the covenant
taken from the people:

“In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. So to say: Peace be
on you, O friend who is sincere in the religion of Allah and is
successful in certainty in us. We are thankful for our existence to
Allah, except Whom there is no God. And we ask Allah for blessings and
mercy upon our Prophet Muhammad and the Progeny of Muhammad. And may He
always give you divine opportunity to help the truth and increase your
rewards for speaking up in our favor. We announce that we have been
permitted to honor you with our letter and entrust you with
responsibility of our friends, who are present around you. May Almighty
Allah befriend them due to His obedience and may He suffice them in
their important matters. May the Almighty Allah help you against the
pledge-breakers who have gone out of the religion of God. Then consider
what I am explaining to you and convey it to those whom you trust, if
Allah wills.

If we are in such a position that we are away from the habitations of
the oppressors and it is due to hidden wisdom that the Almighty Allah
has considered best for us and the believer followers of us, till the
material wealth is in control of the transgressors. Inspite of all this,
we are perfectly cognizant of all your affairs and problems and nothing
regarding you is hidden from us.

We have received information about the disgrace and humility suffered by
you all due to most of you acting in opposition to the ways of your
predecessors, regarding which you may not have received any information.
And that we are concerned about you and we do not forget you and if this
attention and favor had not been there, calamities would have befallen
you and your enemies would have destroyed you. Therefore fear the
Almighty Allah and help us to save you from this mischief. Anyone whose
death is near shall be killed in this mischief and one who has obtained
his desire shall remain safe and this mischief is a sign of distance and
proximity of our commands and prohibitions. Although the Almighty Allah
would perfect His light, even if it is detestable to the disbelievers.

Remain attached to dissimulation and keep away from stoking the fire of
ignorance that the bigotry of Bani Umayyah has created. You should gain
lessons from the incidents that would occur this year in the month of
Jamadiul Awwal and you should wake up from the sleep of carelessness on
witnessing that which occurs immediately after that. A clear sign would
be visible to you in the sky and a similar sign from the earth. In the
eastern lands, there would be disappointing events and an atheist power
would gain

control on Iraq. Due to their evil deeds, the livelihood of the people
of Iraq would reduce.

After that the calamities would be dispelled and the evil ones and the
polytheists would be destroyed. Their destruction would cause happiness
among the righteous and people from all corners of the world would come
for Hajj. Each of you should do that which we like and keep away from
that which we dislike. Because our kingdom shall appear all of a sudden
and at that time, repentance would not be accepted from anyone. No one
would be able to escape punishment. The Almighty Allah has guided you
through divine inspiration and given you the Taufeeq of guidance through
His mercy.”

The following Tawqee was written in the hand of Imam Zamana (a.s.):

“This letter is for you, O sincere brother and friend. O loyal friend.
May Allah protect you. Keep this letter in safe custody and do not show
it to anyone. Though you may convey the points mentioned therein to
those whom you trust. And persuade them to act upon it, if Allah wills.
And may Allah bless Muhammad and his Purified Progeny.”

**8-** ***Ihtijaaj:*** Another epistle of Imam Zamana (a.s.) arrived on
Thursday, 23rd Zilhajj 412 A.H. addressed to Shaykh Mufeed (r.a.) in
which it was written:

“From a traveler of the path of Allah to one whom the Almighty Allah has
given the knowledge of truth and who is the proof of truth.

In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful.

Peace and mercy of Allah be upon you, O helper of religion. O one who
invites to Allah with the word of truth. We thank Allah, except Whom
there is no deity, for your existence and invoke His blessings for our
master and chief, Muhammad, the seal of the prophets and his Ahle Bayt.

After that may the Almighty Allah keep you safe from every calamity and
may He keep you safe from the plots of the enemy; your private
supplication was in our view and we have also interceded for the
acceptance of your Dua. I am writing this from my tent, which is fixed
at an unknown hill and I have walked here from a valley and it is
possible that one day I will come down from this hill and reach
habitation. Perhaps my circumstances may change and our news may reach
you and the proximity that you seek through good deeds may be given to
you by Allah.

May Allah guard you with His eyes that never sleep. You should face
these circumstances. Meanwhile the people of falsehood will be destroyed
as a result of which the believers will be pleased and the sinners will
be aggrieved.

And the sign of our rising will be the incident, which will be effected
through another condemned hypocrite. He will legalize the killing of a
protected life; even then he will not be able to achieve his aim by
oppressing the believers, because our prayers will be there in their
favor that neither an angel of the heaven nor the earth can prevent. So
our friends should rest assured that what the Almighty Allah does is for
the best. Till the people continue to remain aloof from the unlawful.

O sincere friend and struggler, may Allah help you as He had helped His
chosen servants in the past. I promise that if anyone from your brothers
in

faith acquires the fear of Allah and pays that amount, which is
obligatory on him to the eligible recipient, would be safe from sorrow
and calamities. But if anyone is miserly in giving away the wealth that
Allah has given him temporarily, he has made a loss for his children and
his hereafter. If our Shia, may Allah help them in His obedience, had
been loyal to the pledge taken from them, the bounty of our meeting them
would not have been delayed. And the honor of meeting us would have
perfected their recognition earlier. Thus the only things that keep us
hidden from them are those same matters that reach us about them that do
not please us and which we don’t expect from them. And Allah is the
helper and he is the best caretaker and protector. May He bless Muhammad
the giver of good tidings and the warner and his purified progeny and
peace be on them.

Letter written on the 1st of Shawwal in 412 A.H:

“This is my letter to you; O friend, truth is inspired upon you. Which I
have dictated and a trustworthy person has inscribed. Keep it secret
from everyone and make a copy of it and only convey the points mentioned
in it to those of our friends whom you trust. If Allah wills, the
blessings of Allah would be in their share. Praise be to Allah and
blessings be upon our chief, Muhammad the Prophet and his purified
Progeny.”

**9-** ***Ihtijaaj:*** Abu Aamir Aamiri (r.a.) said:

Ibne Abi Ghanim Qazwini along with some Shia people had a difference of
opinion regarding the successorship of His Eminence, Imam Hasan Askari
(a.s.). So much so that Qazwini denied the existence of His Eminence,
the Awaited Imam (a.s.). However, others stressed that the successor of
His Eminence was present and he is His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s.). They
wrote a letter to the Awaited Imam and related their discussion with
Qazwini. His Eminence, wrote in reply as follows:

In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful.

May the Almighty Allah keep you and us safe from the mischiefs and may
He bestow you and us with certainty and may He also protect you and us
from bad consequences. Information regarding the doubt and denial of a
group from you in religion and the matter of guardianship (Wilayat) has
reached us. Our sorrow and anger is for you and not for our own selves,
as the Almighty Allah is with us, therefore except for Him, we are not
needful of anyone else and the truth is with us. Therefore, I am not
afraid if someone turns away from us. And we are the first creations of
our Lord and (other) creatures and people were created afterwards. And
you, O People! Why have you fallen into doubt and bewilderment? Have you
not heard the statement of Almighty Allah that He said:

<p dir="rtl">
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ أَطِيعُواْ اللّهَ وَأَطِيعُواْ
الرَّسُولَ وَأُوْلِي الأَمْرِ مِنكُمْ
</p>

***“O you who believe! Obey Allah and obey the Apostle and those in
authority from among you…” (Surah Nisa 4:59)***

Don’t you know that it has come in traditional reports that unforeseen
events had befallen the past and would befall the remaining Imams? Have
you not seen how in all the times, the Almighty Allah had made a refuge
for you to seek protection in? He appointed torches of guidance from the
time of Adam (a.s.) till the time of Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.) that you
may obtain

guidance and direction, in such a way that whenever a guide went away,
another one took up his place and torch.

When the Almighty Allah took away Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.), do you think
He has rendered His religion invalid and severed His relation with the
creatures? Never! Till the Day of Judgment and the time of the exposure
of Allah’s command, which is not in favor of the people, it cannot be
thus.

Indeed, His Eminence, Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.) passed away with success
and good fortune like his respected forefathers and in such a condition
that his knowledge and will is present with us. And his successor would
perform his functions. And except for an unjust criminal, no one has any
dispute with us in this matter. And except for a denier disbeliever, no
one claims this divine position of ours. And if it would not have
rendered the command of Allah to be subverted and His secret had not
been exposed, our right upon you would have become so clear that your
intellects would have become astonished and your doubts and
uncertainties would have disappeared. However, what Allah had willed,
predestined and written would surely happen and nothing except that.
Then fear Allah and submit to our affair, and leave this matter with us.
And do not persist in acquiring that which Allah has concealed and do
not get deviated to the left and right. And make our right and
illuminated path as the aim. Indeed I wish your well-being and Allah is
witness upon you and me. If I had no affection for you and had not
desired mercy and good for you, I would not have said anything to you.

It is by way of trial and divine test for us that a misguided oppressor,
without any right has become a prisoner of his selfish desires and
usurped the right of others. Like the daughter of the Messenger of
Allah, it is obligatory I should be patient and in the end the ignorant
and tyrant would see the consequences of his deeds. May Allah Almighty
protect you and us from perditions, calamities and evils. And Allah is
having authority and power on them and blessings and mercy of Allah be
upon all the successors, saints and believers. And may Allah bless
Muhammad, the Prophet, and his progeny and peace be upon them.

Debate of Ibne Abi Ghanim is mentioned in*Ghaibat Tusi* also.

**10-** ***Ihtijaaj:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Yaqub Kulaini
from Ishaq bin Yaqub that he requested Muhammad bin Uthman Amari to
convey his letter containing a number of difficult questions to Imam
Zamana (a.s.); the following epistle was received from Imam Zamana
(a.s.):

“May the Almighty Allah keep you on guidance. You have asked about those
of our family and cousins. You should know that no one is related to the
Almighty Allah. Anyone who denies us is not from us and his end will be
same as the son of Prophet Nuh (a.s.). As for the matter of my Uncle,
Ja’far and his sons; it is same as the matter of the brothers of Yusuf
(a.s.). Barley wine is Haraam. There is no problem in turnip extract. We
only accept the monies sent by you so that you may be purified. Now
whoever likes, should send it, whoever likes may not. The provision that
the Almighty Allah has bestowed is better than whatever you send us.

As for the reappearance and advent, it solely depends on the will of
Allah and those who fix a time for it are liars.

As for the saying of those who think that Imam Husain (a.s.) has not
been slain is a kind of disbelief, denial, deviation and misguidance.

But as for the problems, which will occur in the future, you should
refer to the narrators of our traditions for their verdicts as they are
my proofs on you, and I am Allah’s proof on them.”

As for Muhammad bin Uthman Amri, may Allah be pleased with him and his
father, he is trustworthy and reliable one of mine and his writing is my
writing.

As for Muhammad bin Ali bin Mahziyar Ahwazi, then very soon, Allah would
reform his heart and remove his doubt.

As for the money that you sent for me, it is not acceptable to me,
except that which is pure. And the compensation for a singing girl is
unlawful.

As for Muhammad bin Shazan bin Naeem; he is a Shia of Ahle Bayt (a.s.).

As for Abul Khattab Muhammad bin Ali Zainab Ajdaa; he and all his
associates are accursed and you do not cultivate the company of those
who harbor their beliefs; and my forefathers and I are aloof from them.

As for those who are in possession of our funds, in a way that they
consider it lawful for themselves and spend it; they have in fact
devoured (Hell) Fire.

As for Khums, it is lawful for our Shia till the time of reappearance,
so far as their children are pure and not involved in sinful activities.

As for the funds that are sent to us and after which they fell into
doubts and became regretful of having paid it to us, then anyone who
wants, we would return to him and we are not needful of the money of
those who harbor doubt with regard to Allah.

As for the cause of occultation, the Almighty Allah has said:

<p dir="rtl">
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ لاَ تَسْأَلُواْ عَنْ أَشْيَاء إِن تُبْدَ
لَكُمْ تَسُؤْكُمْ
</p>

***“O you who believe! Do not put questions about things which if
declared to you may trouble you…” (Surah Maidah 5:101)***

Each of my forefathers in his time was compelled by the oath of
allegiance to the tyrant ruler and when I reappear, I would not be
having the allegiance of any tyrant on my neck. As for how people would
benefit from me during my occultation, it is like getting benefits from
the sun, which is concealed by the clouds. And I am the security for the
people on the face of the earth just as stars are security for the
inhabitants of the heavens. Therefore do not ask what you are not in
need of and do not put yourself into undue trouble. And pray more for an
early reappearance as in it lies your success. Peace be on you, O Ishaq
Ibne Yaqub and peace be on all those who follow the guidance…”

A similar report is mentioned in*Ghaibat Tusi* from Ishaq bin Yaqub.

A similar report is mentioned in*Ikmaaluddin* from Ishaq bin Yaqub.

**11-** ***Ihtijaaj:*** Abul Husain Muhammad bin Ja’far Asadi says that
they sent some questions to Imam Zamana (a.s.); the following was
received from Shaykh Abu Ja’far Muhammad bin Uthman Amari (q.s.):

As for a question you asked about the Prayer at the time of sunrise and
sunset its reply is as follows: It is said that the sun rises and sets
between the

two horns of Shaitan, then what is better than prayer that it may rub
the nose of Shaitan on the earth? Therefore recite prayer at this time
and rub the nose of Shaitan (humiliate him).

As for a question about that which has become endowed to us and that
which is fixed for us, but inspite of this if its owner becomes needful
of it, its reply is as follows: Till it has not been accepted, a
transaction is allowed to be made invalid and one could spend from it.
If it has been accepted, it cannot be made invalid, whether he is
needful of it or not.

As for that which you asked: that if someone is having something from
our property and he spends it without our permission as if he is himself
the owner and considers it permissible for himself. The reply to it is
as follows: One who does thus is accursed and on the Day of Judgment, we
would be displeased with him. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) has certainly
said: “Anyone who considers a prohibited thing of my progeny as
permissible, is eligible for my curse and that of all the prophets. One
who encroaches upon our rights is among those who are unjust upon us and
the curse of Allah is upon him. The Almighty Allah says:

<p dir="rtl">
أَن لَّعْنَةُ اللّهِ عَلَى الظَّالِمِينَ
</p>

***“Know that! The curse of Allah is upon the oppressors.” (Surah Araaf
7:44)***

As for your question that if a child is circumcised and the foreskin
again grows up, is it necessary to cut it off again; the reply is that
yes, it is necessary to cut off that skin again. The earth complains to
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime for forty days when an uncircumcised
person urinates on it.

As for your question whether it is allowed to pray having a fire, a
picture or a lamp in front, the reply is that there is difference of
opinion in this matter. You should know that if one is not from the
children of idolaters and fire worshippers, he can have these before him
and pray. But if one is from the children of idolaters and fire
worshippers having these things before him in prayers is not allowed.

As for your question regarding our property, whether it is allowed to
stay in the building, is it allowed to pay taxes through its income and
one who has entered this place to gain our proximity and reward, is it
allowed to spend on playing host to him? The reply is that when it is
not permissible to use the property of others without their permission,
how can it be lawful to use our property when our permission has not
been taken? Thus one who makes use of our property without our leave, it
is as if he has made lawful what we made unlawful for him and one who
consumes anything from our property, it is as if he has filled his
stomach with fire and very soon he would be cast into the blazing fire.

As for your question whether it is allowed for a person to form an
endowment in our name and appoint a person to take care of the property
and in lieu of it take a fixed sum of money and send the balance to the
Imam. Well, the reply is that this caretaker is allowed to take the sum
specified by the creator of endowment. But apart from this, none else is
allowed to take anything from the endowment.

You asked regarding the fruits on our property, that whether passersby
are allowed to eat from them. The reply is that they are allowed to do
so, but they cannot carry away the fruits from there.”

The same traditional report is mentioned in*Ikmaaluddin* from Muhammad
bin Ja’far Asadi.

**12-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Abu Ja’far Muhammad bin Muhammad Khuzai
(r.a.) has narrated from Abu Ali Ibne Abul Husain Asadi from his father
that:

I received the following epistle through Shaykh Abu Ja’far Muhammad bin
Uthman Amari (q.s.) without my sending any inquiry:

“In the Name of Allah the Beneficent the Merciful. The curse of Allah,
all angels and men be on the one who has made lawful a single dirham
from our property.”

Abu Ja’far Muhammad bin Muhammad Khuzai says: “I saw and read this
epistle.”

The same report is mentioned in*Ihtijaaj* .

**13-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Muzaffar Alawi has narrated from Ibne Ayyashi
and Haider bin Muhammad from Ayyashi from Adam bin Muhammad Balkhi from
Ali bin Husain Daqqaq and Ibrahim bin Muhammad from Ali bin Asim Kufi
that he said:

“It has come in the epistles of the Master of the Age: Accursed,
accursed is the one who utters my name in the gathering of people.”

**14-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Ibrahim bin Ishaq has narrated from Abu Ali
Muhammad bin Hamam from Muhammad bin Uthman Amari (q.s.) that it was
mentioned in the epistle of Imam Zamana (a.s.) as follows:

“An epistle was issued in a familiar handwriting that said: Curse of
Allah on the one who utters my name in the gathering of people.” Abu Ali
Muhammad bin Hammam says: “I wrote asking him when the reappearance will
be? He replied: Those who fix the time of reappearance are liars.”

**15-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Narrated to us my father and Muhammad bin
Hasan bin Ahmad bin Walid - May Allah be pleased with them - they said:
Narrated to us Abdullah bin Ja’far Himyari: Narrated to me Muhammad bin
Salih Hamadani that:

I wrote to the Master of the Time (a.s.): “The people of my family
harass me about the tradition of your forefathers that: ‘Our people and
our Shia are the worst creatures of Allah’? The Imam replied as follows:
Woe be on you, have not seen that Allah, the Mighty and Sublime has
said:

<p dir="rtl">
وَجَعَلْنَا بَيْنَهُمْ وَبَيْنَ الْقُرَى الَّتِي بَارَكْنَا فِيهَا قُرًى
ظَاهِرَةً
</p>

***“And We made between them and the towns which We had blessed (other)
towns to be easily seen.” (Surah Saba 34:18)***

And by Allah we are that ‘town’ which Allah has blessed and you are the
‘towns to be easily seen’.”

Abdullah bin Ja’far says that this tradition was narrated to us by Ali
bin Muhammad Kulaini from Muhammad bin Salih from the Imam of the Age
(a.s.).

**16-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan (r.a.) from
Saad bin Abdullah from Ali bin Muhammad Raazi famous as Kulaini:
Narrated to me Muhammad bin Jibraeel Ahwazi from Ibrahim and Muhammad
sons of

Faraj from Muhammad bin Ibrahim bin Mahziyar that he reached Iraq in
doubt and confusion and the following epistle was issued from the Imam:

“Tell Mahziyari that we have heard the things that you mentioned about
your Master. Ask him, has he never heard the statement of Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime:

<p dir="rtl">
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ أَطِيعُواْ اللّهَ وَأَطِيعُواْ
الرَّسُولَ وَأُوْلِي الأَمْرِ مِنكُمْ
</p>

***“O you who believe! obey Allah and obey the Apostle and those in
authority from among you.” (Surah Nisa 4:59)***

Is this authority till Judgment Day for anyone else other than him who
is concealed from your view? Allah, the Mighty and Sublime has endowed
you with intellect so that you may contemplate and He has appointed
signs so that you may obtain guidance from them from Adam to Imam Hasan
Askari (a.s.). When one sign disappeared, another appeared like one star
sets and another rises. Do you think that after Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.)
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime has not maintained any connection between
Himself and the people? It is not so. The command of Allah shall
continue to be effective till Judgment Day and they shall continue to
guide.

O Muhammad bin Ibrahim, don’t let doubt to enter your mind. Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime never leaves His earth without His proof. Did not
your father say before his demise: It is time for someone to calculate
these dinars that I am having. When this matter was delayed and the
Shaykh feared that he would die sooner, he told you to calculate the
dinars and said that he would give you a bag. You had thirty bags and
some pouches in front of you containing various amounts of dinars. Then
you calculated them and the Shaykh put his seal on it. You were also
told to seal it with his ring. The Shaykh said: If I remain alive, I
would be more rightful for them and if I die you must fear the Almighty
regarding myself and yourself. And after my separation, you must mould
yourself according to my desire. May Allah have mercy on you. From the
dinars I have given you from my account, separate them and they are ten
dinars, and repay the amount you have taken as more terrible times are
going to come. And Allah is sufficient for us and the best of the
helpers.

**17-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Husain bin Ismail Kindi says that Ja’far bin
Hamadan wrote to Imam Zamana (a.s.) and asked:

“I made a slave girl lawful for myself but before that I laid a
condition on her that I don’t want a child and neither would I give her
the status of mother of my children. After sometime she came to me and
said that she was pregnant. I told her how this could be possible when I
had told her that I don’t want a child? Then she disappeared for
sometime and when she returned to me she had a child with her. Neither I
refused to accept the child nor stopped paying the expenses of that
woman. Before her arrival with the child I had made a bequest regarding
my property in favor of my children. Now when she came to me with a
child, I did not change my will. I just made an addition that when that
child reaches maturity he should be given 200 dinars as one time
payment. After that he or his children will not have any share in my
property. Now my master, tell me whether I made the right

decision regarding that child? And pray for my well being in the world
as well as the hereafter.

The reply was as follows: Your making the slave girl lawful for yourself
and then laying a condition that you don’t want a child is strange
matter! It cannot be imposed on the girl, but it can be asked from
Allah. But it is right to give him 200 dinars, because it belongs to him
and he can do whatever he likes.

**18-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Narrated to us Abu Muhammad Husain bin Ahmad
Mukattib: Narrated to us Abu Ali bin Hammam the following supplication
and mentioned that Shaykh Amri (q.s.) had dictated it to him and
commanded him to recite it and it is the supplication of the occultation
of the Qaim (a.s.).

“O Allah, introduce Yourself to me. For if You don’t introduce Yourself
to me I will not recognize Your Prophet. O Allah, introduce Your
Messenger to me, for if You don’t introduce Your Messenger to me, I will
not recognize Your Proof. O Allah, introduce Your proof to me; for if
You don’t introduce Your proof to me, I will deviate in my religion. O
Allah, don’t let me die the death of ignorance and do not turn my heart
after guidance. O Allah, when You have guided me to the guardianship of
the one whose obedience is incumbent on me who is the master of Your
affair after Your Messenger. Peace be on him and his progeny. So I
became attached to the master of your affair, Amirul Momineen, Hasan,
Husain, Ali, Muhammad, Ja’far, Musa, Ali, Muhammad, Ali, Hasan and
Hujjat the Qaim Mahdi, Your bliss be on them all. O Allah, keep me
steadfast on Your religion, keep me prepared for Your obedience all the
time and keep my heart soft for the master of Your affair. Save me from
those trials in which You involve Your creatures. And keep me steadfast
on the obedience of Your Wali whom You have concealed from the view of
Your creatures. Who is waiting for Your command and You are the learned
without being taught, about the time when the circumstances of Your Wali
will be reformed and when he will reappear and the veil of occultation
shall be opened. Then give me patience so that I don’t make haste in
what You have delayed or that I be inclined to the delay of that, which
You want to hasten. And that I do not ask of the exposition of what You
have concealed. And search for that, which You have concealed. Or that I
should be dissatisfied with what You have decreed. And I should not say
why and how the hidden Imam is not reappearing while the world is
fraught with injustice and oppression. I have entrusted all my affairs
to You.

O Allah, I ask You to let me see the incomparable elegance of Your Wali,
when his rules shall be enforced. I know that the proof, argument,
evidence, exigency, intention and strength is all for You only. So do
this favor on me and the believers that we see Your Wali Amr. Your bliss
be on him and his progeny. In this way should His command become
apparent and his guidance should become clear. He is one who brings out
from misguidance to guidance and one who cures from the malady of
ignorance. O Lord, reveal his countenance, make his pillars firm and
include us among those who witness his incomparable elegance. And give
us the good sense

(*Taufeeq* ) to serve him. And that we may die on his faith and are
raised in his army.

O Allah, protect the hidden Imam whom You have created; from every kind
of mischief, whom You brought from nonentity to being, whom You created,
raised up and gave a form. And protect the Imam from the evil that comes
to him from the front and from behind. From right and the left. From
above and from below. Keep him in Your protection. In a protection after
which none can harm him. And through him, protect the Prophet and the
successor of the Prophet. O Allah, give the Imam of the Age a long life.
Increase his lifespan. Help him in the Wilayat and rulership that you
will grant to him. He is the guided one, one who will establish the
truth, the pure, pious, sincere, satisfied, pleasing, patient, one who
makes effort in the way of Allah and the thankful one.

O Allah, do not destroy our certainty due to the prolongation of his
occultation and due to lack of news about him. Give us perfect faith in
his remembrance, in his awaiting and in him. Do not make us careless of
our duty of praying for him and for invoking divine blessings on him. Do
not make us fall in despair for his reappearance and we should have firm
certainty in his advent like we are certain of the advent of Your
Messenger. And like we have faith in all that was revealed on the
Prophet. Make our faith in these things strong. Till You make me walk
the path of guidance by the Great Proof and the middle path. Give us the
capability of his obedience and keep us steadfast in following him.
Include us among his forces, his friends and his helpers. And make us
among those who are satisfied with each of his actions. And don’t
deprive us of this bounty; neither in the lifetime nor at the time of
death. Till we die on the same faith and certainty. Make us not among
those who doubt or those who break the covenant or those who fall in
sloth or those who deny.

O Allah, hasten his reappearance and help him and help those who help
him. Abandon whose who desert him and destroy those who are inimical to
him and those who deny him. Through his being, make the true religion
apparent. Through him destroy falsehood. Through him save the believers
from degradation. Inhabit the cities through his blessings. Eliminate
the oppressors of disbelief through him. Destroy the strength of the
leaders of the misguided ones and humiliate the tyrants and disbelievers
through him. Through him destroy all the hypocrites, oath-breakers and
irreligious that live in the east and the west of the earth, on land and
on water, in plains or hills, so that neither their cities should remain
nor their vestiges. And that Your cities may be purified from them. And
cure the hearts of Your servants from them, and through the Imam of the
Age, revive all that has been destroyed from Your religion, all the laws
that have been changed and all Your practices that have been altered.
Through the Imam, reform all these things, so that Your religion get a
new lease of life and becomes perfect. The divine laws should become
worthy of being followed without any hesitation and innovation. Due to
his just rule, the fire of disbelief should be extinguished, because he
is the one whom You have kept especially for Yourself. Whom You chose
for helping Your Prophet. You chose him for Your knowledge and protected
him from sins and immunized him from all

defects. And You informed him of the secrets of the Unseen and sent Your
bounties upon him. You kept him away from every impurity and clean from
every ignorance and disobedience.

O Allah, bless them, their purified forefathers, and their prominent
Shia; and fulfill his hope. And keep this supplication of us pure from
every doubt and show-off. So that we do not intend to please anyone, but
You.

O Allah, we beseech in Your court that our Prophet is also not among us.
And our leader is also hidden from us. We are surrounded by hardships
and trials of the world. The enemies have got an upper hand over us.
Your opponents are more and our numbers are few.

So, Allah, save us from these calamities at the earliest and give us
victory through the just Imam. O the true deity, accept our plea.

O Allah, we beseech You to permit Your Wali to express Your justice
among Your servants and that he may slay Your enemies till there does
not remain any caller to oppression. O Lord, demolish the pillars of
oppression and destroy the foundations of tyranny. Demolish their
pillars and blunt their sword. Make their weapons useless. Lower their
flags and eliminate their fighters. Put discord into their forces. O
Lord, send down hard stones upon them and hit them with Your sharp
sword. Do not turn away the severity of Your chastisement from the
criminals. Send down chastisement on the enemies of Your Wali and the
enemies of Your Messenger through the hands of Your Wali and the hands
of Your servants.

O Lord, suffice for Your Hujjat and Your Wali in the earth from the fear
of their enemies. And nullify the plots that they devise for him.
Imprison in the circle of evil one who intends bad for the Qaim. Remove
the mischief of the world through his blessed existence and put awe into
the hearts of his enemies. Make the steps of his enemies waver. Leave
his enemies confused and send down severe chastisement on them. Degrade
them among Your servants. Make them accursed in Your cities. And put
them in the lowest level of Hell. And send your worst punishment for
them. Fasten them with fire and fill the graves of their dead with fire.
And tie them with the fire of Hell. They are the same who considered
Prayer unimportant, who followed their base desires and humiliated Your
servants.

O Allah, revive the Quran through Your Wali. Show us its effulgence
which is permanent and in which there is no darkness. Enliven the dead
hearts through him. Cure the hearts, which are full of malice. And
through him bring together on truth different selfish desires. Through
him revive the laws that have been made obsolete so that the truth
becomes triumphant and justice is established. O Lord, include us among
his helpers. That we may strengthen his rule and be of those who follow
his commands and are satisfied with each of his actions. Make us of
those who submit to his commands. Make us such that people do not have
to resort to dissimulation from us. O Lord, You are the only one who
saves from every harm. You answer the prayer of the helpless. You save
from great sorrow and pain. Thus O Lord, remove every harm from Your
Wali. Appoint him as Your Caliph on the earth as You have decided about
him.

O Lord, do not make me of those who dispute with the Aale Muhammad and
don’t make me among their enemies. Don’t make me one who is

displeased and angry with Aale Muhammad. Thus I seek Your refuge from
this; so please give me refuge. And I beseech You to grant me.

O Allah, bless Muhammad and the progeny of Muhammad and make me
successful with them in the world and the hereafter and make me of those
who are proximate to You.

**19-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Abu Ja’far (r.a.) said: Saad bin
Abdullah has narrated as follows the epistle, which was issued to Amari
and his son (r.a.):

“May Allah make you successful in His obedience and steadfast in His
religion and may He make you fortunate by His pleasure. I have learnt of
what you have mentioned about Mithami and what he has stated about
Mukhtar. And the one who met Mukhtar and spoke to him and concluded that
the sole successor of Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.) is only Ja’far, the son
of Imam Hadi (a.s.), and that he considered his Imamate to be valid. We
have taken note of the whole matter that you had received from the
friends and companions (Shia). And I seek refuge of Allah from blindness
after light and vision, and from deviation after guidance and from evil
deeds and dangerous mischiefs, while the Almighty Allah says:

الم {1}أَحَسِبَ النَّاسُ أَن يُتْرَكُوا أَن يَقُولُوا آمَنَّا وَهُمْ لَا
يُفْتَنُونَ

***“Alif Lam Mim. Do men think that they will be left alone on saying:
We believe, and not be tried?” (Surah Ankabut 29:1-2)***

And it is indeed surprising! How people fall into mischief and step into
bewilderment and lean towards left and right and separate from their
religion. Are they victims of doubt? Are they inimical to truth? Are
they ignorant of the message and import of authentic traditions and
correct reports? Or is it that they are aware of it but they have made
themselves forget it?

Indeed the earth is never devoid of the proof, whether apparent or
hidden. They have not seen and do not know that the Imams have arrived
one after the other after their Prophet till the position reached Imam
Hasan Askari (a.s.) and he sat on the seat of his respected father by
the leave of Allah and guided towards the true path. He was the luminous
star and the brilliant moon. Then the Almighty Allah summoned him to His
presence and took him in His mercy. He, like his respected forefathers,
made a bequest and entrusted his successorship and the covenant and last
Imamate to his successor and his legatee. The Almighty Allah, by His
predetermined will, concealed his location and His elevated rank is with
us, Ahle Bayt and His favor is for us. If the Almighty Allah permits me
to reappear, I would present truth in the best form and the most
illuminated argument and sign, and I would have made myself apparent and
established the proof. But the will of Allah is more dominant and cannot
be subverted and His decision does not change. And the time decided by
Him does not become apparent. Therefore they should keep aloof from
their sensual desires and remain steadfast on the path they were on
before this. And they must not try to search out needlessly that, which
Allah has kept concealed, as they would become sinful and they must not
try to expose the divine secret, as they would regret it.

Although they should know that the truth is by us and with us and no one
except us would claim thus, but that he or she would be a liar and
fabricator. None except us can claim thus, except that he or she be
deviated. Therefore, what we have stated here should suffice for them,
rather than seeking further clarification. Rather than desiring more
explanation and details, they should rest content with this much, if
Allah wills.”

**20-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Muhammad bin Muzaffar Misri narrated from
Muhammad bin Ahmad Dawoodi from his father that he said:

“Once I was present in the assembly of Abul Qasim bin Rauh when a person
inquired about the statement of Abbas (the Prophet’s Uncle) to the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.): ‘Your uncle, Abu Talib brought faith
Islam on the basis of the numeric values of Arabic letters,’ and he
indicated the figure of 63. Thus what was meant by this statement?

Ibne Rauh replied: The explanation of this is the sum total of the
numeric equivalents of the letters of the sentence:*Allah* is*Ahad*
(One) and*Jawad* (generous) is 63. That is A=1, L=30, H=5 + A=1, H’=8,
D=4 + J=3,W=6,A=1,D=4. Hence sum total is 63.”

**21-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** A group of scholars has narrated from
Talakbari from Ahmad bin Ali from Asadi from Ahmad bin Ishaq (r.a.) that
an associate of his came and said that Ja’far bin Ali has sent him a
letter introducing himself claiming that he is the Qaim after his father
and that he is in possession of all the sciences that people need.

Ahmad bin Ishaq says that when I read Ja’far bin Ali’s letter I wrote a
letter to the Imam of the Time (a.s.) and also enclosed Ja’far’s letter.
The following reply came from the Imam:

In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful

May Allah keep you safe and in health. I received your communication and
also the letter that you had enclosed. I went through it; there are many
contradictions and mistakes in it. If you had read carefully, you would
also have realized this. Praise be to the Lord of the worlds in which no
one else has any share that He favored and blessed us. Allah, the Mighty
and Sublime does not want anything except to complete the truth and to
destroy falsehood and He will witness what I am saying. The day in which
there is no doubt, He will ask us about that in which we differ. The
Almighty Allah has not appointed the writer of this letter as an Imam on
anyone of us nor made it obligatory to obey him. Let me explain in
detail, so that it is sufficient for you.

O Ahmad bin Ishaq, may Allah have mercy on you. The Almighty Allah did
not create anyone in vain and neither did He leave it free after
creation. On the contrary, He created them from His power. Gave them
ears, eyes, hearts and brains. Then He sent to them the prophets as
givers of glad tidings and warners, so that they may command the people
to the obedience of Allah and restrain them from His disobedience. That
they inform them about their creator about which they are ignorant. And
He sent scriptures to them and sent the angels to them to maintain a
difference between them and the common people and that their excellence
over them is proved. Then He gave them miracles and a number of signs.

Thus He cooled the fire for some of them and made them as His Khalil.

To some He spoke and made his staff a serpent. Some of them enlivened
the dead and cured the lepers through Allah’s permission. To some He
gave the knowledge of the language of the birds. He gave something from
everything to them. Then He sent Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) as the mercy for
the worlds and completed His favors on him and concluded His prophethood
on him and made him the Prophet for the whole universe. Thus the truths
expressed by him are clear to all and all are aware of the miracles
shown by him.

After that the Almighty Allah captured the soul of the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.s.) and transferred this matter to his cousin, brother,
successor and legatee, Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.). Then the matter of
guidance went to his successors one after the other so that through them
they may keep his religion alive and complete His light and He kept a
clear difference between them and their brothers and cousins so that the
Divine Proof and Imam can be differentiated from the common people by
keeping the Imams pure from all sins and pure of every defect and
appointed them as the trustees of His treasure and bearers of His
secrets and helped them through miracles and proofs. And if this had not
been there, all the people would have been equal and all would have
claimed Imamate. No difference would have remained between right and
wrong and the ignorant and the knowledgeable.

That false claimant has made a false claim on the Almighty Allah and I
don’t know how he can prove the veracity of his claim. Can he prove it
through the knowledge and jurisprudence of the religion of Allah? By
Allah, he does not even know what is lawful and what is unlawful, what
is right and what is wrong; what is clear and what is ambiguous. He does
not even know the limits and times of prayers. Can he prove his Imamate
through piety? The Almighty Allah is a witness that he left obligatory
prayers for forty days in order to learn black magic. You should know
that he has wine cups and other tools of sinful activities. Can he prove
his claim from some miracles? If it is so, let him bring some miracle or
if he has any other evidence of Imamate. The Almighty Allah says in the
Holy Quran:

حم {1} تَنْزِيلُ الْكِتَابِ مِنَ اللَّهِ الْعَزِيزِ الْحَكِيمِ {2} مَا
خَلَقْنَا السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا إِلَّا بِالْحَقِّ
وَأَجَلٍ مُّسَمًّى وَالَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا عَمَّا أُنذِرُوا مُعْرِضُونَ {3}
قُلْ أَرَأَيْتُم مَّا تَدْعُونَ مِن دُونِ اللَّهِ أَرُونِي مَاذَا
خَلَقُوا مِنَ الْأَرْضِ أَمْ لَهُمْ شِرْكٌ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ اِئْتُونِي
بِكِتَابٍ مِّن قَبْلِ هَذَا أَوْ أَثَارَةٍ مِّنْ عِلْمٍ إِن كُنتُمْ
صَادِقِينَ {4} وَمَنْ أَضَلُّ مِمَّن يَدْعُو مِن دُونِ اللَّهِ مَن لَّا
يَسْتَجِيبُ لَهُ إِلَى يَومِ الْقِيَامَةِ وَهُمْ عَن دُعَائِهِمْ
غَافِلُونَ {5} وَإِذَا حُشِرَ النَّاسُ كَانُوا لَهُمْ أَعْدَاء وَكَانُوا
بِعِبَادَتِهِمْ كَافِرِينَ {6}

*** “Ha Mim. The revelation of the Book is from Allah, the Mighty, the
Wise. We did not create the heavens and the earth and what is between
them two save with truth and (for) an appointed term; and those who
disbelieve turn aside from what they are warned of. Say: Have you
considered what you call upon besides Allah? Show me what they have
created of the earth, or have they a share in the heavens? Bring me a
book before this or traces of knowledge, if you are truthful. And who is
in***

***greater error than he who calls besides Allah upon those that will
not answer him till the day of resurrection and they are heedless of
their call? And when men are gathered together they shall be their
enemies, and shall be deniers of their worshipping (them).” (Surah Ahqaf
46:1-6)***

May Allah give you Taufeeq, ask him that which I have told you and test
him and ask him interpretation of any verse of Quran or ask him a
question about the daily prayers. So that you may know how much he knows
and what defect he has.

The Almighty Allah has secured truth with those who are deserving of it
and has placed it at its center. And He cannot accept that after Imam
Hasan and Imam Husain (a.s.) the post of Imamate should go to two
brothers. And when Allah, the Mighty and Sublime permits us to speak the
truth, the truth will come out and falsehood will be destroyed. I ask
for Allah’s help; He is sufficient for us and the best of the helpers.
May Allah bless Muhammad and Aale Muhammad (a.s.).

**22-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** A group of tradition scholars has narrated
from Saduq from Ammar bin Husain bin Ishaq from Ahmad bin Hasan bin Abi
Salih Khajandi that he was very busy in the search for the Imam of the
Time (a.s.); therefore he visited many areas and at last he wrote a
letter to the Imam through Abul Qasim Husain Ibne Rauh, in which he
expressed his aim and the following epistle was received:

“The one who argued undertook an investigation and the one who
investigated established a proof and one who established a proof
destroyed himself and one who destroyed himself has committed
polytheism.

The narrator says that after the arrival of this epistle, I gave up the
search of the Holy Imam (a.s.) and returned to my hometown satisfied.”

**23-** ***Al-Kharaij:*** Ahmad bin Abu Ruh said that he sent Abul Hasan
Khizr bin Muhammad with an amount to be paid to Abu Ja’far Muhammad bin
Uthman Amari and to request him to pray for me as I was not keeping well
and also to inquire if it was allowed to wear Pashmina.

Abul Hasan Khizr bin Muhammad says: Thus when I reached Baghdad to
Amari, he refused to accept that amount and said that it was to be
deposited with Abu Ja’far Muhammad bin Ahmad as he has been instructed
and the replies to my questions have arrived which I will get from him
as well. So I went to Abu Ja’far, gave him the amount and he took out a
letter in which the following was written:

You requested me to pray for your cure and the Almighty Allah has given
you health. And you asked about the lawfulness of prayers wearing
Pashmina and fox skin. Now it is unlawful to pray in it. You are however
allowed to wear the fur of animals whose flesh is Halal, provided
nothing unlawful is mixed in it. And you are allowed pray in a garment,
which you received as income. Goatskin and sheepskin is allowed,
provided the animal was not slaughtered in Germany as Christians
slaughter animals there. You are allowed to wear it if someone you can
trust has slaughtered it.

Note: Whatever I had intended to write in the Book of Occultation ends
here. I pray to the Almighty Allah to include me among the helpers of
Hazrat Hujjat (a.s.) and keep me on his religion and also among those
who will be martyred under his flag and also that he may please us all
through

his vision and that the dust of his feet should become the antimony of
our eyes as every goodness is hoped from Him.

I request the readers to pray for divine mercy on me and seek
forgiveness on my behalf during my lifetime and after my death. Praise
be to Allah and may the Almighty Allah bless Muhammad and his Purified
Progeny.

Written in Rajab 1078 A.H. by the sinful hands of Mulla Baqir bin
Muhammad Taqi, may Allah forgive them both.

\*END OF VOLUME 53\*
====================


