


27

Chapter Twenty-Seven: Excellence of waiting for reappearance, merits of
Shia during Occultation and the best deeds of that time
فِي خَبَرِ الْأَعْمَشِ قَالَ الصَّادِقُ ع مِنْ دِينِ الْأَئِمَّةِ
الْوَرَعُ وَ الْعِفَّةُ وَ الصَّلَاحُ إِلَى قَوْلِهِ وَ انْتِظَارُ
الْفَرَجِ بِالصَّبْرِ

**1-** ***Al-Khisaal:*** It is reported by Amash that Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) said:

“The religion of the Imams consists of piety, chastity reform of
conditions…” till he said “…awaiting patiently for the reappearance.”

**2-** ***Uyun Akhbar Reza:*** It is narrated through three chains of
narrators from Imam Ali Reza (a.s.) that he narrated from his
forefathers that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said:

“The best deed of my Ummah is waiting for the reappearance.”

**3-** ***Amali Tusi:*** Ibne Hamawayh has narrated from Muhammad bin
Muhammad bin Bakr from Ibne Muqbil from Abdullah Ibne Shabib from Ishaq
bin Muhammad Qarwi from Saeed bin Muslim from Ali bin Husain from his
father from Imam Ali (a.s.) that he said: The Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.) said:

“Allah is satisfied with the scanty deeds of one who is satisfied with
little sustenance from Him and waiting for the reappearance is a worship
act.”

**4-** ***Ihtijaaj:*** It is narrated from Abu Hamza Thumali from Abu
Khalid Kabuli from Ali bin Husain (a.s.) that he said:

“O Abu Khalid, the twelfth successor of the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.) will have a long occultation. O Abu Khalid, those who live in
his Imamate during his occultation would be waiting from his
reappearance. They will be superior to the people of every age. Because
the Almighty Allah will bestow them with such understanding and
recognition that for them the occultation will be like presence. The
Almighty Allah will accord them the status of fighting Jihad in the
company of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.). They will be sincere
people and our true Shia. They will be propagating the religion of
Allah, openly and discreetly.”

Then he said, “Waiting for Faraj (victory) is itself a great Faraj.”

**5-** ***Amali Tusi:*** It is narrated from Shaykh Mufeed from Ibne
Quluwayh from Kulaini from Ali from his father from Yaqtini from Yunus
from Amr bin Shimr from Jabir that he said:

I came to Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) and requested him to render some
advices to us. Imam (a.s.) said:

“The strong among you should help the weak.

The rich among you should care for the poor.

You should like for others what you like for yourself.

You should continue to maintain our secrets and must not lead people to
subjugate you.

You should await for the reappearance of our Qaim and if you come across
some of our reports that are compatible to Quran, you must accept

them; and if they are opposed to Quran, you must reject them. If you
encounter reports which are ambiguous, you must wait till we explain
them to you.

If you continue to act on our advices, all of you who die before the
reappearance of our Qaim will be considered martyrs. And one who
survives till the time of Imam Qaim (a.s.) and dies fighting on his side
will earn the status of two martyrs and one who fights on his side and
kills even one of our opponents, will earn the reward of twenty
martyrs.”

**6-** ***Ikmaaluddin*** **&** ***Maniul Akhbar:*** It is narrated from
Muzaffar Alawi from Ibne Ayyashi from his father from Ja’far bin Ahmad
from Amriki Bufikki from Hasan bin Ali bin Fadhdhal from Marwan bin
Muslim from Abu Basir that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said:

“Tooba (Glad tidings) for the one who is attached to our Wilayat during
the occultation of our Qaim and his heart does not deviate after
guidance. He was asked: May I be sacrificed on you, what is Tooba? He
replied: A tree in Paradise growing from the house of Ali Ibne Abi Talib
(a.s.) and there will not be any believer who does not have one of its
branches reaching into his house and that is the meaning of the saying
of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime:

<p dir="rtl">
طُوبَى لَهُمْ وَحُسْنُ مَآبٍ
</p>

***“Tooba (a good final state) shall be theirs and a goodly return.”
(Surah Raad 13:29)***

**7-** ***Al-Khisaal:*** The Chapter of Four hundred: Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) said:

“Await for the reappearance of the master of affair and do not despair
of divine mercy, because in the view of the Almighty Allah the most
excellent deed is awaiting the reappearance of the master of affair.”

Then he said, “Digging up the mountains is easier than trying to
establish a rule for which a time is fixed. Seek help from the Almighty
Allah and be patient, since this earth belongs to Allah and He would
make any of His servants inherit it and the end is for those who are
pious. Do not make haste for the reappearance of the master of affair
before his reappearance or you will regret it and do not consider the
period of occultation to be long or your hearts will harden.”

Then he said, “One who believes in the master of our affair will be with
us in Paradise with us tomorrow. And one who waits for our kingdom, is
like one who is smeared in blood fighting on the way of Allah.”

**8-** ***Basairud Darajaat:*** It is narrated from Ibne Maruf from
Hammad bin Isa from Abul Jarud from Abu Basir from Abu Ja’far Imam Baqir
(a.s.) that he said:

One day the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said twice in the presence of
his companions: “O Allah, show my brothers to me. Companions who were
around him asked: Are we not your brothers, O Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.)? He replied: No, you all are my companions, and my brothers
would be those people at the end of the time, who would believe in me
without having seen me, the Almighty Allah has informed me about their
and their fathers’ names before they will emerge from the loins of their

fathers and the wombs of their mothers. For each of them, it would be
more difficult to guard their religion than walking on thorns in the
darkness of the night or holding embers; they would be lamps in
darkness, the Almighty Allah would save them from every mischief and
evil.”

**9-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq (r.a.) has narrated from Ibne
Mutawakkil from Muhammad Attar from Ibne Isa from Umar bin Abdul Aziz
from more than one person from Dawood bin Kathir from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) that:

He said with regard to the interpretation of the following verse:

<p dir="rtl">
الَّذِينَ يُؤْمِنُونَ بِالْغَيْبِ
</p>

***“Those who believe in the unseen.” (Surah Baqarah 2:3)***

“That is regarding those who believe that the uprising of the Qaim is
truth.”

**10-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Daqqaq from Asadi from
Nakhai from Naufili from Ali bin Abi Hamza from Yahya bin Abul Qasim
that he said: I asked the meaning of the following verses from Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) and he said:

<p dir="rtl">
الم ذَلِكَ الْكِتَابُ لاَ رَيْبَ فِيهِ هُدًى لِّلْمُتَّقِينَ الَّذِينَ
يُؤْمِنُونَ بِالْغَيْبِ
</p>

***“Alif Lam Mim. This Book, there is no doubt in it, is a guide to
those who guard (against evil). Those who believe in the unseen…” (
Surah Baqarah 2:1-3)***

The Imam said: Here the pious means the Shia of Ali and the unseen
implies the hidden proof of Allah. It is proved by the verse:

<p dir="rtl">
وَيَقُولُونَ لَوْلاَ أُنزِلَ عَلَيْهِ آيَةٌ مِّن رَّبِّهِ فَقُلْ
إِنَّمَا الْغَيْبُ لِلّهِ فَانْتَظِرُواْ إِنِّي مَعَكُم مِّنَ
الْمُنتَظِرِينَ
</p>

***“And they say: Why is not a sign sent to him from his Lord? Say: The
unseen is only for Allah; therefore wait- surely I too, with you am of
those who wait.” (Surah Yunus 10:20)***

Thus the Almighty Allah has informed that unseen is His sign and Proof.
It is proved by the verse:

<p dir="rtl">
وَجَعَلْنَا ابْنَ مَرْيَمَ وَأُمَّهُ آيَةً
</p>

***“And We made the son of Maryam and his mother a sign.” (Surah
Mominoon 23:50)***

**11-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Ibne Abdus from Ibne
Quraibah from Hamadan bin Sulaiman from Ibne Yazi from Salih bin Uqbah
from his father from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) from his holy
forefathers that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said:

“The best worship act is waiting for the reappearance.”

**12-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Ali bin Shah
from Ahmad bin Hasan from Ahmad bin Khalid Khalidi from Muhammad bin
Ahmad bin Salih Tamimi Muhammad bin Hatim Qattan from Hammad bin Amr
from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) from his holy forefathers that the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said to Amirul Momineen (a.s.):

“O Ali, know that, the faith is astonishing and certainty great of those
who shall be there in the last period of time. There will be no prophet
among them and Divine Proof will be hidden from them inspite of that
they will believe in black upon white (writings/books).”

**13-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Hamadani from Ali from
his father from Bistam bin Murra from Amr Thabit from Imam Zainul
Abideen (a.s.) that he said:

“To one who remains firm on our guardianship (Wilayat) during the
occultation of our Qaim, Allah, the Mighty and Sublime will give the
reward of a thousand martyrs of Badr and Uhad.”

This report is also mentioned in*Dawat* of Rawandi in the same way
except that it says: “One who dies on our friendship.”

**14-** ***Al-Mahasin:*** It is narrated from Sandi from his grandfather
that he said:

“I asked Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.): What do you say about the one who
dies waiting for the reappearance? He replied: He is like those who are
in the tent of the Qaim (a.s.). Then he fell silent for a moment, then
he spoke up again: He is like one who is with the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.).”

**15-** ***Al-Mahasin:*** It is narrated from Ibne Faddal for Ali bin
Uqbah from Musa Numairi from Alaa bin Siyabah that he said: Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (a.s.) said:

“Those of you who die (with belief) on this matter (of reappearance),
awaiting it; are like those who are in the tent of the Qaim (a.s.).”

**16-** ***Al-Mahasin:*** It is narrated from Ibne Faddal from Ali bin
Uqbah from Umar bin Aban Kalbi from Abdul Hamid Wasiti that he said to
Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.):

“May God bless you, we have stopped going to the markets in anticipation
of the reappearance. The Imam said: O Abdul Hamid do you think that
Allah will not open the way for one who controls his self for His sake?
No, by Allah, Allah will indeed open a way for him. May Allah have mercy
on one who controls his self for our sake. May Allah have mercy on one
who keeps our matter alive. I asked: What if I die before the time of
Imam Qaim? He replied: If one of you makes an intention that he is
present in the time of Qaim of Aale Muhammad, he will render help to
him, he is like the one who fights in his company; and is martyred.”

**17-** ***Al-Mahasin:*** It is narrated from Ibne Mahbub from Amr bin
Abil Miqdam from Malik bin Ayyan that he said: Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
said:

“Those of you who die (with belief) on this matter (of reappearance),
awaiting it; are like those who fight in the way of the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.s.).”

**18-** ***Al-Mahasin:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Noman from Ishaq
bin Ammar etc. from Faiz bin Mukhtar that he said: I heard Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (a.s.) say:

“Those of you who die awaiting for reappearance are like those who are
in the tent of the Qaim (a.s.). Then he fell silent for a moment, then
he spoke up again: No he is like one who has fought at his side. Then he
said: Rather like he is martyred before the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.).”

**19-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Ahmad bin Idris from Ali
bin Muhammad from Fadhl bin Shazan from Ibne Abi Umair from Husain bin
Abu Alaa from Abu Basir from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“When His Eminence, Salman Farsi entered Kufa he glanced at it and
mentioned all the troubles and events that were to occur in it till he
also

mentioned about the Bani Umayyah rulers and the period after them. After
that he said:

‘When all this is over, you must remain confined to your houses till the
reappearance of the master of the affair, the pure one, son of the pure
and purifying. The one who has an occultation and who is the ‘*Tareed’*
and ‘*Shareed’* [^1]

Report of Ammar Sabati
----------------------

**20-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Muzaffar Alawi from Ibne
Ayyashi from Haider bin Muhammad together from Ayyashi from Qasim bin
Hisham Laulawi from Ibne Mahbub from Hisham bin Saalim from Ammar Sabati
that he said:

Report of Ammar Sabati

“I asked Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.): ‘Which is better, worship in secret
with a hidden Imam from among you during government by an illegal ruler,
or worship during the manifestation of the Truth and its government with
the manifest Imam from among you?’ He said: O Ammar, giving Sadaqah in
secret is better, by Allah, than giving it openly; similarly, by Allah,
your worship in secret with your hidden Imam during government by an
illegal ruler, and your fear of your enemy during government by an
illegal ruler and in a state of truce with your enemy, is better than
that you should worship Allah, may remembrance of Him be made Mighty and
Majestic, during the manifestation of the Truth with the Imam of Truth,
which is manifest during the government of Truth. Worship while you fear
during government by an illegal ruler is not the same as worship and
security during the government of Truth. Know that whoever of you now
prays a prescribed prayer at its hour in congregation, thereby
concealing himself from his enemy, and completes it correctly, Allah
will register rewards for having completed fifty prescribed prayers in
congregation; and that whoever of you prays a prescribed prayers at its
hour by himself, thereby concealing himself from his enemy, and
completes it correctly, Allah to Whom belong Might and Majesty, will
register thereby reward for having completed twenty-five prescribed
prayers recited alone; and that whoever of you prays a supererogatory
prayers at its hour and completes it correctly, Allah will register
thereby reward for having completed ten supererogatory prayers; and that
whoever of you performs a good deed, Allah to Whom belong Might and
Majesty, will register reward for having performed twenty good deeds;
and Allah, to Whom belong Might and Majesty, will handsomely double [the
reward] of the good deeds of the believer among you when he does good
deeds and practices Taqayyah with regard to his religion, his Imam and
himself, and keeps his tongue in check; for Allah, to Whom belong Might
and Majesty, is Generous.’

“I said: ‘May I be made your ransom, by Allah you have encouraged me to
do good deeds, and spurred me on to them, but I should like to know how
we shall be better in [our] deeds at this time than the companions of
the manifest Imam from among you during the government of Truth, since
we are of a single religion?’ He said: “Indeed, you outstrip them in
involvement in the religion of Allah, to Whom belong Might and Majesty,
and in prayers,

fasting, Hajj and in every good deed and knowledge, and in worshipping
Allah, may remembrance of Him be made Mighty and Majestic, secretly from
your enemy, while concealing the truth about your Imam, being obedient
to him and being patient with him, awaiting the government of the Truth,
apprehensive about your Imam and yourselves before oppressive
sovereigns. You see the rights of your Imam and your own rights in the
hands of the oppressors: they take them away from you and force you to
work hard on the land and struggle to make a livelihood, and be patient
about your religion, your worship, obedience to your Imam and fear of
your enemy. For this, Allah, to whom belong Might and Majesty, will
double the reward for your actions for you, may it be pleasing to you.’

“I said: ‘May I be your ransom, what do you think? That we should be
companions of Qaim and [see] the Truth manifest itself, or that today,
in your Imamate, obedient to you, we are better in [our] deeds than the
contemporaries of the government of Truth and Justice?’ He said: “Glory
be to Allah! Do you not wish that Allah the blessed, the sublime, should
make the Truth and Justice appear in the lands? That Allah should cause
people’s speech to harmonize, and that Allah should unite the diverse
hearts of people? That they should not rebel against Allah, to whom
belong Might and Majesty, in His land? That His restriction should apply
among His creatures, and that Allah should return the rights to His
people so that it may become manifest, so that nothing of the Truth
might be concealed through fear of any one of His creatures? By Allah, O
Ammar, indeed no one among you will die in the condition you are in, but
he will be more perfect before Allah than many of the martyrs of Badr
and Uhad. May you rejoice!’”

**21-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Muzaffar Alawi from Ibne
Ayyashi from his father from Ja’far bin Maruf from Muhammad bin Husain
from Ja’far bin Bashir from Musa bin Bakr from Muhammad Wasiti from Imam
Musa Kazim (a.s.) from his forefathers that the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.) said:

“The best deed of my Ummah is to await for deliverance from Allah.”

**22-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from the same chains of
narrators from Ayyashi from Imran from Muhammad bin Abdul Hamid from
Muhammad bin Fudail that he asked Imam Ali Reza (a.s.):

When will reappearance occur? And he said: “Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime says:

<p dir="rtl">
فَانتَظِرُواْ إِنِّي مَعَكُم مِّنَ الْمُنتَظِرِينَ
</p>

***“Wait then, I too with you will be of those who wait.” (Surah Araaf
7:71)***

(That is waiting for the reappearance with reference to the command of
Allah, in this verse, is itself a type of waiting). This traditional
report is also mentioned in*Tafsir Ayyashi* .

**23-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from the same chains of
narrators from Ayyashi from Khalaf bin Hamid from Sahl bin Ziyad from
Muhammad bin Husain from Bazanti from Imam Ali Reza (a.s.) that he said:

“How good is patience and awaiting for the reappearance! Have you not
heard Allah, the Mighty and Sublime say?

<p dir="rtl">
وَارْتَقِبُواْ إِنِّي مَعَكُمْ رَقِيبٌ
</p>

***“And watch, surely I too am watching with you.” (Surah Hud 11:93)***

<p dir="rtl">
فَانتَظِرُواْ إِنِّي مَعَكُم مِّنَ الْمُنتَظِرِينَ
</p>

***“Wait then, I too with you will be of those who wait.” (Surah Araaf
7:71)***

Thus you must be patient, because there is deliverance after despair and
those before you were more patient than you.”

Report of Ibrahim Kufi
----------------------

**24-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Saduq has narrated from Ali bin Ahmad from
Asadi from Nakhai from Naufili from Abu Ibrahim Kufi that he said:

“I went to Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) and was sitting in his presence when
Abul Hasan Musa Ibne Ja’far (a.s.) entered while he was a boy. I stood
up, kissed him and sat down with him. Then Abu Abdullah (a.s.) remarked,
‘O Ibrahim! Know that, he is your master after me. Know that, concerning
him one group will be destroyed while another will be saved. Then may
Allah curse his killer and multiply His chastisement for the one who
fights against him.

Know that, certainly Allah will bring out from his progeny the best of
the inhabitants of the earth in his time. He will be named after his
grandfather, he will be the inheritor of this knowledge and his laws in
his judgments, the treasure-chest of Imamate and the fountainhead of
wisdom. The tyrant king of Bani (Abbas) will kill him after his amazing
acts, due to envy. But Allah (Mighty and Glorified be He) will convey
His affairs even if the polytheists dislike it. And Allah will bring
forth from his progeny the completion of twelve Mahdi (guided leaders).
Allah has chosen them for His nobility, permitted for them the abode of
His Holiness and the twelfth awaited one is from them, as if with an
open sword standing in front of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) in his
defense.’

Then a person from the friends of Bani Umayyah entered due to which Imam
had to cut short his speech. I returned to Abu Abdullah (a.s.) eleven
times that he may complete his talk, but was unable to do so.

In the coming year, which was the second year, I went to him while he
was sitting. He said: ‘O Ibrahim! He is the one who will provide
salvation to his Shia after intense straitening, lengthy calamities,
grief and fear. Then congratulations to him who finds his time. This is
enough for you, O Ibrahim.’ Ibrahim said: ‘Then nothing was dearer to my
heart or soothed my eyes more than this talk.’”

**25-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Fadhl from Ismail bin
Mahran from Aiman bin Mohraz from Rufaa bin Musa and Muawiyah bin Wahab
from His Eminence, Abu Abdullah Sadiq (a.s.) that he said: The Messenger
of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said:

“Blessed be those who are fortunate to live in the time of Qaim of my
Ahle Bayt. Those who would believe in him during his occultation and
before his advent, who would love his friends and remain aloof from his
enemies. Such people would be my closest ones and my friends on the Day

of Judgment.” (According to the tradition of Rufaa:) “And the most
respected creatures of Allah in my view.”

**26-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Fadhl from Ibne Mahbub
from Abdullah bin Sinan from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said: The
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said:

“Very soon will come a people after you, each of whom will be eligible
for fifty times your reward. They said: O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.),
we lived in your company, fought the Badr, Uhad and Hunain battles with
you and the Holy Quran came down among us? The Prophet said: Indeed if
you were to face what they faced, you will not be as patient as them.”

**27-** ***Al-Mahasin:*** It is narrated from Uthman bin Isa from Abul
Jarud from Qinwata Ibne Rashid Hijri that she said:

I said to my father: “Why are you laboring so much?”

He replied: “Daughter, after us will arrive a people whose religious
insight will be superior to the struggle of the past people.”

**28-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Fadhl from Ibne Abi
Najran from Muhammad bin Sinan from Khalid Aquli from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) that he said:

“Why are you waiting so eagerly? Why are you so hasty? Are you not in
peace and security? Does not one of you who leaves his house for some
need return safely? Whereas in the past whenever one of your
co-religionist left his house he was immediately apprehended and his
limbs were amputed and he was impaled on a date palm; he was sawn into
half without being told what his fault was.” After that he recited the
following verse:

<p dir="rtl">
أَمْ حَسِبْتُمْ أَن تَدْخُلُواْ الْجَنَّةَ وَلَمَّا يَأْتِكُم مَّثَلُ
الَّذِينَ خَلَوْاْ مِن قَبْلِكُم مَّسَّتْهُمُ الْبَأْسَاء وَالضَّرَّاء
وَزُلْزِلُواْ حَتَّى يَقُولَ الرَّسُولُ وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ مَعَهُ
مَتَى نَصْرُ اللّهِ أَلا إِنَّ نَصْرَ اللّهِ قَرِيبٌ
</p>

***“Or do you think that you would enter the garden while yet the state
of those who have passed away before you has not come upon you; distress
and affliction befell them and they were shaken violently, so that the
Apostle and those who believed with him said: When will the help of
Allah come? Now surely the help of Allah is nigh!” (Surah Baqarah
2:214)***

**29-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Fadhl from Ibne Asbat
from Hasan bin Jaham that he said:

“I asked His Eminence, Abul Hasan Musa bin Ja’far (a.s.) regarding
Faraj. He replied: Don’t you know that waiting for the Faraj is Faraj? I
asked: I don’t know anything except what you have taught. He replied:
Yes, waiting for the Faraj is (also) a kind of Faraj.”

**30-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Fadhl from Ibne Faddal
from Thalaba from Maimoon that he said:

“Obtain recognition of your Imam. If you are able to gain their
recognition, it will not make any difference whether the period of their
rule comes earlier or later. If one is able to gain the cognition of his
Imam and he dies before the time of his rule, and the reappearance of
the Imam comes afterwards, he will also be given the reward of one who
is present in the Imam’s army.”

**31-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Fadhl from Ibne Faddal
from Muthanna Hannat from Abdullah bin Ajlan from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) that he said:

“One who believes in occultation and reappearance, but dies before the
advent of Imam Mahdi (a.s.) it is as if he has died fighting alongside
the Imam.”

**32-** ***Al-Mahasin:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Hasan bin
Shamun from Abdullah bin Amr bin Ashath from Abdullah bin Hammad Ansari
from Sabbah Mazni from Harith bin Hasir from Hakam bin Uyyina that he
said:

“On the day Amirul Momineen (a.s.) routed the Kharijites of Nahrawan, a
man stood up and inquired: We are fortunate to be present in this battle
with you and to defeat the Khawarij.

Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said: “By the one Who split the seed and created
all living things, we have seen such people participating in this battle
whose ancestors the Almighty Allah has not yet created.”

The man asked: “How can those who are not yet created participate in the
battle?”

He replied: “Yes, it is a community that will come in the last period of
time and participate in this battle of ours; which will accept our
stance and it will really participate in what we are doing.”

**33-** ***Al-Mahasin:*** It is narrated from Naufili from Sukuni from
Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) from his forefathers from Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) that he said:

“The best worship act of a believer is to wait for the reappearance.”

**34-** ***Tafsir Ayyashi:*** It is narrated from Fadhl bin Abi Qurra
that he said: I heard Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) say:

“The Almighty Allah sent revelation to Ibrahim that a son would be born
to him soon. He (Ibrahim) conveyed this to Lady Sarah. Sarah said: Would
I give birth to a child, while I have become an old woman? Then the
Almighty Allah revealed to Ibrahim that: She (Sarah) would give birth to
a child and her children would be subject to divine punishment due to
her doubt in My statement.”

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said: “When chastisement and calamities increased on
Bani Israel, they lamented and supplicated in the court of the Almighty
for forty days, then the Almighty Allah sent revelation to Musa and
Harun to deliver Bani Israel and He advanced this by 170 years.”

His Eminence, Sadiq (a.s.) added: “You case is also such that if you do
this, the Almighty Allah would deliver you through us; but if not, the
matter will reach its destined end.”

**35-** ***Tafsir Ayyashi:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Muslim
from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said regarding the verse:

The Almighty Allah has said:

<p dir="rtl">
أَلَمْ تَرَ إِلَى الَّذِينَ قِيلَ لَهُمْ كُفُّواْ أَيْدِيَكُمْ
وَأَقِيمُواْ الصَّلاَةَ وَآتُواْ الزَّكَاةَ
</p>

***“Have you not seen those to whom it was said: Withhold your hands,
and keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate…” (Surah Nisa 4:77)***

In it lies the obedience of the Imam. Thus they asked the Imam to allow
them to fight a holy war; but when Jihad was made obligatory for them in
the company of Imam Husain (a.s.), they said:

<p dir="rtl">
رَبَّنَا أَخِّرْنَا إِلَى أَجَلٍ قَرِيبٍ نُّجِبْ دَعْوَتَكَ وَنَتَّبِعِ
الرُّسُلَ
</p>

***“O our Lord! respite us to a near term, (so) we shall respond to Thy
call and follow the apostles.” (Surah Ibrahim 14:44)***

Imam (a.s.) said: “They meant to ask for its postponement till the time
of Imam Qaim (a.s.).”

**36-** ***Majalisul Mufeed:*** It is narrated from Umar bin Muhammad
from Ja’far bin Muhammad from Isa bin Mahran from Abu Yashkar Balkhi
from Musa bin Ubaidah from Muhammad bin Kaab Qarzi from Auf bin Malik
that he said:

One day the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said: “If only I could see my
brothers.” Abu Bakr and Umar said: “Are we not your brothers even though
we brought faith on you and migrated with you?” He replied: “You brought
faith and migrated. If only I could see my brothers.” Again they
repeated their words. So the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said: “You
are my companions; and my brothers would be those who come after you;
who would believe in me and have affection for me, they would help me
and testify to me without having seen me, thus if only I could see my
brothers.”

**37-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Harith bin
Mughira that his father said:

I asked Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.): “Will there be a time, in which the
Muslims will not know who their Imam is?”

He said: “It is said so.”

I asked: “What will we do then?”

He said: “If that occurs, then keep to the previous one (religion of
Islam) until the next one becomes clear to you.”

It is narrated from Abdullah bin Sinan in the same book that I and my
father went to Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) and the Imam said: “What will
you do if you reach a time that you do not find an Imam of guidance nor
any banner and then no one will be saved from that confusion, except one
who will pray to Allah with the prayer of drowner (Dua Ghareeq)?”

My father said: “By Allah, this is a great calamity. May I be your
ransom! What will we do then?”

He said: “If that occurs - and you will not attain it - then keep your
previous faith intact until the matter becomes clear.”

It is narrated from Harith bin Mughira Basri in the same book that he
said: I said to Abu Abdullah Imam Sadiq (a.s.): “We have a tradition
saying that the Imam will be missed in some periods of time. What will
we do then?”

He said: “Keep to the previous one (Shia faith) that you have kept to
until the matter becomes clear.”

The author says: These reports imply that Shia during the time of the
occultation of Imam Zamana (a.s.) should not be confused with regard to
the religious commands and Islamic laws. In simpler terms it means that
they

should continue to act on the principles and secondary laws with
steadfastness and not to leave them till the Imam reappears.

It is possible that the meaning of the report is that you must not
believe in the claim of anyone who claims to be the Qaim of Aale
Muhammad (a.s.) till he does not prove his claims through miracles. We
have mentioned this in the argumentation of Shaykh Tusi in which he has
quoted the statements of Saad bin Abdullah.

**38-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Hamam
from Aban bin Taghlib from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“What will you do if a time comes to you between the two mosques, at
which knowledge will be bound as a snake bound in its hole and the Shia
will disagree among themselves, will call each other as liars and will
spit at the face of each other?”

Aban said: “What goodness will be in that?”

He said: “All the goodness will be in that,” He said it three times and
he meant that deliverance would be near.”

The same was narrated by Muhammad bin Yaqub Kulaini from some of his
companions from Ahmad bin Muhammad from Hasan bin Ali Washsha from Ali
bin Husain from Aban bin Taghlib from Abu Abdullah Imam Sadiq (a.s.).

Also in the same book it is narrated from Aban bin Taghlib that the Imam
said: “O Aban, a period of time will come to people, at which knowledge
will be bound between the two mosques as a snake bound in its hole; as
they are in such a condition, their star will shine to them,”

Aban said: “May I be your ransom! What will we do and what will happen
then?”

He said: “Keep to what you have kept to until Allah brings the master
(of the matter).”

The author says: In*Al-Kafi* , instead of Batsha between the two mosques
it is mentioned as Batsha. It is an implication to the army of Sufyani
and their domination between Mecca and Medina (Batsha is in the meaning
of sudden attack). It is an allusion to the events that will take place
between Mecca and Medina and the knowledge will go into hiding. Or that
due to the oppressions of unjust most of it will be concealed.

Ibne Athir Jazari says: The report means that Islam will be in
concealment in Medina just as a snake hides in a hole. That is it
gathers itself and goes into hiding.

**39-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Hamam
from Himyari from Muhammad bin Isa from Salih bin Muhammad from Yaman
Tamma from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“The man of this matter will disappear for a period of time, during
which one, who still keeps to his religion, is like one, who lathes
thorns of Qatad with his bare hand. Which of you can grasp at the thorns
of Qatad?”

Then he pondered for a while and said: “The man of this matter will
disappear for a time so people are to fear Allah and to keep to their
faith.”

Also in*Ghaibat Nomani* it is narrated from Salih bin Khalid that he
said: I was sitting in the gathering of Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) when
the Imam said: The master of this affair has an occultation during which
it is necessary

to seek the refuge of Allah and to remain attached to ones religion. In
that book, the same report is quoted through another chain as well.

**40-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Ahmad
bin Yusuf from Ibne Mahran from Ibne Bataini from his father from Wahab
bin Hafas from Abu Basir from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

My father (a.s.) has said to me: There must be a fire (war) from
Azerbaijan that leaves nothing. If it occurs, then you are to stay at
homes and remain as we have remained. If our revolter (the Qaim) rises,
you are to hasten to join him even crawling. By Allah, as if I see him
between the Rukn and Maqam being paid allegiance on a new covenant. He
will be severe with the Arabs.

Then he said: Woe unto the arrogants of the Arabs from an evil that is
about to come.”

**41-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from a
person from Ali bin Ammarah from Muhammad bin Sinan from Abul Jarud that
he said:

I said to Imam Baqir (a.s.): Please, advise me!” He said: “I advise you
to fear Allah, to stay at home and to be away from the masses. Beware of
the rebels (like Zaid bin Ali and descendants of Imam Hasan who rose
against Bani Umayyah without the permission of the Imam and as a result
of it they were eliminated), because they are not on the straight path
nor will they get to a pleasant end.

Know that the Umayyads have a strong awe that people cannot stand
against. Know that the faithful people will have a state. If that
happens, Allah will entrust one of us with it. If anyone of you lives
until that time, he will be with us in the highest position (of
Paradise) and if he dies before that, Allah will choose for him as He
wills.

Know that no group rising to resist oppression or to defend faith unless
death is the end until a group, that has fought with the Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) in the battle of Badr and whose killed ones are not buried,
whose felled ones are not lifted and whose wounded ones are not cured,
rises.” I asked: “Who are they?” He said: “The angels.”

**42-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Hamam
from Muhammad bin Hasan bin Jamhur together from Hasan bin Muhammad bin
Jamhur from his father from Samaa from Abul Jarud from Qasim bin Walid
from Hamadani from Harith Awar Hamadani that he said: Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) said from the pulpit:

“If Khatib (Khateeb) is perished, the Imam of the age disappears and the
hearts begin to turn here and there; some fertile and some barren, then
the ill-wishers will perish, the vanishers will vanish and the believers
will remain and how few they will be; three hundred or a little more! A
group (of angels) that has fought with the Prophet (s.a.w.s.) in the
battle of Badr, that none of them has been killed or has died, will
fight with them (with the Imam and his followers).”

**43-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Ahmad
bin Ziyad from Ali bin Sabbah Ibne Zahhak from Ja’far bin Muhammad bin
Samaa from Saif Tammar from Abul Marhaf from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
that he said:

“The hasteners will perish and those nearest to Allah will be saved!
Keep to your homes, because seditions will be against those who cause
them! Whenever they wish you a distress, Allah afflicts them with what
makes them busy away from you, except those who follow them.”

The author says:*Mahazeer* is the plural of*Mahzir* and it is in the
meaning of a refractory horse. Perhaps it implies the group, which is
making haste for the Imam to rise up soon. The nearest to Allah are
those who say that the deliverance is near.

If it is taken with the vowel A on it would imply those who are patient
and forbearing in the awaiting for Imam Zamana (a.s.). And that is why
they are called as the nearest one of Allah.

**44-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Yahya
bin Zakariya from Yusuf bin Kalib Masudi from Hakam bin Sulaiman from
Muhammad bin Kathir from Abu Bakr Hadhrami that he said:

I and Aban bin Taghlib went to Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) and it was at a
time when black flags were being raised from Khorasan. We asked: “What
do you think about that?” He said:

“Stay at home and when you see us agree unanimously upon a man, then
hurry to us with your weapons.”

**45-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Hamam
from Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Malik from Muhammad bin Ahmad from Ibne
Asbat from some of his associates from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he
said:

“Keep silent and remain in your houses, because no evil will afflict you
especially, which will afflict the rest of people, and as long as the
(revolutionary) Zaydites will be as a frontstead between you and the
governments.”

**46-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Ahmad from
Ubaidullah bin Musa from Ali bin Hasan from Ali bin Hisan from Abdur
Rahman bin Kathir from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said when
talking about the Quranic verse:

<p dir="rtl">
أَتَى أَمْرُ اللّهِ فَلاَ تَسْتَعْجِلُوهُ
</p>

***“Allah’s commandment has come, therefore do not desire to hasten it…”
(Surah Nahl 16:1)***

“It is our matter. Allah the Almighty has ordered not to hasten it until
He assists it with three armies; the angels, the believers and fright.
His (the Qaim’s) advent will be like the advent of the Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) as Allah has said:

<p dir="rtl">
كَمَا أَخْرَجَكَ رَبُّكَ مِن بَيْتِكَ بِالْحَقِّ
</p>

***“Even as your Lord caused you to go forth from your house with the
truth.” (Surah Anfal 8:5)***

**47-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Hamam and
Muhammad bin Hasan bin Muhammad together from Hasan bin Muhammad bin
Jamhur from his father from Samaa from Salih bin Nabat and Bakr Muthanna
from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said:

“The hasteners will perish and those nearest to Allah will saved! After
distress, there will be a wonderful deliverance!”

**48-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Hamam
from Ja’far bin Muhammad Malik from Ahmad bin Naail Jofi from Muhammad
bin Muthanna Hadhrami from his father from Uthman bin Zaid from Jabir
from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said:

“The advent of the Qaim (a.s.) is like the advent of the Messenger of
Allah (a.s.). If any of us, Ahlul Bayt, rises before the advent of the
Qaim (a.s.), he will be like a young bird that flies and falls down and
then children play with it.”

**49-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Ahmad from
Ubaidullah bin Musa from Muhammad bin Husain from Muhammad bin Sinan
from Ammar bin Marwan from Munakhal bin Jamil from Jabir bin Yazid from
Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said:

“Be quiet as long as the heavens and the earth are quiet! Do not rebel
against anyone. Your matter is clear and not vague, but it is a sign
from Allah and not from people. It is brighter than the sun. It is
neither ignored by a pious nor by a dissolute. Do you see the morning?
It is like the morning, which is clear to everyone.”

Duties of Shia during Occultation
---------------------------------

**50-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Ahmad
bin Yusuf from Ibne Mahran from Ibne Bataini from his father from Wahab
bin Hafas from Abu Basir from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said one
day:

“Shall I not inform of that without which the Almighty Allah does not
accept the deeds of the people? I said: Please tell me what that is? He
said: It is the testimony to the oneness of Allah and prophethood of
Muhammad and belief in the words of Allah and friendship towards us and
aloofness from the enemies of us Imams, and submission to them and
sincerity and effort in religious matters and patience and awaiting for
the reappearance of our Qaim.

Then he said: We are having a kingdom, when Allah wills, He will bring
it about. Then he added: One who is desirous to be among the helpers of
our Qaim should be waiting for his reappearance and should observe piety
and follow good morals and pass his days in this way. If he dies in this
condition and the Qaim appears after his death, he will be rewarded just
as he had been alive. So make efforts and keep waiting. Glad tidings to
you that the Almighty Allah has surrounded you with His mercy.

Firm faith of the Shia
----------------------

**51-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Ali
bin Hasan Taimili from Ibne Mahbub from Abu Ayyub from Muhammad Ibne
Muslim from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“Fear Allah, be pious and patient before the distresses of life and try
your best to obey Allah. The utmost happiness of a faithful is when he
thinks of the afterlife and turns his back to this life and its
transient pleasures. If one reaches this degree of faith, he will know
that he will get bliss, honor and the reward of being in Paradise. He
will feel safe from what he has feared

and will be certain that he has been with the truth and those, who
oppose his beliefs, are certainly on the wrong path and will surely
perish.

Be delighted that you will get what you look forward to. Do you not see
that your enemies hurry towards sins and kill each other just for the
pleasures of this life, while you are safe in your houses and away from
them? It suffices you that Sufyani will avenge you on your enemies. It
is one of the signs to you. Although he is sinful, but you will be safe
for a month or two after his rising, until he kills much many people
other than you.”

Some of his companions asked: “What about our families if that occurs?”

He said: “Men are to hide from him (Sufyani). His rage is against our
followers and women will be safe, Inshallah.”

It was said to him: “Whereto do men escape from him?”

He said: “Whoever wants to get away is to go to Medina or Mecca or other
countries.”

Then he said: “But what do you do in Medina?! His army will attack
Medina. You are to go to Mecca. It will be the place of your meeting. It
will be a sedition that will not last more than nine months, Insha
Allah.”

**52-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Kulaini from Ali bin
Ibrahim from his father from Hammad from Hariz from Zurarah that Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said:

“Know your Imam, because if you know him, it does not harm you whether
deliverance comes soon or late.”

**53-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Kulaini from Husain
bin Muhammad from Mualla from Muhammad bin Jamhur from Safwan from
Muhammad bin Marwan from Fudail bin Yasar that he asked Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (a.s.):

“I asked Abu Abdullah Imam Sadiq (a.s.) about the Quranic verse:

<p dir="rtl">
يَوْمَ نَدْعُو كُلَّ أُنَاسٍ بِإِمَامِهِمْ
</p>

***“(Remember) the day when We will call every people with their Imam…”
(Surah Isra 17:71)***

…and he said: “O Fudhayl, know your Imam, because if you know your Imam,
it does not harm you whether this matter (the appearance of the Qaim)
comes soon or late. He, who knows his Imam and dies before the
appearance of the Qaim, is like one who will be in the camp of the Qaim
or like one who will be under the banner of the Qaim.” Some of our
companions narrated the tradition with this addition “...like one who
has been martyred (while fighting) with the Prophet (s.a.w.s.).”

**54-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Kulaini from Ali bin
Muhammad directly from Bataini from Abu Basir that he said: I said to
the Imam:

“I said to Abu Abdullah Imam Sadiq (a.s.): May I be your ransom! When
does deliverance come?”

He said: “O Abu Basir, are you from those who love this life? Whoever
believes in this matter is delivered for his waiting for it.”

**55-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Kulaini from Ali bin
Ibrahim from Salih bin Sindi from Ja’far Ibne Bashir from Ismail bin
Muhammad Khuzai that he said:

“Once I heard Abu Basir asking Abu Abdullah Imam Sadiq (a.s.): “Do you
think that I live until the Qaim appears?” Abu Abdullah Imam Sadiq
(a.s.) said to him: “O Abu Basir, do you not know your Imam?” Abu Basir
said: “I know him. By Allah, it is you.” Abu Abdullah (a.s.) took Abu
Basir’s hand and said: “O Abu Basir, by Allah, never mind if you are not
under the shadow of the Qaim’s tent with your sword!”

The author says: That is you are in every way prepared to support our
Qaim.

**56-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Kulaini from some of
his associates from Ahmad bin Muhammad from Ali bin Noman from Muhammad
bin Marwan from Fudhayl bin Yasar that he heard Imam Muhammad Baqir
(a.s.) say:

“Whoever dies and has not had an Imam, he dies an unbeliever and whoever
dies while believing in his Imam, it does not harm him whether the
appearance of the Qaim occurs soon or late. He, who dies while believing
in his Imam, is like one, who will be with the Qaim in his pavilion.”

**57-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Kulaini from Ali bin
Muhammad from Sahl bin Ziyad from Hasan bin Saeed from Faddala from Amr
bin Aban that he said:

“I heard Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) say: “Know (the sign of your) Imam. If
you know him, it does not harm you whether this matter comes soon or
late. Allah has said: ‘Remember the day when We will call every people
with their Imam.’ He, who knows his Imam, is like one, who will be with
the Mahdi (a.s.) in his pavilion.”

In the same book, it is narrated from Humran bin Ayyan that Abu Abdullah
Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said: “Know your Imam. If you know him, it does not
harm you whether this matter comes soon or late, because Allah has said:
‘Remember the day when We will call every people with their Imam.’
Whoever knows his Imam is as if he is with the Qaim (a.s.) in his
pavilion.”

**58-** ***Al-Kafi:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Yahya from Ahmad
bin Muhammad from Husain bin Saeed from Hammad bin Ibne Isa from Husain
bin Mukhtar from Abu Basir from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“Every standard that is waved before the reappearance of the Qaim (a.s.)
is the standard of a tyrant who worships someone or something other than
the Almighty Allah.”

**59-** ***The Author says:*** The following is also mentioned in Hadith
Lauh (the tradition of the tablet):

“After that We will complete this series through his son who has the
perfection of Prophet Musa (a.s.), the elegance of Prophet Isa (a.s.)
and the patience of Prophet Ayyub (a.s.). During the period of his
occultation, My friends will be humiliated and their severed heads will
be given away as presents, like those of the slaves of Turkey and
Dailam. They will be killed, burnt alive and they will constantly be in
fear. The earth will be dyed in their blood. There will be wailing and
mourning among their ladies and they

will be Our true friends. It is through them alone that I will remove
all the dark mischiefs and through them will I make to flow the springs
of Zalazil and remove all the obstacles. They will be blessed by the
mercy of their Lord and in fact only they are the guided.”

**60-** ***Kifayatul Athar:*** Through the chains mentioned previously,
it is narrated from Jabir Ansari from the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.)
that he said:

“The Divine Proof will hidden from them; uttering his name will be
prohibited, till the Almighty Allah makes him reappear and when the
Almighty Allah hastens his reappearance, he will fill up the earth with
justice and equity as it would be fraught with injustice and
oppression.”

Then he said: “Good fortune to those who are patient during his
occultation. Good fortune to the pious who are steadfast in his path. It
is about them that the Almighty Allah has said in His Book:

<p dir="rtl">
الَّذِينَ يُؤْمِنُونَ بِالْغَيْبِ
</p>

***“Those who believe in the unseen…” (Surah Baqarah 2:3)***

And also said:

<p dir="rtl">
أُوْلَئِكَ حِزْبُ اللَّهِ أَلَا إِنَّ حِزْبَ اللَّهِ هُمُ الْمُفْلِحُونَ
</p>

***“…these are Allah’s party: now surely the party of Allah are the
successful ones.” (Surah Mujadilah 58:22)***

**61-** ***Tafsir Nomani:*** It is narrated from Imam Ali (a.s.) that he
said: The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said:

“O Abul Hasan, it is obligatory on the Almighty Allah to admit the*Ahle
Zalaal* to Paradise. They are in fact the believers who live during
testing times when the location of their Imam is unknown. That is they
have faith in the Imam who is concealed from them. But in spite of that
they will believe in his Imamate steadfastly. They will be eager
awaiting for his reappearance and be certain of it. They will not doubt
about it and they will be patient in it. They will be submitting to him.
They will be unaware of the location of their Imam and the recognition
of his personality.”

**62-** ***Ikhtisaas:*** It is narrated from Hasan bin Ahmad from Ahmad
bin Hilal from his mother from Ibne Ali from an unidentified person that
he said:

I asked Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.): “Who is superior? We or the companions
of the Qaim (a.s.)?”

He replied: “You are superior to the companions of the Qaim, because all
the time you have to fear the loss of your life and property at the
hands of unjust leaders. Even your prayer is a prayer of dissimulation
and your fast is a fast of dissimulation. When you perform the Hajj, it
is a Hajj in dissimulation. If you testify in a case your testimony is
not accepted just because you are a Shia.”

The Imam mentioned many such examples…

I asked: “If we people are superior, why do we harbor aspirations for
the reappearance of Imam Zamana (a.s.)?”

He replied: “Glory be to Allah, do you not like that justice should be
established in the earth and the roads should remain secure and the
oppressed are dealt with justice?”

**63-** ***Nahjul Balagha:*** “Stick to the earth, keep patient in
trials, do not move your hands and swords after the liking of your
tongues, and do not make haste in matters in which Allah has not asked
for haste, because anyone of you who dies in his bed while he had
knowledge of the rights of Allah and the rights of His Prophet and
members of the Prophet’s house, will die as a martyr. His reward is
incumbent on Allah. He is also eligible to the recompense of what good
acts he has intended to do, since his intention takes the place of
drawing his sword. Certainly, for everything there is a time and a
limit.”

**64-** ***Amali Tusi:*** It is narrated from Ahmad bin Abdun from Ali
bin Muhammad bin Zubair from Ali bin Hasan bin Faddal from Abbas bin
Aamir from Ahmad bin Razzaq Ghamshani from Yahya bin Alaa from Imam
Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said:

“Every believer is a martyr even though he may die in his bed. On the
contrary he is like one who is martyred in the army of the Qaim.”

Then he said: “Would he still not enter Paradise, even though he relies
on Allah?”

**65-** ***Dawaat Rawandi:*** It is narrated from the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.) that he said:

“Awaiting patiently for the reappearance is worship.”

**66-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Ibne Walid from Saffar
from Barqi from his father from Mughira from Mufaddal bin Salih from
Jabir Jofi from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“A time will come upon the people when their Imam shall disappear from
their view. Blessed be those who remain firm upon our guardianship
during such times. The least divine reward that shall reach them would
be that the Almighty Allah shall call them and say: O My servants and
maidservants, you brought faith in My secret and believed in My unseen.
Then good news to you for My goodness and rewards as you are truly My
servants and maidservants. I shall accept your deeds, disregard your
faults and forgive your sins. And due to you I shall send rain to My
creatures and ward off calamities from them. If you hadn’t been there, I
would have sent My chastisement upon them.”

Jabir says: “I asked: O son of Allah’s Messenger, what is the best
action that a believer can perform at that time?” He replied: “Guarding
his tongue and staying at home.”

**67-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq says: Narrated to us my father
and Muhammad bin Hasan - May Allah be pleased with them - they said:
Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah and Abdullah bin Ja’far Himyari, all of
them from Ibrahim bin Hashim from Muhammad bin Khalid from Muhammad bin
Sinan from Mufaddal bin Umar from Abi Abdullah (a.s.) that he said:

“The most proximate servants of Allah and those with whom Allah is
pleased are those who when the proof of Allah disappears from sight and
they don’t know about his location, yet they continue to have faith that
the Proof of Allah can never be invalid and day and night they continue
to wait for him. And the wrath of Allah is on those of His enemies who
when the proof of Allah disappears from sight, they fall into doubts and
denial. He

(Allah) knew that His special servants will never fall into doubts and
if it were not so, He would not have taken away His Proof from their
sight even for a moment. These doubts will reign supreme over the hearts
of evil ones.”

**68-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** A similar tradition is narrated from
Kulaini from Ali bin Ibrahim from Hashim from his father from Muhammad
bin Sinan.

**69-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** And through the same chain of narrators,
Mufaddal bin Umar said: I heard Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) say:

“One who dies awaiting for the reappearance is like one who is with the
Qaim in his tent, rather he is like one who fights the holy war under
the command of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.).”

Report of Zurarah bin Ayyan
---------------------------

**70-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq says: Narrated to us Ahmad bin
Muhammad bin Yahya Attar (r.a.): Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah from
Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Isa from Uthman bin Isa Kilabi from Khalid bin
Najih from Zurarah bin Ayyan that he said: I heard Abi Abdullah (a.s.)
say:

“There is an occultation for the Qaim before his reappearance.” I asked:
“Why is it so?” He replied: “He is fearful.” And he pointed towards his
belly, implying that the Qaim fears for his life. Then he said: “O
Zurarah; and he is that awaited one and he is the one in whose birth
they shall doubt. Thus some will say: His father died heirless and some
will say: He was in the womb of his mother when his father died. Some
others will allege that he was born two years before the passing away of
his father. And he is the Awaited one; but the Almighty Allah likes to
test the Shia. It is the time when people of falsehood will fall in
doubts.”

Zurarah says: I asked: “If I am able to live till that period, what
action I should perform?”

He replied: “O Zurarah if you live till that time you must recite the
following supplication:

<p dir="rtl">
اللهم عرفني نفسك ، فإنك إن لم تعرفني نفسك لم أعرف نبيك، اللهم عرفني نبيك
فإنك إن لم تعرفني نبيك لم أعرف حجتك ، اللهم عرفني حجتك فإنك إن لم تعرفني
حجتك ضللت عن ديني
</p>

‘O Allah introduce Yourself to me. For if You don’t introduce Yourself
to me, I will not recognize Your Prophet. O Allah introduce Your
Messenger to me for if You don’t introduce Your Messenger to me, I will
not recognize Your Proof. O Allah introduce Your proof to me for if You
don’t introduce Your proof to me, I will deviate in my religion.’

Then he said: O Zurarah, at that time a youth will be killed in Medina.
I asked: May I be sacrificed on you, would the army of Sufyani kill this
youth? He replied: No, the forces of so-and-so tribe will kill him.
Those forces will enter Medina, accost this young man and kill him. This
murder will be a rebellion against divine ordinances and injustice and
now Allah will not give much respite. At that time the Imam will
reappear.”

Shaykh Saduq has mentioned this report in*Ikmaaluddin* through two other
chains and also in*Ghaibat Shaykh* and*Ghaibat Nomani* it is narrated

through another channel and also Kulaini in*Kafi* has narrated from two
other chains all from Zurarah and he has narrated from Imam (a.s.).

**71-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq says: Narrated to us my father
(r.a.): Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah from Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Isa
and Yaqub bin Yazid, all of them from Hasan bin Ali bin Faddal from
Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Mansur from a man - and his name was Umar bin
Abdul Aziz from Abi Abdullah (a.s.) that he said:

“When days and nights pass in such a condition that you are unable to
see the Imam whom you can follow, you must continue to love what you
love and continue to hate what you hate till Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime brings him out.”

**72-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq says: Narrated to us my father
and Muhammad bin Hasan bin Ahmad bin Walid - May Allah be pleased with
them - they said: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan Saffar: Narrated to
us Muhammad bin Husain bin Abil Khattab and Muhammad bin Isa bin Ubaid
Yaqteeni, all of them from Abdur Rahman bin Abi Najran from Isa bin
Abdullah bin Muhammad bin Umar bin Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) that he
said to his uncle, Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.):

“If such a time comes (when we are deprived from your presence) whom
shall we obey? The Imam gestured towards Imam Musa Kazim (a.s.). I
asked: And after him? He replied: His son. If his son dies leaving a son
who is young and a brother who is aged, whom do we follow? He replied:
His son. Then he said: And always do like this only.

I asked: What if a time comes when I cannot recognize the Imam and don’t
know his whereabouts? He replied: At that time you must recite the
following supplication: O Allah I have attached myself to Your remaining
Divine Proof from the sons of the previous Imam. That would be
sufficient.” This tradition is also mentioned through another chain of
reporters in*Ikmaaluddin* .

**73-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq says: And through the same chain
of narrators from Muhammad bin Masud that he said: I saw in the
handwriting of Jibraeel bin Ahmad: Narrated to me Ubaidi Muhammad bin
Isa from Yunus bin Abdur Rahman from Abdullah bin Sinan that Abi
Abdullah (a.s.) said:

“After this, a time will come when you will not be able to see the Imam
of the time. In that period no one will be saved except the one who
recites “Dua-e-Gareeq”. The narrator inquired as to what is
Dua-e-Gareeq. Imam (a.s.) replied:

<p dir="rtl">
يا الله يا رحمن يا رحيم يا مقلب القلوب ثبت قلبي على دينك
</p>

“O Allah! O Beneficent! O Merciful! O the One Who transforms the hearts!
Make my heart steadfast upon your religion!”

The narrator repeated the Dua in this way:

<p dir="rtl">
يا الله يا رحمن يا رحيم يا مقلب القلوب والابصار ثبت قلبي على دينك
</p>

The narrator added “Moqallebal Quloob. Wal Absaar” Imam (a.s.) told him,
“Indeed, Allah is Moqallebal Quloob Wal Absaar”, but you say only “Ya
Muqallebal Quloob Sabbit Qalbee Ala Deenek!”

Remain steadfast on your faith
------------------------------

**74-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq says: Narrated to us Muhammad
bin Musa bin Mutawakkil (r.a.): Narrated to us Abdullah bin Ja’far
Himyari from Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Isa from Muhammad bin Isa bin Ubaid
from Hasan bin Mahbub from Yunus bin Yaqub from one who narrated to him
from Abi Abdullah (a.s.) that he said:

“What will your condition be when a part of your life will remain and
you will not be able to see your Imam? Someone asked: What shall we do
in such circumstances? He replied: Keep up with the original command
till the matter becomes clear to you.”

**75-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq says: Narrated to us my father
(r.a.): Narrated to us Abdullah bin Ja’far Himyari from Ayyub bin Nuh
from Muhammad bin Abi Umair from Jameel bin Durraj from Zurarah that he
said: Abi Abdullah (a.s.) said:

“There will come upon the people a time when the Imam will disappear
from them. It was asked: What should they do in such circumstances? He
replied: They should remain attached to the faith they were on before,
till the matter becomes clear to them.”

**76-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq says: Narrated to us Muzaffar
bin Ja’far bin Muzaffar Alawi Amari Samarqandi (r.a.): Narrated to us
Muhammad bin Ja’far bin Masud and Haider bin Muhammad bin Nuaim
Samarqandi, all of them from Muhammad bin Masud Ayyashi that he said:
Narrated to me Ali bin Muhammad bin Shuja from Muhammad bin Isa from
Yunus Ibne Abdur Rahman from Ali bin Abi Hamza from Abi Basir that Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said regarding the words of Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime:

<p dir="rtl">
يَوْمَ يَأْتِي بَعْضُ آيَاتِ رَبِّكَ لاَ يَنفَعُ نَفْسًا إِيمَانُهَا
لَمْ تَكُنْ آمَنَتْ مِن قَبْلُ أَوْ كَسَبَتْ فِي إِيمَانِهَا خَيْرًا
</p>

***“On the day when some of the signs of your Lord shall come, its faith
shall not profit a soul which did not believe before, or earn good
through its faith.” (Surah Anaam 6:158)***

That it denotes the advent of the awaited Qaim from us. Then he said: “O
Aba Basir, fortunate are the Shia of our Qaim who during the period of
his occultation wait for his reappearance and who obey him during the
period of his reappearance. They are*Awliya* of Allah for whom there
shall be neither fear nor grief.”

**77-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq says: Narrated to us my father
(r.a.): Narrated to us Abdullah bin Ja’far Himyari from Muhammad bin
Umar Katib from Ali bin Muhammad Saymoori from Ali bin Mahziyar that he
said: I wrote to Abil Hasan of Askar (Imam Hadi a.s.) and asked him
about the reappearance. In reply he wrote:

“When your Imam disappears from the land of the oppressors, you must
await for the reappearance.”

This report is also mentioned in*Imamah wa Tabsira* of Ali Ibne
Babawayh, father of Shaykh Saduq, through another chain of reporters.


