28
==

Chapter Twenty-Eight: Those who falsely claim meeting the Imam (a.s.) during Major occultation and that the Imam comes visits the people but no one recognizes him
==================================================================================================================================================================

<p dir="rtl">
خَرَجَ التَّوْقِيعُ إِلَى أَبِي الْحَسَنِ السَّمُرِيِّ يَا عَلِيَّ بْنَ
مُحَمَّدٍ السَّمُرِيَّ اسْمَعْ أَعْظَمَ اللَّهُ أَجْرَ إِخْوَانِكَ فِيكَ
فَإِنَّكَ مَيِّتٌ مَا بَيْنَكَ وَ بَيْنَ سِتَّةِ أَيَّامٍ فَاجْمَعْ
أَمْرَكَ وَ لَا تُوصِ إِلَى أَحَدٍ يَقُومُ مَقَامَكَ بَعْدَ وَفَاتِكَ
فَقَدْ وَقَعَتِ الْغَيْبَةُ التَّامَّةُ فَلَا ظُهُورَ إِلَّا بَعْدَ
إِذْنِ اللَّهِ تَعَالَى ذِكْرُهُ وَ ذَلِكَ بَعْدَ طُولِ الْأَمَدِ وَ
قَسْوَةِ الْقُلُوبِ وَ امْتِلَاءِ الْأَرْضِ جَوْراً وَ سَيَأْتِي مِنْ
شِيعَتِي مَنْ يَدَّعِي الْمُشَاهَدَةَ أَلَا فَمَنِ ادَّعَى
الْمُشَاهَدَةَ قَبْلَ خُرُوجِ السُّفْيَانِيِّ وَ الصَّيْحَةِ فَهُوَ
كَذَّابٌ مُفْتَرٍ وَ لَا حَوْلَ وَ لَا قُوَّةَ إِلَّا بِاللَّهِ
الْعَلِيِّ الْعَظِيمِ
</p>

**1-** ***Ihtijaaj:*** It is mentioned in a*Tawqee* addressed to Abul
Hasan Saymoori:

“O Ali Ibne Muhammad Saymoori, may Allah give good rewards to your
brethren concerning you (i.e. on your death), for indeed you shall die
after six days. So prepare your affairs, and do not appoint anyone to
take your place after your death. For the second occultation has now
occurred, and there can be no appearance until after a long time when
Allah gives His permission, hearts become hardened and the world is full
of injustice. And someone shall come to my partisans (Shia) claiming
that he has seen me; but beware of anyone claiming to have seen me
before the rise of Sufyani and the outcry from the sky, for he shall be
a slanderous liar. And there is no strength and might except for Allah,
the High and the Mighty.”

**2-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq has narrated: Narrated to us my
father and Muhammad bin Hasan and Muhammad bin Musa bin Mutawakkil and
Muhammad bin Ali Majiluwayh and Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Yahya Attar - May
Allah be pleased with them - they said: Narrated to us Muhammad bin
Yahya Attar: Narrated to us Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Malik Fazari Kufi
from Ishaq bin Muhammad Sairafi from Yahya bin Muthanna Attar from
Abdullah bin Bukair from Ubaid bin Zurarah that he said: I heard Abi
Abdullah (a.s.) say:

“The Imam will be unseen by the people. Then he will witness those who
come for the Hajj pilgrimage, he will see them but they will not see
him.”

In that book this report is narrated through two chains and in*Ghaibat
Nomani* it is narrated through three chains and in*Ghaibat Shaykh* it is
narrated through other chains.

**3-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq has narrated: Narrated to us
Muzaffar bin Ja’far bin Muzaffar Alawi Umari Samarqandi (r.a.): Narrated
to us Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Masud from his father Muhammad bin Masud
from Ja’far bin Ahmad from Hasan bin Ali bin Faddal that he said: I
heard Abul Hasan Ali bin Musa Reza (a.s.) say:

“Khizr (a.s.) drank from the nectar of life. Thus he is alive and will
not die till the bugle is blown. Indeed he comes to us and he greets us
by*Salaam* . His voice is audible but he could not be seen. And he is
present wherever his name is mentioned. Thus whomsoever of you mentions
him, must say*Salaam* to him. Every year he is present in the ceremonies
of Hajj. He performs all the rituals and he camps at Arafat; says Amen
to the prayers of believers. And the Almighty Allah changes the
loneliness of our Qaim (a.s.) during his occultation into his
companionship and removes his loneliness through him (Khizr).”

**4-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq has narrated: Narrated to us
Muhammad bin Musa bin Mutawakkil (r.a.): Narrated to us Abdullah bin
Ja’far Himyari from Muhammad bin Uthman Amari (r.a.) that he said:

“The master of this affair shall perform the Hajj rituals every year.
Thus he shall see the people and recognize them and they shall (also)
see him, but will not recognize him.”

**5-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Ahmad bin Idris from Ali
bin Muhammad from Fadhl bin Shazan from Abdullah bin Jabla from Abdullah
bin Mustanir from Mufaddal bin Umar from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that
he said:

“The man of this matter disappears twice. The first one lasts long until
some people say that he has died, some say that he has been killed and
others say that he has gone. None of his companions will still believe
in him except a very few people. No one knows his place except the
guardian, who manages his affairs.”

**6-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** Through the same chains, it is narrated from
Fadhl from Ibne Abi Najran from Ali bin Abi Hamza from Abu Basir from
Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said:

“The man of this matter must disappear and he is to be in isolation
during his disappearance There in no loneliness among the thirty and how
good abode Tayba is!”

**7-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Ibne Abi Jayyid from Ibne
Walid from Saffar from Ibne Maruf from Abdullah bin Hamduya bin Baraa
from Thabit from Ismail from Abdul Alaa, slave of Saam family that he
said:

I once traveled with Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) and when we reached Rauha,
Imam (a.s.) sighted a golden mountain and remarked:

“Can you see this mountain? It is called Mt. Rizvi and it a mountain of
Fars. When it expressed love for us, the Almighty Allah transferred it
here. See, every tree growing upon is fruitful and it will be a refuge
to one who is in fear. It is so because the master of affair will have
two occultations: one is a shorter occultation (*Ghaibat Sughra* ) and
the other is longer occultation (*Ghaibat Kubra* ).”

**8-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Fadhl bin Shazan from
Abdullah bin Jabla from Salma bin Junah Jofi from Hazim bin Habib from
Abu Abdullah Sadiq (a.s.) that he told Hazim bin Habib:

“O Hazim, for the master of this affair there will be two occultations
and he would reappear in the second of the two. And if someone comes to
you and says that he has touched his grave, do not testify for him
(accept him).”

**9-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** Ali bin Ahmad narrated from Ubaidullah bin
Musa Alawi from Ahmad bin Husain from Ahmad bin Hilal from Abdur Rahman
bin Abu Najran from Fudhala bin Ayyub that Sudair Sairafi had said: I
heard Abu Abdullah Imam Sadiq (a.s.) say:

“In the master of this affair, there is a similarity to Prophet Yusuf.”
I asked: “It seems as if you are informing us about occultation and
bewilderment?” He replied: “These accursed people resembling pigs, why
do they deny this statement? Brothers of Yusuf were wise and intelligent
persons, they came to Yusuf, talked with him, had a deal with him, and
he was their brother, inspite of that until he introduced himself they
did not recognize him. And when he said I am Yusuf, they recognized him.
On the basis of this why does the confused Ummah deny that Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime from time to time conceals His proof from them. Yusuf
had the rulership of Egypt and the distance between him and his father
was not more than of 18 days’ travel, if the Almighty Allah wanted, He
could have made his location known to his father. Then how could this
Ummah deny that the Almighty Allah can do with His proof what He did
with Yusuf? While your oppressed master whose rights have been usurped,
he comes and goes among them and he walks in their Bazaars and treads on
their carpets and they cannot recognize him? Till the time that the
Almighty Allah permits him to introduce himself as He allowed Yusuf. And
when his brothers asked: Are you Yusuf? He replied: Yes, I am that same
Yusuf.”

**10-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Saeed bin Ogda
narrated from Ali bin Hasan Taymali from Umar bin Uthman from Hasan bin
Mahbub from Ishaq bin Ammar Sairafi that Abu Abdullah Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) had said:

“The Qaim disappears twice; one is a short disappearance and the other
is long. In the first disappearance some of his close Shia know his
place and in the other one no one knows his place except the guardians
of his religion.”

**11-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** Muhammad bin Yaqub narrated from Muhammad
bin Yahya from Muhammad bin Husain from Hasan bin Mahbub from Ishaq bin
Ammar that Abu Abdullah Imam Sadiq (a.s.) had said:

“The Qaim disappears twice; one is a short disappearance and the other
is long. In the first disappearance, some of his close Shia knows his
place and in the other one no one knows his place, except his close
confidants.”

**12-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Saeed narrated from
Ali bin Hasan from Abdur Rahman bin Abu Najran from Ali bin Mahziyar
from Hammad bin Isa from Ibrahim bin Umar Yamani that Abu Ja’far, Baqir
(a.s.) had said:

“The master of this affair has two occultations,” and I also heard that
he said: “The master of this affair will not rise up having anyone’s
allegiance.”

**13-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Saeed narrated from
Qasim bin Muhammad bin Hasan bin Hazim from Obayss bin Hisham from
Abdullah bin Jibilla from Salama bin Janah that Hazim bin Habib said: I
came to Imam Sadiq (a.s.) and said:

“My parents died without performing Hajj. Allah has granted to me good
livelihood. May I perform Hajj on behalf of them?”

He said: “Yes, you may, because that will benefit them.”

Then he said to me: “O Hazim, the man of this matter disappears twice
and he reappears after the second disappearance. Do not believe whoever
comes to you saying that he (the Qaim) has died.”

**14-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** Abdul Wahid bin Abdullah narrated from
Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Rabah Zuhri from Ahmad bin Ali Himyari from Hasan
bin Ayyub from Abdul Karim bin Amr from Abu Hanifah Sayiq that Hazim bin
Habib had said: “I said to Abu Abdullah Imam Sadiq (a.s.):

“My father, who was a foreigner man, died and I wanted to perform the
Hajj and give charities on his behalf. What do you say about it?”

He said to me: “Do that because he will be rewarded by it.”

Then he said: “O Hazim, the man of this matter will disappear twice,” He
mentioned the rest of the tradition as the one above.

**15-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** Abdul Wahid bin Abdullah narrated from
Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Rabah from Ahmad bin Ali Himyari from Hasan bin
Ayyub from Abdul Karim bin Amr from Alaa bin Razeen from Muhammad bin
Muslim Thaqafi that Abu Ja’far, Baqir (a.s.) had said:

“The Qaim disappears twice. In one of them it will be said: He has
perished or it is unknown which valley he has followed.”

**16-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** Abdul Wahid bin Abdullah narrated from
Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Rabah from Ahmad bin Ali Himyari from Hasan from
Abdul Karim bin Amr from Ibne Bukair and Yahya bin Muthanna that Zurarah
heard Abu Abdullah Imam Sadiq (a.s.) say:

“The Qaim (a.s.) disappears twice. He comes back after one of them, but
in the second disappearance, no one knows where he is. He attends the
seasons of Hajj. He sees the people but they do not see him.”

The author says: Perhaps the return of the Imam during the minor
occultation implies meeting his special friends and representatives or
receipt of his news by the people.

**17-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Saeed bin Uqda
narrated from Muhammad bin Mufaddal bin Ibrahim bin Qays, Sadan bin
Ishaq bin Saeed, Ahmad bin Husain bin Abdul Malik and Muhammad bin Ahmad
bin Husain Qatawani all from Hasan bin Mahbub from Ibrahim bin Ziyad
Khariqi that Abu Basir had said:

I said to Abu Abdullah Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that Abu Ja’far, Baqir (a.s.)
often said: “The Qaim of Muhammad’s progeny will disappear twice; one
will be longer than the other.”

He said: “Yes, but that will not be until the army of the tribe of so
and so disagrees, life becomes so difficult, Sufyani rises, distresses
and calamities increase and death and killing spread among people until
they resort to the sanctum of Allah (the Kaaba) and the sanctum of the
Prophet (s.a.w.s.) (the Prophet’s mosque).”

**18-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** Muhammad bin Yaqub Kulaini has narrated
from Muhammad bin Yahya and Ahmad bin Idris from Hasan bin Ali Kufi from
Ali bin Hassaan from Abdur Rahman bin Kathir that Mufaddal bin Umar had
said: I heard Abu Abdullah Imam Sadiq (a.s.) say:

“The man of this matter disappears twice. After one of his
disappearances, he comes back to his family and in the other one it is
said that he has perished or (it is unknown that) in which valley he has
gone.”

I said: “If that takes place, then what will we do?”

He said: “If someone pretends that (he is the representative of the
Qaim), you are to ask him about the great matters, which no one will
answer except him (the Qaim).”

**19-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Saeed narrated from
Qasim bin Muhammad bin Hasan bin Hazim from Obayss bin Hisham from
Abdullah bin Jibilla from Ahmad bin Harith from Mufaddal bin Umar that
Abu Abdullah Imam Sadiq (a.s.) had said:

“The man of this matter will recite in one of his (two) disappearances:

<p dir="rtl">
فَفَرَرْتُ مِنكُمْ لَمَّا خِفْتُكُمْ فَوَهَبَ لِي رَبِّي حُكْمًا
وَجَعَلَنِي مِنَ الْمُرْسَلِينَ
</p>

***“So I fled from you when I feared you, then my Lord granted me wisdom
and made me of the apostles…” (Surah Shoara 26:21)***

**20-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** Muhammad bin Yaqub Kulaini has narrated
from some of his companions from Ahmad bin Muhammad from Hasan bin Ali
Washsha from Ali bin Abu Hamza from Abu Basir that Abu Abdullah Imam
Sadiq (a.s.) had said:

“Occultation is necessary for the master of this affair and seclusion is
necessary in this occultation and the best place of residence is Tayyaba
(Medina) and with the thirty he will not feel lonely.”

In*Kafi* and*Ghaibat Nomani* this report is also quoted through other
chains.

The author says: Tayyaba implies holy Medina. Most likely Imam Zamana
(a.s.) lives in Medina and its surroundings and it also shows that the
Imam is having thirty special friends in his company. If one of them
passes away, another one takes his place.

**21-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** Abdul Wahid bin Abdullah narrated from
Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Rabah from Muhammad bin Abbas bin Isa from Hasan
bin Ali Bataini from his father from Mufaddal that Abu Abdullah Imam
Sadiq (a.s.) had said:

“The man of this matter will have a house called Baitul Hamd (house of
praise). It will have a lamp lighted since the day of his birth until
the day when he will rise with the sword.”

This tradition is also mentioned in*Ghaibat Tusi* from Imam Muhammad
Baqir (a.s.).


