31
==

Chapter Thirty-One: Reappearance of Imam Zamana (a.s.), its signs and what all will occur after that
====================================================================================================

<p dir="rtl">
أَبِي عَنْ سَعْدٍ عَنِ ابْنِ يَزِيدَ عَنِ ابْنِ أَبِي عُمَيْرٍ عَنْ
غَيْرِ وَاحِدٍ عَنْ أَبِي عَبْدِ اللَّهِ ع قَالَ يَخْرُجُ قَائِمُنَا
أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ يَوْمَ الْجُمُعَةِ الْخَبَر
</p>

**1-** ***Al-Khisaal:*** My father has narrated from Saad from Ibne
Yazid from Ibne Umair from more than one person from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) that he said:

“The Qaim of us, Ahle Bayt (a.s.), will reappear on a Friday.”

**2-** ***Ilalush Sharai:*** My father has narrated from Muhammad Attar
from Ashari from Musa bin Umar from Ibne Sinan from Abu Saeed Qammat
from Bukair bin Ayyan from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said about
Hajar Aswad and the pillar in which it is placed:

“From the same pillar will descend a bird upon Imam Qaim (a.s.) and he
will be the first to pledge allegiance to him. I swear by Allah that the
bird, in fact, is His Eminence, Jibraeel (a.s.). Imam Qaim (a.s.) will
be leaning on the wall. And he is the proof for the Qaim. Anyone who
goes before him will testify for Imam Qaim (a.s.) in his presence.”

**3-** ***Ihtijaaj:*** It is narrated from Hannan bin Sudair from his
father, Sudair bin Hakim from his father from Abu Saeed Aqisa from Hasan
bin Ali (a.s.) that he said:

“None of us is without a tyrant ruler of his time dominating him, except
for this Imam Qaim (a.s.) behind whom will Prophet Isa (a.s.) pray. For
this very reason, Allah, the Mighty and Sublime will keep his birth and
his location a secret so that he may not be forced to live under
anyone’s rule. He will be the ninth descendant of my brother, Husain
(a.s.) and he will be born to the chief of the maids. The Almighty Allah
will prolong his life during his occultation and when he appears, he
would seem to be a forty-year-old young man. And it will be clear to all
that the Almighty Allah is powerful over everything.”

**4-** ***Tafsir Qummi:*** It is narrated from Ahmad bin Ali and Ahmad
bin Idris together from Muhammad bin Ahmad Alawi from Umar Kayi from
Muhammad bin Jamhur from Sulaiman bin Samaa from Abdullah bin Qasim from
Yahya bin Maisira Khathami from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said:

“*Haa meem Ain seen Qaaf* are the numerical equivalents of the age of
Imam Qaim (a.s.) and Qaaf is a mountain of green emerald which surrounds
the earth and the green hue visible on the sky is due to it. And the
knowledge of everything is included in*Ain seen Qaaf* .”

**5-** ***Qurbul Asnad:*** It is narrated from Ibne Saad from Azdi that
he said: I and Abu Basir came to Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) and Ali bin
Abdul Aziz was with us.

I asked Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.): “Maula, are you the Sahibul Amr
(master of affair)?”

He replied: “I am your Imam.”

Then he held the skin of his arm, pulled it and said: “See I have become
old (and my skin is wrinkled). Whereas your Sahibul Amr will be young.”

**6-** ***Ihtijaaj:*** It is narrated from Zaid bin Wahab Jahni from
Hasan bin Ali bin Abu Talib from his father (a.s.) that he said:

“In the last period of time, the Almighty Allah will raise a man among
the illiterate masses whom He will support by His angels and protect his
helpers, help him through His signs and he will conquer the whole world.
All would enter the fold of religion willingly or unwillingly. He would
fill the earth with justice, equity and proof. No disbeliever will
remain without accepting faith. During his rule, even the wild beasts
would become tame. And the earth will through up its vegetation.
Blessings will descend from the sky. The treasures buried in the earth
will be exposed and he would rule the world for forty years. Fortunate
would be one who lives till that time and hears his speech.”

**7-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq (r.a.) has narrated from Muhammad
bin Ibrahim bin Ishaq from Husain bin Ibrahim bin Abdullah bin Mansur
from Muhammad bin Harun Hashmi from Ahmad bin Isa from Ahmad bin
Sulaiman Dahwi from Muawiyah bin Hisham from Ibrahim bin Muhammad bin
Hanafiyyah from his father, Muhammad bin Hanafiyyah from his respected
father, Amirul Momineen (a.s.), who has quoted from the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.s.) that he said:

“The Mahdi is from us, Ahle Bayt. Allah will reform his affair on a
single night. And in another version: Allah will bring reform for him in
a single night.”

**8-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Taliqani from Ibne Hamam
from Ja’far bin Malik from Hasan bin Muhammad Samaa from Ahmad bin
Harith from Mufaddal bin Umar from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) from his
father, Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said:

“When Qaim (a.s.) rises up, he would say:

<p dir="rtl">
فَفَرَرْتُ مِنكُمْ لَمَّا خِفْتُكُمْ فَوَهَبَ لِي رَبِّي حُكْمًا
وَجَعَلَنِي مِنَ الْمُرْسَلِينَ
</p>

***“So I fled from you when I feared you, then my Lord granted me wisdom
and made me of the apostles.” ( Surah Shoara 26:21)***

**9-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** My father and Ibne Walid have together
narrated from Saad and Himyari and Ahmad bin Idris together from Ibne
Isa and Ibne Abil Khattab and Muhammad bin Abdul Jabbar and Abdullah bin
Aamir from Ibne Abi Najran from Muhammad bin Masawir from Mufaddal bin
Umar Jofi from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“Do not protest! By Allah! Your Imam shall remain hidden from you for a
long time. You will be tried and examined in those times. To such an
extent that some people shall say: He has died or he has gone into some
cave. While the believers will be shedding tears for him. The hearts of
the people will be shaken up by the calamities like a ship is tossed in
the waves of the stormy sea. None shall get deliverance except those
from whom Allah has taken oath, on whose hearts He has inscribed faith
and whom He helped

with His mercy. At that time twelve standards will arise and all of them
will be alike, thus it will not be known, which the standard of truth
is.

I began to weep, so the Imam asked: O Abi Abdullah why do you weep? I
replied: Master, why shouldn’t I weep when you say that twelve standards
will arise and all of them will be alike, thus how do we know which is
the standard of truth? The Imam said: Look at the sun, on which army it
is shining. I said: Maula, this same sun? “Yes,” he replied, “O Abi
Abdullah, have you seen this sun? I said: Yes. Imam said: I swear by
Allah, our matter (Wilayat) is more clear than this sun.”

This traditional report is also mentioned in*Ghaibat Nomani* through two
other chains of narrators.

**10-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq (r.a.) has narrated from Sinani
from Asadi from Sahal from Abdul Azeem Hasani that he said:

“I said to His Eminence, Muhammad bin Ali bin Musa: We hope that you
would be the Qaim of the Progeny of the House of Muhammad (s.a.w.s.),
who would fill the earth with justice and equity just as it would be
fraught with injustice and oppression. He replied: O Abal Qasim, none of
us Imams are but Qaim by the command of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime,
and we are the guides towards the religion of Allah. But the Qaim
through whom the Almighty Allah would purify the earth from the infidels
and apostates and who would fill up the earth with justice and equity is
the one whose birth shall remain concealed for the people and whose
person would remain unseen by the people and pronouncing whose name
would be unlawful. His name and agnomen shall be the same as that of the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.).

He is the one for whom the earth would wrap itself and every hardship
would become easy for him. His companions numbering same as the fighters
of Badr would gather around him from far off places of the earth. And
that is the meaning of the verse:

<p dir="rtl">
أَيْنَ مَا تَكُونُواْ يَأْتِ بِكُمُ اللّهُ جَمِيعًا إِنَّ اللّهَ عَلَى
كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ
</p>

***“Wherever you are, Allah will bring you all together; surely Allah
has power over all things.” (Surah Baqarah 2:148)***

Thus when this number gathers around him, the Almighty Allah would
reveal his matter. And when the number of his helpers reach 2000, he
would, by the permission of Allah set out in pursuit of the enemies of
Allah in order to please the Almighty.”

Abdul Azeem says: I asked His Eminence: “My master, how would he know
that the Almighty Allah is pleased with him?” He replied: “Allah would
instill mercy into his heart. Thus when he enters Medina, he would bring
out the Laat and Uzza and burn them up.” This traditional report is also
mentioned in*Ihtijaaj* .

The author says: Laat and Uzza were two idols of Quraish and here they
imply the first and the second caliph.

**11-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** A group of scholars has narrated from Abul
Mufaddal from Muhammad bin Himyari from his father from Ibne Abil
Khattab from Musa bin Sadan from Abdullah bin Qasim from Mufaddal bin
Umar that he asked Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) about the Tafsir of Jabir
and he said:

“Do not mention the Tafsir of these verses to those who have decadent
thinking otherwise they will publicize it. Have you not seen the
following verse in Quran?

<p dir="rtl">
فَإِذَا نُقِرَ فِي النَّاقُورِ
</p>

***“For when the trumpet is sounded…” (Surah Muddaththir 74:8)***

Indeed one of us Imams will be in occultation and when the Almighty
Allah wants to show His matter, He will inspire the Imam and he will
reappear and stage an uprising by the permission of Allah.”

The same tradition is also mentioned in*Rijal Kishi* from another chain
of reporters.

**12-** ***Kanz Jamiul Fawaid:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Abbas
from Abdullah bin Asad from Ibrahim bin Muhammad from Muhammad bin
Muammar Asadi from Muhammad bin Fudhail from Kalabi from Abu Salih from
Ibne Abbas with regard to the saying of Allah:

<p dir="rtl">
إِن نَّشَأْ نُنَزِّلْ عَلَيْهِم مِّن السَّمَاء آيَةً فَظَلَّتْ
أَعْنَاقُهُمْ لَهَا خَاضِعِينَ
</p>

***“If We please, We should send down upon them a sign from the heaven
so that their necks should stoop to it.” (Surah Shoara 26:4)***

“This verse is revealed about us and Bani Umayyah. Our family will gain
power and the Bani Umayyah will be humiliated.”

**13-** ***Kanz Jamiul Fawaid:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Abbas
from Ahmad bin Hasan bin Ali from his father from his father from
Muhammad bin Ismail from Hannan bin Sudair from Imam Muhammad Baqir
(a.s.) that he said with regard the following verse of Quran:

<p dir="rtl">
إِن نَّشَأْ نُنَزِّلْ عَلَيْهِم مِّن السَّمَاء آيَةً فَظَلَّتْ
أَعْنَاقُهُمْ لَهَا خَاضِعِينَ
</p>

***“If We please, We should send down upon them a sign from the heaven
so that their necks should stoop to it.” (Surah Shoara 26:4)***

“This verse is revealed about Imam Qaim (a.s.). His name will be
announced from the sky.”

**14-** ***Kanz Jamiul Fawaid:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Abbas
from Husain bin Ahmad from Muhammad bin Isa from Yunus from Safwan from
Abu Uthman from Mualla bin Khunais from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he
said: Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said:

“Expect the reappearance of Imam Qaim (a.s.) after witnessing three
signs.”

He was asked: “What are those signs?”

“The mutual discord of the Syrians, appearance of black flags from
Khorasan and fear in the month of Ramadhan.”

He was asked: “What is the fear in the month of Ramadhan?”

He replied: “Have not seen the following saying of the Almighty Allah in
the Holy Quran?”

<p dir="rtl">
إِن نَّشَأْ نُنَزِّلْ عَلَيْهِم مِّن السَّمَاء آيَةً فَظَلَّتْ
أَعْنَاقُهُمْ لَهَا خَاضِعِينَ
</p>

***“If We please, We should send down upon them a sign from the heaven
so that their necks should stoop to it.” (Surah Shoara 26:4)***

“At that time ladies will come out of their veils and those who are
asleep will wake up and begin to tremble in fear.”

**15-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Husain bin Ubaidullah
from Bazufari from Ahmad bin Idris from Ibne Qutaibah from Fadhl bin
Shazan from Ibne Faddal from Masna Hannat from Hasan bin Ziyad Saiqal
that he said: I heard Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) say:

“Without any doubt, Imam Qaim (a.s.) will not reappear till there is a
call from the sky which the ladies in veils and people of each corner of
the world hear. It is about this point that the following verse is
revealed:

<p dir="rtl">
إِن نَّشَأْ نُنَزِّلْ عَلَيْهِم مِّن السَّمَاء آيَةً فَظَلَّتْ
أَعْنَاقُهُمْ لَهَا خَاضِعِينَ
</p>

***“If We please, We should send down upon them a sign from the heaven,
so that their necks should stoop to it.” (Surah Shoara 26:4)***

**16-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq (r.a.) has narrated from
Taliqani from Ahmad bin Ali Ansari from Abu Sult Harawi that he said: I
asked Imam Reza (a.s.):

“What would be the sign of your Qaim when he reappears?” He replied: “He
will be advanced in age, but he will seem like a young man. Whoever sees
him will say that he is forty or less. The rotation of days and nights
does not affect him till his last.”

**17-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Ibne Idris from his
father from Ibne Isa from Ahwazi from Bataini from Abu Basir that Imam
Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) said:

“The Qaim will reappear on a Saturday, Ashura Day, day of the martyrdom
of Imam Husain (a.s.).”

**18-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Ibne Walid from Saffar
from Ibne Yazid from Ibne Abu Umair from Aban bin Uthman from Aban bin
Taghlib from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“The first to pledge allegiance to Qaim (a.s.) is Jibraeel, who would
come down in the form of a white bird and give him an oath of
allegiance. Then keeping one foot on the Holy Kaaba and another on the
Holy Qods issue such a loud call that when the creatures hear it, they
would cry:

<p dir="rtl">
أَتَى أَمْرُ اللّهِ فَلاَ تَسْتَعْجِلُوهُ
</p>

***“Allah’s commandment has come, therefore do not desire to hasten it.”
(Surah Nahl 16:1)***

In*Tafsir Ayyashi* it is narrated through other chains of narrators from
Aban bin Taghlib from the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) and also from
Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.).

**19-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated through the same chain of
narrators from Aban bin Taghlib that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said:

“Very soon 313 persons will come to your Masjid - that is the Masjid of
Mecca - the people of Mecca will know that they are not natives. All of
them will be carrying swords and each of the swords will be inscribed
with the Kalimah from each of which a hundred Kalimas will be coming
out.

Then the Almighty Allah shall send a breeze that shall call out in every
valley, ‘This is Mahdi, who shall judge like Prophet Dawood and Sulaiman
and he would not ask for evidence.’”

**20-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Husain from
Muhammad bin Yahya Attar from Muhammad bin Hasan Raazi from

Muhammad bin Ali Kufi from Ismail bin Mahran from Muhammad bin Abu Hamza
from Aban bin Taghlib, a similar tradition and in that he says:

“Every sword will be inscribed with a thousand words and each word will
be a key to a thousand words.”

**21-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Majiluwayh from his uncle
from Barqi from his father from Muhammad bin Sinan from Mufaddal bin
Umar that he said: Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said:

The following verse was revealed about the companions of the Qaim:

<p dir="rtl">
أَيْنَ مَا تَكُونُواْ يَأْتِ بِكُمُ اللّهُ جَمِيعًا
</p>

***“Wherever you are, Allah will bring you all together.” (Surah Baqarah
2:148)***

“They shall go to bed at night and in the morning find themselves in
Mecca. Some of them will travel on clouds. The Imam will be knowing them
by their names, father’s names, appearance and genealogies.” I asked,
“May I be sacrificed on you, who will be the best in faith among them?”
He replied, “One who will ride the clouds during the day.”

**22-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Hamam from
Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Malik from Umar bin Tarqan from Muhammad bin
Ismail from Ali bin Umar bin Ali bin Husain from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) that he said:

“Indeed the Master of the Age will be aged like Prophet Ibrahim (a.s.);
(that is he lived to be a hundred and twenty years), but he will look
like a thirty-year-old young man.”

**23-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Hamam from
Hasan bin Ali from Aquli from Hasan bin Ali bin Abu Hamza from his
father from Abu Basir from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“When Imam Qaim (a.s.) reappears, people will refuse to believe in him
and he will approach them in the form of a young man, However the
believer from whom the Almighty Allah has taken a covenant in Aalame Zar
(in the initial stage of creation) will believe immediately.”

**24-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** A similar tradition is narrated from Ali
bin Husain Masudi from Muhammad Attar from Muhammad bin Hasan Raazi from
Muhammad bin Ali Kufi from Ibne Mahbub from Ibne Jabla from Bataini from
Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.). And in reports other than this, he (a.s.) is
supposed to have said:

“It is a great affliction, that their man (the Qaim) appears to them
young while they think that he is an old man.”

**25-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Ghazairi from Bazufari
from Ahmad bin Idris from Ibne Qutaibah from Ibne Shazan from Ismail bin
Sabbah that he said:

“I heard from an elder that Saif bin Umaira narrated: Once I was in the
company of Abu Ja’far Mansur Dawaniqi. I heard him say: O Saif bin
Umaira, it is inevitable that the name of a man from the descendants of
Abu Talib will be announced from the sky.

I asked: Has someone reported a tradition about it?

He replied: By the one in whose control my life is, I have directly
heard that an announcement will be made from the sky in the name of a
person.

I said: O chief of believers, but I have never heard any such report?

He replied: O Saif, when there is such an announcement, I will be the
first to harken to it, except that it would be in favor of one of my
cousins.

I asked: Which cousins.

Mansur said: From the descendants of Lady Fatima (s.a.).

Then he said: O Saif, if I had not heard this from Abu Ja’far Muhammad
bin Ali (a.s.) I would not have believed it even if the whole world had
stated thus.”

A similar report is mentioned in*Irshad* from Ali bin Bilal from
Muhammad bin Ja’far Muaddib from Ahmad bin Idris.

**26-** ***Al-Kafi:*** It is narrated from Ali from his father from Ibne
Abu Umair from Mansur bin Yunus from Ismail bin Jabir from Abu Khalid
from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said with regard to the
following verse of Quran:

<p dir="rtl">
فَاسْتَبِقُواْ الْخَيْرَاتِ أَيْنَ مَا تَكُونُواْ يَأْتِ بِكُمُ اللّهُ
جَمِيعًا
</p>

***“…therefore hasten to (do) good works; wherever you are, Allah will
bring you all together…” (Surah Baqarah 2:148)***

“Good works means Wilayat.” And: wherever you are, Allah will bring you
all together” denotes the three hundred and thirty companions of the
Imam. And they are only the “counted nation” (*Ummate Maadooda* )

By Allah, they will come together within an hour like rain clouds
gather.”

**27-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Ahmad bin Idris from
Ibne Qutaibah from Ibne Shazan from Ibne Mahbub from Thumali that he
said: I said to Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.):

“Your respected father, Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) used to state that
the coming of Sufyani is inevitable, the call from the sky is
inevitable, the rising of the sun from the west is inevitable and he
used to mention the same about many things.

Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said: And mutual discord in Bani so-and-so is
inevitable, killing of Nafse Zakiyya is inevitable and the rising of
Imam Qaim is also inevitable.

I asked: What the call from the sky be?

A caller will call out the following from the sky in the morning: Know
that the truth is with Imam Ali (a.s.) and his Shia.

And then in the evening the Iblis will call out from the sky: Know that
the truth is with Uthman and his followers.

This call from Iblis would make the people of falsehood fall into
doubts.”

A similar report is mentioned in*Irshad* from Ibne Shazan.

**28-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Saad from Hasan bin Ali
Zaituni and Himyari together from Ahmad bin Hilal from Ibne Mahbub from
Imam Ali Reza (a.s.) that he said in a long tradition, which we have
condensed here as follows:

“It is inevitable that a terrible mischief will arise, in which all the
secrets will be exposed and it will happen at a time when the Shia will
be deprived of my third descendant; that is after the passing away of
Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.) on which the folks of the earth and the sky
will mourn. And how many

will be aggrieved by the disappearance of the spring of sweet water. As
if I can see their worried state, when there will be a call for them,
which all the world would be able to hear clearly. This call will be a
mercy to the believers and chastisement to the disbelievers.

I asked: What that call would be?

He replied: Three calls will be issued in the month of Rajab. The first
call will say: Know that, curse of Allah is on the unjust.

The second call will say: The near event draws nigh. O group of
believers.

At the time of the third call, a shape will be seen in the sun and a
voice will say: This is Amirul Momineen, he will repeatedly attack the
oppressors.

And in another report Himyari has said that a shape will become visible
in the sun and it will say: The Almighty Allah has sent so-and-so;
listen to him and obey him.

And at that time, people will get deliverance and peace and even the
dead will wish to have been alive and the hearts of the believers will
become free of grief.”

In*Ghaibat Nomani,* Muhammad bin Hamam has narrated from Ahmad bin
Mabandad and Himyari together and they have narrated from Ahmad bin
Hilal a similar report.

**29-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Fazal from Muhammad bin
Ali Kufi from Wuhaib bin Hafas from Abu Basir from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) that he said:

“The name of Imam Qaim (a.s.) will be announced on the 23rd night and he
will reappear on the day of Ashura, on which Imam Husain (a.s.) was
martyred.”

**30-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Fazal from Muhammad bin
Ali from Muhammad bin Sinan from Hayy bin Marwan from Ali bin Mahziyar
from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said:

“As if I can see the Qaim (a.s.) on the day of Ashura, on Saturday
standing between the*Rukn* and*Maqam* and Jibraeel is announcing before
him: Allegiance is for Allah. Then he would fill the earth with justice
and equity, like it would have been fraught with injustice and
oppression.”

**31-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Fazal from Ibne Mahbub
from Ali bin Abi Hamza from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“The rising of Imam Qaim (a.s.) is an inevitable matter.”

I asked: “How will it be announced?”

He replied: “A caller will call out the following from the sky in the
morning: Know that the truth is with Imam Ali (a.s.) and his Shia.

And then in the evening the Iblis will call out from the sky: Know that
the truth is with Uthman and his followers.”

**32-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Fazal from Ibne Mahbub
from Abu Ayyub from Muhammad bin Muslim that he said:

“A caller will announce the name of Imam Qaim (a.s.) from the sky, which
will be heard by all the people of the world; which will awaken the
sleeping ones; those who are standing will sit up and those who sit will
stand up and this voice will be that of His Eminence, Jibraeel (a.s.).”

**33-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Fazal from Ismail bin
Ayyash from Amash from Abu Wael from Huzaifah that he said: I heard the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) say when Imam Mahdi (a.s.) was mentioned
in his presence:

“Indeed his allegiance will be given between Rukn and Maqam. He has
three names: Ahmad, Abdullah and Mahdi.”

**34-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Fazal from Ali bin
Abdullah from Abdur Rahman bin Abi Abdullah from Abul Jarud from Imam
Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said:

“The Qaim will rule for 309 years equal to the number of years the folks
of the cave (As-haab-e-Kahaf) remained in their cave. He would fill up
the earth with justice and equity just as it would be fraught with
injustice and oppression. After that the Almighty Allah will conquer the
east and the west of the earth for him and kill the people till no
religion remains, except that of Muhammad (s.a.w.s.). He (the Qaim) will
deal in the manner of Sulaiman bin Dawood. He would call out to the Sun
and the Moon and they would respond to him and the earth shall be
illuminated by his effulgence and divine revelation would descend for
him and he would act according to divine commands and revelation.”

**35-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Fazal from Abdullah bin
Qasim Hadhrami from Abdul Karim bin Amr Khathami that he said:

“I asked Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) about the duration of the rule of Imam
Qaim (a.s.).

He replied: He will rule for seven years but these seven years will be
equal to seventy years of your reckoning.”

**36-** ***Irshad:*** It is narrated from Ibne Mahbub from Ali bin Abu
Hamza from Abu Basir from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“The reappearance of Imam Qaim (a.s.) will occur in one of the odd
years: like one, three, five, seven or nine.”

**37-** ***Tafsir Ayyashi:*** It is narrated from Abi Samina from the
freed slave of Abul Hasan that he asked Abul Hasan (a.s.) about the
following verse of Quran:

<p dir="rtl">
أَيْنَ مَا تَكُونُواْ يَأْتِ بِكُمُ اللّهُ جَمِيعًا
</p>

***“Wherever you are, Allah will bring you all together…” (Surah Baqarah
2:148)***

“By Allah, when our Qaim reappears, the Almighty Allah will gather with
him his Shia from each corner of the world.”

**38-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Abdul Wahid bin
Abdullah from Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Rubah from Ahmad bin Ahmad Ali
Himyari from Ibne Mahbub from Abdul Karim bin Amr and Muhammad bin
Fudhail from Hammad bin Abdul Karim Jallab that he said: Once the Qaim
(a.s.) was mentioned before Abu Abdullah Imam Sadiq (a.s.). He said:

“If he appears, people will say: How can that be whereas his bones have
perished since such and such time?”

**39-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Hammam
from Ja’far bin Muhammad from Hasan bin Muhammad bin Samaa from Harith
Anmati from Mufaddal bin Umar from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he
said:

“When the Qaim (a.s.) rises, he will recite this Quranic verse:

<p dir="rtl">
فَفَرَرْتُ مِنكُمْ لَمَّا خِفْتُكُمْ
</p>

***“So I fled from you when I feared you…” (Surah Shoara 26:21)***

[It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Qasim bin Muhammad from Ubais bin
Hashim from Ibne Jabla from Ahmad bin Nadhr from Mufaddal from Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“There is occultation for the master of this affair, in which he will
say:

<p dir="rtl">
فَفَرَرْتُ مِنكُمْ لَمَّا خِفْتُكُمْ فَوَهَبَ لِي رَبِّي حُكْمًا
وَجَعَلَنِي مِنَ الْمُرْسَلِينَ
</p>

***“So I fled from you when I feared you, then my Lord granted me wisdom
and made me of the apostles” (Surah Shoara 26:21)***

***Ghaibat Nomani:*** Abdul Wahid bin Abdullah bin Yunus narrated from
Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Rabah from Ahmad bin Ali Himyari from Hasan bin
Ayyub from Abdul Karim bin Amr Khathami from Ahmad bin Harith from Abu
Abdullah Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that Abu Ja’far Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) said:

“When the Qaim (a.s.) rises, he will recite:

<p dir="rtl">
فَفَرَرْتُ مِنكُمْ لَمَّا خِفْتُكُمْ فَوَهَبَ لِي رَبِّي حُكْمًا
وَجَعَلَنِي مِنَ الْمُرْسَلِينَ
</p>

***“So I fled from you when I feared you, then my Lord granted me wisdom
and made me of the apostles” (Surah Shoara 26:21)***

**40-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Ali
bin Hasan Timli from Amr bin Uthman from Ibne Mahbub from Abdullah bin
Sinan said:

“Once when I was with Abu Abdullah Imam Sadiq (a.s.), a man from Hamadan
said to him: “People criticize us and say to us that we claim that a
caller from the heavens will call out the name of the man of
deliverance.”

Abu Abdullah Imam Sadiq (a.s.) became so angry. He changed his sitting
position and said: “Do not narrate this from me but narrate it from my
father and you are not to be blamed for that. I have heard my father
say: “By Allah, it is mentioned in the Quran. Allah has said: ‘If We
please, We should send down upon them a sign from the heaven so that
their necks should stoop to it. Everyone on the earth then will submit
to that (the call coming from the heavens) and his neck will stoop when
a call is heard from the heavens announcing that: ‘The right is with Ali
bin Abu Talib and his followers.’ The next day Iblis will rise in the
space until he disappears from the people of the earth and calls out:
‘The right is with Uthman bin Affan and his followers. He has been
killed unjustly, so you are to avenge his blood.’ Allah will confirm the
believers, who believe in the first call and then those, whose hearts
are full of disease, will doubt and become confused. By Allah, the
disease of the heart is the enmity towards us. Then they will turn away
from us and begin to criticize us. They will say that the first call is
a piece of magic of the people of this house (Ahlul Bayt).”

Then Abu Abdullah Imam Sadiq (a.s.) recited this Quranic verse, ‘And if
they see a miracle, they turn aside and say: Transient magic.”

This report is mentioned in*Ghaibat Nomani* through two other chains
from Abdullah bin Sinan.

**41-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Ali
bin Hasan from his father from Ahmad bin Umar Halabi from Husain bin
Musa from Fudayl bin Muhammad from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he
said:

“The call coming from the heavens and calling out the name of the Qaim
is clear in the Book of Allah.”

He was asked: “Where is it in the Book of Allah?”

He said: “Allah has said:

<p dir="rtl">
إِن نَّشَأْ نُنَزِّلْ عَلَيْهِم مِّن السَّمَاء آيَةً فَظَلَّتْ
أَعْنَاقُهُمْ لَهَا خَاضِعِينَ
</p>

***“If We please, We should send down upon them a sign from the heaven
so that their necks should stoop to it.” (Surah Shoara 26:4)***

When people hear the call, they will become as if there are birds on
their heads (because of astonishment and confusion).”

**42-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Ahmad
bin Yusuf from Ismail bin Mahran from Ibne Bataini from his father from
Wuhaib from Abu Basir from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“If the Abbasid ruler ascends the pulpit of Marwan, the state of the
Abbasids will begin to decline gradually. My father has said to me:
“There must be a fire coming from Azerbaijan that will destroy
everything. When that occurs, you are to stay at homes as long as we
have stayed. When our man (the Qaim) rises, then hurry up to him even
crawling. By Allah, as if I see him between the corner (Rukn) and the
Place of Ibrahim being paid allegiance to rule over the people with a
new method. He will be severe with the Arabs. Woe unto the Arabs from a
near evil!

**43-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Ali
bin Hasan Timli from Muhammad and Ahmad sons of Hasan from Ali bin Yaqub
from Harun bin Muslim from Ubaid bin Zurarah from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) that he said:

“The name of the Qaim will be called out (from the heavens). It will be
said to him while he is behind the Place (of Ibrahim): “Your name has
been called out. What are you waiting for?” Then his hand will be taken
to be paid allegiance.” Zurarah said: “Praise be to Allah! We often
heard that the Qaim would be paid allegiance unwillingly and we did not
know the reason behind that. Then we knew that the unwillingness of the
allegiance was not guilt.”

**44-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated through the same chains of
narrators from Harun Muslim from Abu Khalid Qummat from Humran bin Ayyan
that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said:

“The inevitable things that must occur before the appearance of the
Qaim. They are the rising of Sufyani, the sinking of the desert, killing
of Nafse Zakiyyah and the call from the sky.”

**45-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Ahmad
bin Yusuf bin Yaqub from Ismail bin Mahran from Hasan bin Ali from his
father from Wuhaib bin Hafas from Najiya Attar that Abu Ja’far Baqir
(a.s.) had said:

“The caller will call out that the Mahdi is from Muhammad’s progeny. He
will call out the name of the Mahdi and the name of his father. Then th

Satan will call out that the truth is with so and-so (Uthman) and his
followers.”

**46-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Ali
bin Hasan from Abdullah bin Aamir from Ibne Bukair from Zurarah that he
said: I heard Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) say:

“A caller will call out from the heavens that so-and-so is the emir and
that Ali and his followers are the triumphant.” I asked: “Then who will
fight the Mahdi after that?” He said: “The Satan will call out that
so-and-so and his followers are the triumphant - a man of the Umayyads
(Uthman).” I said: “Then who will know which the truthful is and which
the liar is?” He said: “Those who used to narrate our traditions will
know that and will know that they are with the truth.”

**47-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Ali
bin Hasan from Hasan bin Ali bin Yusuf from Muthanna from Zurarah that
he said:

I said to Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.): “May Allah make you succeed! I
wonder how people will fight against the Qaim in spite of all the
miracles they will see; like the sinking of the desert with the army and
the divine call that will come from the heavens!” He said: “The Satan
will not let them free until he calls out as he has called out against
the Prophet (s.a.w.s.) on the day of Aqaba.”

**48-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Ali
bin Hasan from Muhammad bin Abdullah from Ibne Abu Umair from Hisham bin
Salim that he said:

I said to Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.): “Jareeri says to us that you have
said that there will be two calls coming from the heavens then which of
them is truthful and which is false?” Abu Abdullah Imam Sadiq (a.s.)
said: “Say to him: He, who has told us of that, is the truthful although
you deny it!”

**49-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from the same chains that
Hisham bin Salim said: I heard Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) say:

“There will be two cries; one at the beginning of the night and the
other will be at the end of the second night.” I asked: “How will that
be?” He said: “One will be from the heavens and the other will be from
Iblis.” I said: “How one will be distinguished from the other?” He said:
“He, who has known about them before they occur, will know which of them
is from the heavens.”

**50-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Ali
bin Hasan from his father from Muhammad bin Khalid from Thalaba bin
Maimoon from Abdur Rahman bin Muslima that he said:

“I said to Abu Abdullah Imam Sadiq (a.s.): “Sunni blame us and ask how
the truthful call would be distinguished from the false one when they
both occur?” He said: “What do you answer them?” I said: “Nothing.” He
said: “Say to them: He, who has believed in them before they occur, will
know which of them is true and which is false. Allah has said:

<p dir="rtl">
أَفَمَن يَهْدِي إِلَى الْحَقِّ أَحَقُّ أَن يُتَّبَعَ أَمَّن لاَّ
يَهِدِّيَ إِلاَّ أَن يُهْدَى فَمَا لَكُمْ كَيْفَ تَحْكُمُونَ
</p>

***“Is He then Who guides to the truth more worthy to be followed, or he
who himself does not go aright unless he is guided? What then is the
matter with you; how do you judge?” (Surah Yunus 10:35)***

**51-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Ali
bin Hasan Taimili from Muhammad bin Umar bin Yazid and Muhammad bin
Walid bin Khalid Khazzaz from Hammad bin Isa from Abdullah bin Sinan
that he said:

A caller from the heavens will call out: “So-and-so the son of so-and-so
is the man of this matter. Then what is the fight for?”

**52-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Abu Sulaiman Ahmad bin
Hauza Bahili who in turn narrates from Ibrahim bin Ishaq in Nahawand
(273 A.H.) from Abdullah bin Hammad Ansari in Ramadhan of 229 A.H. from
Abdullah bin Sinan that Abu Abdullah Imam Sadiq (a.s.) had said:

“This matter, which you stretch your necks to, will not be until a
caller from the heavens calls: “So-and-so is the man of this matter so
what is this fighting for?”

**53-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from
Muhammad bin Mufaddal and Sadan bin Ishaq and Ahmad bin Husain and
Muhammad bin Ahmad together from Hasan bin Mahbub from Abdullah bin
Sinan that he said: I heard Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) say:

“Death and killing will spread among people until they resort to the
Kaaba. Then a caller (from the heaven) will call out when fighting and
killing become so violent) What are all these fights and killings for?
Your man is so-and-so.”

**54-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Hamam
from Fazari from Ashari from Muhammad bin Sinan from Yunus bin Zabyan
from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“When the night of Friday comes, Allah sends down an angel to the lower
heaven. When dawn comes, the angel sits on a throne on the House (the
Kaaba) and sets pulpits of light for Muhammad, Ali, Hasan and Husain
(peace be upon them). They ascend the pulpits. The angels, the prophets
and the believers are invited to gather before them. The gates of the
heavens are opened. When the sun declines, the Prophet (s.a.w.s.) says:
“O my Lord, carry out Your promise that You have promised of in Your
Book by this verse:

<p dir="rtl">
وَعَدَ اللَّهُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا مِنكُمْ وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ
لَيَسْتَخْلِفَنَّهُم فِي الْأَرْضِ كَمَا اسْتَخْلَفَ الَّذِينَ مِن
قَبْلِهِمْ وَلَيُمَكِّنَنَّ لَهُمْ دِينَهُمُ الَّذِي ارْتَضَى لَهُمْ
وَلَيُبَدِّلَنَّهُم مِّن بَعْدِ خَوْفِهِمْ أَمْنًا
</p>

***“Allah has promised to those of you who believe and do good that He
will most certainly make them rulers in the earth as He made rulers
those before them, and that He will most certainly establish for them
their religion which He has chosen for them, and that He will most
certainly, after their fear, give them security in exchange…” (Surah Nur
24:55)***

The angels and the prophets say the same thing. Then Muhammad, Ali,
Hasan and Husain prostrate themselves and pray to Allah: “O our Lord,
avenge! Your sanctum has been dishonored, Your choice have been killed
and Your faithful slaves have been degraded.” Then Allah does as He
wills and that will be a great day.”

**55-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ahmad bin Hawza from
Ibrahim bin Ishaq from Abdullah bin Hammad from Abu Basir from Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“A caller (from the heavens) will call out the name of the Qaim: O you
the son of so-and-so, get up!”

**56-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from the same chains from
Abu Basir from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“The Qaim will appear on the day of Ashura.”

**57-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from
Muhammad bin Mufaddal and Sadan bin Ishaq and Ahmad bin Husain bin Abdul
Malik and Muhammad bin Ahmad together from Ibne Mahbub from Yaqub Sarraj
from Jabir Jofi that Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) said:

“O Jabir, the Qaim will not appear until the people of Shaam will be
afflicted with a sedition, from which they try their best to be free but
they cannot; a terrible killing will occur between Kufa and Heera and a
call that will come from the heavens.”

**58-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** From the same chains, it is narrated from
Ibne Mahbub from Alaa from Muhammad from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that
he said:

“Expect the cry to come to you surprisingly from the direction of
Damascus. Then the great deliverance will come to you.”

**59-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Ali
bin Hasan Taimili from Hasan bin Ali bin Yusuf from his father and
Muhammad bin Ali from his father from Ahmad bin Umar Halabi from Hamza
bin Humran from Ibne Abu Yafur that Abu Abdullah Imam Sadiq (a.s.) had
said:

“The Qaim (a.s.) will rule for nineteen years and some months.”

**60-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Abu Sulaiman bin Hawza
Nahawandi from Abdullah bin Hammad Ansari from Ibne Abu Yafur that he
said:

“Our Qaim will rule for nineteen years and some months.”

**61-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from
Muhammad bin Mufaddal bin Ibrahim and Sadan bin Ishaq Ibne Saeed and
Ahmad bin Husain bin Abdul Malik and Muhammad bin Ahmad bin Husain from
Ibne Mahbub from Amr bin Thabit from Jabir bin Yazid Jofi that he said:

“I heard Abu Ja’far Baqir (a.s.) say: “By Allah, a man from us, Ahlul
Bayt, will rule for three hundred and thirteen years and then for other
nine years.” I asked him: “When will that be?” He said: “After the death
of the Qaim (a.s.).” I said: “How long will the Qaim rule until he
dies?” He said: “It will be nineteen years since his rising until the
day of his death.”

**62-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Ahmad from
Ubaidullah bin Musa from some of his associates from Ahmad bin Hasan
from his father from Ahmad bin Umar bin Saeed from Hamza bin Humran from
Ibne Abu Yafur from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“Indeed the Qaim (a.s.) will rule from nineteen years and some months.”

**63-** ***Al-Kafi:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Yahya etc. from
Muhammad bin Ahmad from Musa bin Umar from Muhammad bin Sinan from Abu
Saeed Qummat from Bukair bin Ayyan that he said:

“I asked Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.): Why is the Hajar Aswad placed at that
particular pillar of Kaaba and why it was not placed at another pillar?

He replied: The Almighty Allah has placed it there, it is in fact a
stone that the Almighty Allah had sent to Adam (a.s.) in Paradise and
because of

the renewal of covenant it was placed near that pillar. Because when the
Almighty Allah took covenant from human beings when they were in the
loins of their progenitors it was taken at this same place. And on this
same spot a bird will descend for Imam Qaim (a.s.) and will be the first
to pledge allegiance for him and by Allah, he will be Jibraeel and on
the same spot Imam Qaim would stand resting his back. And it is a proof
for Imam Qaim (a.s.).”

**64-** ***Al-Kafi:*** It is narrated from Abu Ali Ashari from Muhammad
bin Abdul Jabbar from Ibne Faddal and Hajjal together from Thalaba from
Abdur Rahman Muslima Jareeri that he said:

“I said to Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (a.s.): “Some people blame us and ask
how the truthful call is distinguished from the false one when they both
occur?”

He said: “What do you answer them?” I said: “Nothing.”

He said: “Say to them: He, who has believed in them before they occur,
will know which of them is true and which is false. Allah has said:

<p dir="rtl">
أَفَمَن يَهْدِي إِلَى الْحَقِّ أَحَقُّ أَن يُتَّبَعَ أَمَّن لاَّ
يَهِدِّيَ إِلاَّ أَن يُهْدَى فَمَا لَكُمْ كَيْفَ تَحْكُمُونَ
</p>

***“Is He then Who guides to the truth more worthy to be followed, or he
who himself does not go aright unless he is guided? What then is the
matter with you; how do you judge?” (Surah Yunus 10:35)***

**65-** ***Al-Kafi:*** It is narrated from Ali from his father from Ibne
Abi Najran etc. from Ismail bin Sabah that he said: I heard a person
narrate that Saif bin Umaira said:

“I was with Abu Dawaniq when he began to speak of his own accord: O Saif
bin Umaira, it is inevitable that the name of a man from the descendants
of Abu Talib will be announced from the sky.

I asked: Has someone reported a tradition about it?

He replied: By the one in whose control my life is, I have directly
heard that an announcement will be made from the sky in the name of a
person.

I said: O chief of believers, but I have never heard any such report?

He replied: O Saif, when there is such an announcement, I will be the
first to harken to it, except that it would be in favor of one of my
cousins.

I asked: Which cousins.

Mansur said: From the descendants of Lady Fatima (s.a.).

Then he said: O Saif, if I had not heard this from Abu Ja’far Muhammad
bin Ali (a.s.) I would not have believed it even if the whole world had
stated thus.”

**66-** ***Al-Kafi:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Yahya from Ahmad
bin Muhammad from Ibne Mahbub from Yaqub Sarraj that he said to Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.):

“I asked Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (a.s.): “When will the deliverance of
your Shia be?”

He said: “If the Abbasids disagree, their rule will become weak, those
who have never thought of the rule, will seize the opportunity to gain
their (the Abbasids’) rule, the Arabs will become uncontrolled, Sufyani
will rise, Yamani will come with his army, Hasani will move with his
troops and then the Qaim will appear in Medina and move towards Mecca
with the heritage

of the Prophet (s.a.w.s.). I asked: “What is the heritage of the Prophet
(s.a.w.s.)?” He said: “The heritage of the Prophet (s.a.w.s.) is his
sword, armor, turban, garment, banner, stick, horse and saddle.” Then he
added:…until he (the Qaim) stops at the outskirt of Mecca. He will take
the sword out of its sheath, put on the armor, spread the banner and the
garment, put on the turban, hold the stick and will ask Allah for
permission to appear. He will inform some of his guardians of that. He
will go to inform Hasani. Immediately Hasani will rise but the people of
Mecca will kill him and send his head to Shaam. Then the Qaim will
appear. People will pay allegiance to him and follow him. The ruler of
Shaam then will send an army to Medina but the will of Allah will make
them perish before reaching Medina. Then all of Ali’s progeny in Medina
will flee to Mecca and join the Qaim. The Qaim will move towards Iraq
and send an army towards Medina ordering its people to go back to it.”

**67-** ***Al-Kafi:*** It is narrated from Ali from his father from
Safwan bin Yahya from Ais bin Qasim from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that
he said:

“Fear the Almighty Allah who has no partner and beware of your selfish
desires.

By Allah, if one of you had two souls, it would have fought against
another and experienced what happens after being killed and would have
retained the other soul and acted according to that experience, but you
have only one soul, if you lose it, you will also lose the opportunity
of repentance; therefore you are most eligible to see what you choose
for yourself and if one of us stages an uprising, you should consider
what is the aim of your uprising and do not say: Zaid had staged an
uprising, because he was a scholar and he had a clear conscience. He had
not called for his own self; he had only called you to the obedience of
Aale Muhammad (a.s.).

Now the one who is rising from among us[^6] ; tell me to what is he
calling? Is he calling to the obedience of Aale Muhammad (a.s.)? Then
know that, we testify that we are not pleased at this. He is not obeying
us. There is no one with him and no matter with how many flags someone
from us may arise, he is not eligible that he should be obeyed, except
one on whom all the descendants of Fatima have consensus. By Allah, your
Sahibul Amr will be the one on whom all the descendants of Fatima have
consensus. Thus when it is the month of Rajab, you should march out in
the name of Allah and if you want to delay it, there is no harm in
delaying it till Shaban and if you want to keep fasts at home, perhaps
in my view, it is better for you and the coming of Sufyani is a
sufficient sign of reappearance for you.”

**68-** ***Al-Kafi:*** It is narrated from Ali from his father from
Hammad bin Isa from Rabai directly from Imam Ali bin Husain (a.s.) that
he said:

“By Allah, anyone who stages an uprising from among us before the
reappearance of the Qaim, will be like the young one of a bird who
leaves the nest before his wings are strong, who is captured by children
that they may play with him.”

**69-** ***Al-Kafi:*** It is narrated from some scholars from Ahmad bin
Muhammad from Ibne Isa from Bakar bin Muhammad from Sudair from Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“O Sudair, stay in your houses and remain quiet till these days and
night are quiet. But when you learn about the advent of Sufyani, you
should come to us immediately even if you have to come walking.”

70- Taraif:

“It is narrated that a voice will call out from the sky in the name of
Mahdi that his obedience is obligatory.”

This traditional report is mentioned by Ahmad bin Manadi in*Malahim,*
Hafiz Abu Naeem in*Akhbarul Mahdi,* Ibne Shiruwayh Dailami in*Firdosul
Akhbar* and Hafiz Abul Alaa in*Kitabul Fitan* .

**71-** ***Al-Kafi:*** It is narrated from some scholars from Sahl from
Ibne Faddal from Thalaba from Tayyar from Abu Abdullah (a.s.) regarding
the words of the Almighty Allah:

<p dir="rtl">
سَنُرِيهِمْ آيَاتِنَا فِي الْآفَاقِ وَفِي أَنفُسِهِمْ حَتَّى يَتَبَيَّنَ
لَهُمْ أَنَّهُ الْحَقُّ
</p>

***“We will soon show them Our signs in the Universe and in their own
souls, until it will become quite clear to them that it is the truth. Is
it not sufficient as regards your Lord that He is a witness over all
things?” (Surah Fussilat 41:53)***

That the Imam (a.s.) said: “It means sinking of the ground,
transmogrification (of a person) and raining of stones.”

I asked: “What is the meaning of: until it will become quite clear to
them?”

He replied: “Leave it, it is about the reappearance of Imam Qaim
(a.s.).”

**72-** ***Kifayatul Athar:*** It is narrated from Abul Mufaddal
Shaibani from Kulaini from Muhammad Attar from Salma Ibnul Khattab from
Muhammad Tayalisi from Ibne Abi Umaira and Salih bin Uqbah together from
Al-Qama bin Muhammad Hadhrami from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he
narrated from his forefathers from Imam Ali (a.s.): The Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.s.) said:

“O Ali, when our Qaim reappears, 313 persons will join him and when it
is the time of uprising, his sword will come out of the cover
automatically and call out: O Wali of Allah, arise and eliminate the
enemies of Allah.”

**73-** ***Ikhtisaas:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Maqil
Qarmisini from Muhammad bin Asim from Ali bin Husain from Muhammad bin
Marzuq from Aamir Sarraj from Sufyan Thawri from Qais bin Muslim from
Tariq bin Shahab from Huzaifah that he said: I heard the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.s.) say:

“When it will be the time of the reappearance of the Qaim, a caller will
call out from the sky: O people, now the time of domination of the
oppressors is over; now the best of the Ummah of Muhammad is your ruler;
go and meet him in Mecca.”

Upon hearing this voice the nobles of Egypt, the key persons of Shaam
and the royals of Iraq will come out. They will be humble worshipper of
the Almighty Allah at night and brave lions during the day. Their hearts
will be like iron ingots and they will come to Mecca and pledge
allegiance to Imam Mahdi (a.s.) between Rukn and Maqam.

Imran bin Husain asked: O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.), please tell us
something about that man (*Sahibul Amr* ).

He said: He would be from the descendants of Imam Husain (a.s.). His
name will be same as mine. After his reappearance birds will reproduce
in abundance, fishes in the seas will breed in abundance, the water will
surge and springs will burst forth everywhere, the earth will vegetate
more than is required. When he moves, he will be preceded by Jibraeel
and Israfeel will follow him and he would fill up the earth with justice
and equity like it would have been fraught with injustice and
oppression.”

**74-** ***Al-Kafi:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Yahya from Ibne
Isa from Ali bin Hakam from Abu Ayyub Khazzaz from Umar bin Hanzala that
he said: I heard Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) say:

“Five signs will appear before the rising of the Qaim: Call from the
sky, Sufyani, splitting of the earth, killing of Nafse Zakiyya and the
advent of Yamani.”

I asked: May I be your ransom, if someone from your Ahle Bayt (a.s.)
stages an uprising before these signs, are we supposed to support him?

He replied: No.

Then on the next day I recited the following verse:

<p dir="rtl">
إِن نَّشَأْ نُنَزِّلْ عَلَيْهِم مِّن السَّمَاء آيَةً فَظَلَّتْ
أَعْنَاقُهُمْ لَهَا خَاضِعِينَ
</p>

***“If We please, We should send down upon them a sign from the heaven
so that their necks should stoop to it.” (Surah Shoara 26:4)***

And asked if it denoted the call from the sky?

He replied: Yes, although it would cause the necks of the enemies of
Allah to stoop.”

**75-** ***Al-Kafi:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Yahya bin Ahmad
bin Muhammad from Ibne Faddal from Abi Jamila from Muhammad bin Ali
Halabi that he said: I heard Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) say:

“Mutual discord in Bani Abbas is inevitable, call from the sky is
inevitable and the reappearance of Imam Qaim (a.s.) is inevitable.”

I asked: What would that call be?

He replied: A caller will call out in the morning: Know that Ali and his
Shia are successful.

And in the evening a call will say: Know that Uthman and his followers
are successful.”

**76-** Sayyid Ali bin Abdul Hamid has narrated through his chains from
Ahmad bin Muhammad Ayyadi directly from Abdullah bin Ajlan that he said:
We mentioned the advent of the Qaim in the presence of Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) and asked:

“How would we come to know that he has reappeared?

He replied: When you rise up in the morning, a slip of paper will come
out from below your pillow on which would be written: It is best to obey
him.”

**77-** It is narrated from his chains from the book of Fazl bin Shazan
that it will be written on the flag of Imam Mahdi (a.s.):

**“Listen and obey.”**

**78- It is narrated from his chains from Fazl from Ibne Mahbub directly
from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said about the sinking of the
army of Sufyani:**

“On that day, the Qaim will be in Mecca leaning his back against the
Kaaba. He will announce: “O people, we resort to Allah to make us
succeed. Whoever of you wants to support us, let him join us. We are the
progeny of your Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.s.). We are worthier of Allah
and Muhammad than other people. Whoever argues with me about Adam, I am
the worthiest of Adam. Whoever argues with me about Nuh, I am the
worthiest of Nuh. Whoever argues with me about Ibrahim, I am the
worthiest of Ibrahim. Whoever argues with me about Muhammad (s.a.w.s.),
I am the worthiest of Muhammad (s.a.w.s.). Whoever argues with me about
the prophets, I am the worthiest of the prophets.

Has Allah not said in his Book:

إِنَّ اللّهَ اصْطَفَى آدَمَ وَنُوحًا وَآلَ إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَآلَ عِمْرَانَ
عَلَى الْعَالَمِينَ {33} ذُرِّيَّةً بَعْضُهَا مِن بَعْضٍ وَاللّهُ
سَمِيعٌ عَلِيمٌ

***“Surely Allah chose Adam and Nuh and the descendants of Ibrahim and
the descendants of Imran above the nations; offspring one of the other;
and Allah is Hearing, Knowing?” (Surah Aale Imran 3:33-34)***

I am a remainder of Adam, a relic of Nuh, elite of Ibrahim and a choice
of Muhammad, peace be upon them all. Whoever argues with me about the
Book of Allah, I am the worthiest of the book of Allah. Whoever argues
with me about the Sunnah of the Messenger of Allah, I am the worthiest
of the Sunnah of the Messenger of Allah.

I adjure everyone, who hears my speech today, to inform the absent of
it.

Allah will make his (the Mahdi’s) three hundred and thirteen companions
join him without any previous appointment. O Jabir, it is the verse that
Allah has revealed in His Book:

<p dir="rtl">
أَيْنَ مَا تَكُونُواْ يَأْتِ بِكُمُ اللّهُ جَمِيعًا
</p>

***“Wherever you are, Allah will bring you all together.” (Surah Baqarah
2:148)***

People will pay allegiance to him between Rukn and Maqam. With him will
be relics of the Prophet (s.a.w.s.) that are inherited by the
descendants; one after the other. If people doubt all that, let them not
doubt his descending from the Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and his inheriting
knowledge from the Scholars (the infallible Imams) one after the other.
If all these things become confusing to them, then the call that will
come from the heavens and will call out his name and his father’s names
certainly will not be confusing to them at all.”

**79-** It is narrated from the same chains directly from His Eminence,
Ali Ibnul Husain (a.s.) that he said regarding Imam Qaim (a.s.):

“Then they would sit under the common locust-tree; Jibraeel would come
to him in the form of a man from Kalb tribe and say: O servant of Allah,
why are you sitting here? He would reply: I am waiting for the night so
that I may move to Mecca and I don’t like setting out in this hot
weather. Then Jibraeel would smile and when he smiles, His Eminence
would recognize him that he is Jibraeel. Then Jibraeel would take his
hand and do*Musafeha* (handshake) with him, salute him and say: Arise, I
have brought a steed for you called Buraq. So His Eminence would mount
it and reach mount Razva.

At that time His Eminence, Muhammad and His Eminence, Ali (a.s.) would
arrive and write for him a long proclamation that may be read out to the
people. Then he would come out to Mecca where people would be gathered.
Imam Sajjad (a.s.) said: Then a man would come forward to His Eminence
and call out: O people this is one you were in anticipation of, He is
calling to the same thing that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) was calling
for. Then they would arise from their place. Then His Eminence would
himself arise and say: O people, I am so-and-so son of so-and-so. I am
the son of Prophet of Allah. I am calling you to that to which the
Prophet of Allah called.

Then some people would get up to kill him, and three hundred or three
hundred and odd persons would get up and prevent them from this. Fifty
persons from Kufa and the rest from other people would not recognize
each other and would have gathered there without prior decision.”

**80-** It is narrated from the same chains directly from Abu Basir from
Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said:

“From this day, Imam Qaim (a.s.) will wait in Zeetuwa with his three
hundred and thirteen companions, then he will stand with his back to
Hajar Aswad and wave his flag.”

**81-** It is narrated from the same chains directly from Abu Basir from
Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said in a lengthy tradition:

“Imam Qaim (a.s.) will address his men: O people, these Meccans are not
willing to submit, but I will send an envoy to them to exhaust the
argument on them.

Then he will call one of his men and say: Go to the Meccans and say: I
am the envoy of so-and-so who says: I am the Ahle Bayt of mercy and the
mine of prophethood and caliphate. I am the essence of the progeny of
Muhammad and other prophets. Since our Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) passed
away, we have been continuously oppressed. We have been suppressed and
our rights were trespassed. We seek help from you, please help us.

When the envoy conveys this message, they will apprehend and slaughter
him between Rukn and Maqam and he is the same Nafse Zakiyya. When this
news reaches Imam Qaim (a.s.) he would tell his men: Did I not say that
these Meccans will not accept us? Then he would take 313 men and descend
from the Tawa pass and reach the Sacred Mosque. He will pray four units
of prayers at Maqam Ibrahim and then leaning on Hajar Aswad, would
praise and glorify the Almighty. He will mention the name of the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) and invoke blessings on him. Then he would
deliver a sermon none has delivered before.

After this sermon, the first to pledge allegiance to him would be
Jibraeel followed by Mikaeel. And along with them the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.) and Amirul Momineen (a.s.) will also arise. The Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) would give a new book to Imam Qaim (a.s.), which would be
very tough on the Arabs and it would bear a fresh seal. He will say to
the Qaim: Act according to whatever is mentioned therein. Then 300 of
his men and some people from Mecca will pledge allegiance to him.

When he sets out from Mecca, he would be within a circle.

I asked: What is a circle?

He replied: It would consist of ten thousand men. Jibraeel will be on
the right and Mikaeel on the left. Then he would wave his majestic
standard. It would be the standard of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and
which is named Sahaba. He would wear the coat of mail and tie up the
Zulfiqar to his waist.”

It is mentioned in another traditional report that some people from
every city will accompany him except from Basra.

**82-** It is narrated from the same chains directly from Fudhail bin
Yasar from Abu Abdullah (a.s.) that he said:

“There will be some men whose hearts will be as strong as iron and who
will not have an iota of doubt and regarding their faith in Allah, they
shall be as solid as rocks. They shall be so valiant that if they were
to attack mountains, they could move them from their place. And to
whichever area they turn they shall destroy it and for seeking blessings
and to create courage in the hearts they will keep kissing the saddle of
Imam Qaim (a.s.). They shall be right upto the expectations of the Imam.

They shall be men that do not sleep at night. They shall be busy all
night in prayers. The sound of them reciting the Quran will seem like
humming of the bees. They shall spend the night standing and in the
morning mount their horses. In the night they will be like monks and
ascetics and in the day they shall be like ferocious lions. They shall
be more obedient to their Imam than a slave girl is to her master. Their
hearts (from the aspect of faith) will be like lanterns in which the
flame is lighted. They shall be fearful of Allah. They shall invite
towards martyrdom. They shall be eager to be killed in the way of God.
Their slogan shall be:*Yaa Tharatal Husain!* That is: “Revenge of the
blood of Husain!” When they march, their awe shall precede them for a
distance of one months travel (far away). It is through them that Allah
will help the true Imam.”

**83-** It is narrated from the chains of Kabuli from Imam Muhammad
Baqir (a.s.) that he said:

“In Mecca, allegiance will be given to Imam Qaim (a.s.) on the Book of
Allah and the Sunnah of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.). Then he would
appoint a deputy in Mecca and move to Medina. On the way, he would
receive information that his appointee has been assassinated. He will
return to Mecca and eliminate his killers. Then on the way from Mecca to
Medina he will call the people to the Book of Allah, to the Sunnah of
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.), Wilayat of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and
dissociation from his enemies till he reaches Baidha. The army of
Sufyani will come out to confront him and it will sink in the desert.

It is mentioned in another traditional reports that he would go to
Medina and live there for some days and then move to Kufa appointing a
deputy in Medina. When he reaches Shafra, the people of Medina will
receive a letter from Sufyani: If you don’t eliminate his deputy, we
would slay you all and take your families as prisoners. So the people of
Medina will murder his deputy.

When he gets this information, he would return and slaughter them and
Quraish so much that they would be reduced to straw. After that he would
appoint another deputy and march to Kufa and camp in Najaf Ashraf.”

**84-** It is narrated from Shaykh Ahmad bin Fahad in*Al-Muhazzib* and
others have narrated from Mualla bin Khunais from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) that he said:

“The day of Navroz is the day when the Qaim and Wali Amr of us, Ahle
Bayt (a.s.) will reappear and the Almighty Allah will make him
victorious over Dajjal and he will impale Dajjal at Kinasa in Kufa. We
expect deliverance every year on Navroz, as it is our day, which the
people of Fars have preserved, but you have wasted it.”


