32
==

Chapter Thirty-Two: Companions of Imam Zamana (a.s.)
====================================================

<p dir="rtl">
هَارُونُ عَنِ ابْنِ زِيَادٍ عَنْ جَعْفَرٍ عَنْ أَبِيهِ ع قَالَ إِذَا
قَامَ قَائِمُنَا اضْمَحَلَّتِ الْقَطَائِعُ فَلَا قَطَائِعَ
</p>

**1-** ***Qurbul Asnad:*** It is narrated from Harun from Ibne Ziyad
from Ja’far from his father (a.s.) that he said:

“When our Qaim arises, he will completely eradicate the feudal system.”

**2-** ***Al-Khisaal:*** It is narrated from Ibne Musa from Hamza bin
Qasim from Muhammad bin Abdullah bin Imran from Muhammad bin Ali
Hamadani from Ali bin Abu Hamza from his father from Abu Abdullah (a.s.)
from Abul Hasan (a.s.) that he said:

“When the Qaim arises, he will issue three decrees which no one has
issued before him. He will order the aged fornicator to be killed; order
that anyone who refuses to pay Zakat should be killed; and allow
inheritance between brothers in faith.”

**3-** ***Al-Khisaal:*** My father has narrated from Saad from Ibne
Yazid from Musab bin Yazid from Awwam Abu Zubair that he said: Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said:

“The Qaim shall come with forty-five men who are from nine tribes. There
will be one from one tribe, two from a second tribe, three from a third
tribe, four from a fourth tribe, five from a fifth tribe, six from a
sixth tribe, seven from a seventh tribe, eight from an eighth tribe and
nine from a ninth tribe, which add up to forty-five.”

**4-** ***Uyun Akhbar Reza:*** It is narrated from Ahmad bin Thabit
Dawalibi from Muhammad bin Ali bin Abdus Samad from Ali bin Asim from
Abu Ja’far the second, Imam Ali Naqi (a.s.), from his forefathers that
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) described the Qaim to Ubayy bin Kaab
thus:

“Indeed the Almighty Allah has placed in the loins of Imam Hasan Askari
(a.s.) a blessed and pure seed, which would be valued by all those from
whom Allah has taken the covenant of faith. And who would be denied by
every disbeliever. He would be an Imam. He will be pious and purified.
He will be satisfied at divine will and he will be the guided and the
guide. He would rule with justice and establish equity. He would testify
to the saying of the Almighty Allah. Allah would actualize his
statement.

He would rise up from Tahama[^7] at a time when all the signs of his
reappearance would have appeared. He would be having treasures, but not
of gold and silver; he would have elegant horses and signed riders who
would number 313 equal to the fighters of the Battle of Badr.

That Imam would have a sealed scroll which would have the names of his
men, along with their nationalities and patronymics etc. They will be
very much devoted to their Imam.

Ubayy asked: O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.), what are the evidences and
signs of that Imam?

The Prophet replied: He would have a standard. When it is time for his
uprising, it would unfurl automatically and the Almighty Allah would
grant to it the power of speech and it would say: O Wali of Allah, arise
and eliminate the enemies of Allah.

These were two signs (unfurling of the standard and talking to the
Imam).

Now his sword would be in the sheath, but when it is the time of his
advent; it would also come out of the sheath and the Almighty Allah
would give it power of speech. It will address the Imam as follows: O
Wali of Allah, arise. Now it is not allowed for you to sit without
confronting the enemies of Allah.

The Imam will set out with the standard and the sword and he would slay
the enemies of Allah wherever he finds them. He would establish the
divine limits, apply the divine laws, Jibraeel will be on his right and
Mikaeel on the left. Remember what I have told you. I entrust my matter
to the Almighty Allah.

O Ubayy, fortunate is the one who would meet that Imam, lucky is one who
would be devoted to him and auspicious is one who would have faith in
his Imamate. He would remain safe from destruction and because of his
faith in Allah and His Messenger, the Almighty Allah will open the doors
of Paradise for him. His example on the earth would be like that of musk
whose fragrance spreads everywhere and on the heavens his example is
that of a shining moon whose light never wanes or goes out.

Ubayy said: O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.), please mention some
qualities of those Imams.

He said: The Almighty Allah has revealed twelve scrolls to me and at the
end of each of them is mentioned their respective qualities and names.”

**5-** ***Ilalush Sharai*** **&** ***Uyun Akhbar Reza:*** It is narrated
from Ibne Saeed Hashmi from Furat from Muhammad bin Ahmad Hamadani from
Abbas bin Abdullah Bukhari from Muhammad bin Qasim bin Ibrahim from
Harawi from Imam Ali Reza (a.s.) that he narrated from his forefathers
(a.s.) that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said:

“When I was taken up to the heavens in Meraj, I was called. I said:
“Yes, my Lord, You are blessed and high.” Then I was called again: O
Muhammad, You are My servant and I am your Lord. Then worship Me and
rely on Me. You are My Light among My creatures, and My proof among the
people. I have created Paradise for you and your followers and created
Hell for those who oppose you. I have made it incumbent to honor your
Trustees and have assured reward for their followers.”

Then I asked: “O Lord, who are my trustees? I was told, “O Muhammad, the
names of your trustees are recorded on the base of My Throne.” When I
was in front of my Lord - the Exalted the Magnificent - I looked at the
base of the Throne and saw twelve Lights. Over each Light there was a
green line on which the name of one of my Trustees was written. The
first of them was Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.). The last one was the Mahdi
of my nation. Then I asked: “O Lord, are these the trustees after me?” I
was told, “O Muhammad, they are My Trustees, loved ones, chosen ones and
proofs from My creatures after you. They are your Trustees and
successors and are the best

of the people after you. I swear by My honor and majesty that I will
make My religion victorious by means of them. I will announce My word by
them. I will cleanse the earth from My enemies by the last one of them
(Imam Mahdi). I will rule the east and the west of the earth by him. I
will make the winds subdued to him. I will debase tough clouds for him.
I will raise him up to the heavens and assist him with My Troops. I will
assist him with the angels so that he propagates My invitation and
unites the people concerning My Unity. Then I will extend his rule and
continue the times under the control of My friends until Judgment Day.”

**6-** ***Ilalush Sharai*** **&** ***Uyun Akhbar Reza:*** It is narrated
from Hamadani from Ali from his father from Harawi that he asked from
Imam Ali Reza (a.s.) about the saying of Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) in
which he said:

“O son of Allah’s Messenger, what is your opinion about the following
tradition narrated on the authority of Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that:
When the riser comes, he would kill the offspring of Imam Husain’s
murderers? The Imam said: That is right. Then I asked: Then what is the
meaning of the following, which the Almighty Allah has said:

<p dir="rtl">
كُلُّ نَفْسٍ إِلاَّ عَلَيْهَا وَلاَ تَزِرُ وَازِرَةٌ وِزْرَ أُخْرَى
</p>

***“…and no soul earns (evil) but against itself, and no bearer of
burden shall bear the burden of another…” (Surah Anam 6:164)***

The Imam said: “Allah is honest in all what he says. However the
offspring of the murderers of Husain will even be pleased with the deeds
of their forefathers. They will be even proud of it. Whoever is pleased
with something is like one who has actually performed it. If someone
gets killed in the east and someone else in the west is pleased that he
was killed, then he will be considered to be a partner in that crime in
the sight of the Almighty Allah. The Qaim will kill them for being
pleased with their forefathers’ murders when he rises. I asked: “What
will the Qaim who is from you do first when he rises?” The Imam said:
“At first he will cut off the hands of the descendants of Shaibah since
they are the thieves of the House of the Almighty Allah.”

**7-** ***Basairud Darajaat:*** It is narrated from Hamza bin Yaala from
Muhammad bin Fudail from Rabai from Rafid, the freed slave of Ibne
Hubaira that he said:

“I asked Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.): O son of Allah’s Messenger, would
Imam Qaim (a.s.) also deal with the people of Sawad like Amirul Momineen
Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.)?

He replied: No, O Rafid, Imam Ali (a.s.) dealt with the people of Sawad
in the manner that is mentioned in the White Jafr (scroll). Imam Qaim
(a.s.) will deal with the Arabs according to the treatment mentioned in
the red scroll.

I asked: May I be your ransom, what is the red scroll?

In reply he gestured with his finger on his neck (implying that he will
eliminate them).”

**8-** ***Ilalush Sharai:*** My father and Walid have together narrated
from Saad from Barqi from Abu Zuhair Shabib bin Anas from some
companions of Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that:

“Once when Abu Hanifah came to the Imam, he asked: What is the meaning
of the words of Allah:

<p dir="rtl">
سِيرُوا فِيهَا لَيَالِيَ وَأَيَّامًا آمِنِينَ
</p>

***“Travel through them nights and days, secure.” (Surah Saba 34:18)***

Then the Imam asked: What is the location of that place?

Abu Hanifah said: I think it is between Mecca and Medina, where people
travel in safety.

Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) turned to his companions and said: You also
know that people are robbed on the way between Mecca and Medina and
their lives are also in danger. Some are even killed there.

Companions said: True, this happens regularly.

Abu Hanifah fell silent and then Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) asked once
more: O Abu Hanifah, what is the meaning of the following verse:

<p dir="rtl">
وَمَن دَخَلَهُ كَانَ آمِنًا
</p>

***“…and whoever enters it shall be secure…” (Surah Aale Imran 3:97)***

And what place is that?

Abu Hanifah replied: Holy Kaaba.

Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said: Do you know when Abdullah bin Zubair took
refuge in Holy Kaaba, Hajjaj bin Yusuf used catapults to throw rocks to
desecrate the Kaaba and eliminated Ibne Zubair. Did he get refuge there?

Abu Hanifah fell silent and when he went away from there, Abu Bakr
Hadhrami asked: May I be your ransom, what is the explanation of these
two problems.

Imam (a.s.) replied: O Abu Bakr, one who travels with the Qaim of us,
Ahle Bayt (a.s.) would be secure. And one who pays allegiance to him and
enter his circle and join his companions would be secure.”

**9-** ***Ilalush Sharai:*** Shaykh Sadooq has narrated from Majiluwayh
from his uncle from Barqi from his father from Muhammad bin Sulaiman
from Dawood bin Noman from Abdur Rahim Qasir that Imam Baqir (a.s.)
said:

“When the Qaim rises, Humaira will be brought to him (after being raised
from the dead), so that he may punish her with lashes to avenge for
Fatima, the daughter of Muhammad (s.a.w.s.).” I asked why he would
punish her with lashes? He replied, “Due to the false allegation she
made against Ibrahim’s mother.” I asked: How is it that the Almighty
Allah postponed this matter of (punishment by lashing) till the time of
Hazrat Qaim? He said: The Almighty Allah, blessed be He, sent Muhammad
(s.a.w.s.) as a mercy, but He has created Qaim (a.s.) for punishing and
taking revenge.”

**10-** ***Tafsir Qummi:*** My father has narrated from Ibne Abu Umair
from Mansur bin Yunus from Abu Khalid Kabuli that Imam Muhammad Baqir
(a.s.) said:

“By Allah, as if I can see Imam Qaim leaning his back against Hajar
Aswad and adjuring people in the name of Allah and saying:

“O people, Whoever argues with me about Allah, I am the worthiest for
Allah. Whoever argues with me about Adam, I am the worthiest of Adam.
Whoever argues with me about Nuh, I am the worthiest of Nuh. Whoever
argues with me about Ibrahim, I am the worthiest of Ibrahim. Whoever

argues with me about Musa, I am the worthiest of Musa. Whoever argues
with me about Isa, I am the worthiest of Isa. Whoever argues with me
about Muhammad (s.a.w.s.), I am the worthiest of Muhammad (s.a.w.s.).
Whoever argues with me about the Book of the Almighty Allah, I am the
worthiest of the Book of Allah.”

After that he will go to the Place of Ibrahim and pray two units of
prayer and adjure the people in the name of Allah.

Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) then said:

<p dir="rtl">
أَمَّن يُجِيبُ الْمُضْطَرَّ إِذَا دَعَاهُ وَيَكْشِفُ السُّوءَ
وَيَجْعَلُكُمْ خُلَفَاء الْأَرْضِ
</p>

***“Or, Who answers the distressed one when he calls upon Him and
removes the evil, and He will make you successors in the earth.” (Surah
Naml 27:62)***

In this verse, the word of ‘distressed’ denotes Imam Qaim (a.s.).

After that first of all, Jibraeel will pledge allegiance to him followed
by three hundred and thirteen persons. Some would travel to him some
will disappear from their beds. And it is with regard to them that
Amirul Momineen (a.s.) has said: It is these who would disappear from
their beds and the Almighty Allah has said:

<p dir="rtl">
فَاسْتَبِقُواْ الْخَيْرَاتِ أَيْنَ مَا تَكُونُواْ يَأْتِ بِكُمُ اللّهُ
جَمِيعًا
</p>

***“Therefore hasten to (do) good works; wherever you are, Allah will
bring you all together.” (Surah Baqarah 2:148)***

Then he said: In this verse, ‘good works’ denotes Wilayat.

On another occasion the Almighty Allah says:

<p dir="rtl">
وَلَئِنْ أَخَّرْنَا عَنْهُمُ الْعَذَابَ إِلَى أُمَّةٍ مَّعْدُودَةٍ
</p>

***“And if We hold back from them the punishment until a stated period
of time (reappearance of Imam Zamana (a.s.))…”(Surah Hud 11:8)***

In this verse, “stated period of time” denotes the companions of Imam
Qaim (a.s.) who would join him in an hour.

When he reaches Baidha, Sufyani would launch an attack on him and at
that moment the Almighty Allah would command the earth to swallow them
all. And the army of Sufyani would sink in the desert.

It is with regard to this that the Almighty Allah has said:

<p dir="rtl">
وَلَوْ تَرَى إِذْ فَزِعُوا فَلَا فَوْتَ وَأُخِذُوا مِن مَّكَانٍ قَرِيبٍ
</p>
{51} وَقَالُوا آمَنَّا بِهِ وَأَنَّى لَهُمُ التَّنَاوُشُ مِن مَكَانٍ
بَعِيدٍ {52} وَقَدْ كَفَرُوا بِهِ مِن قَبْلُ وَيَقْذِفُونَ بِالْغَيْبِ
مِن مَّكَانٍ بَعِيدٍ {53} وَحِيلَ بَيْنَهُمْ وَبَيْنَ مَا يَشْتَهُونَ
كَمَا فُعِلَ بِأَشْيَاعِهِم مِّن قَبْلُ إِنَّهُمْ كَانُوا فِي شَكٍّ
مُّرِيبٍ

***“And could you see when they shall become terrified, but (then) there
shall be no escape and they shall be seized upon from a near place. And
they shall say: We believe in it. And how shall the attaining (of faith)
be possible to them from a distant place? And they disbelieved in it
before, and they utter conjectures with regard to the unseen from a
distant place. And a barrier shall be placed between them and that which
they desire, as***

***was done with the likes of them before: surely they are in a
disquieting doubt.” (Surah Saba 34:51-54)***

**11-** ***Al-Khisaal:*** It is narrated from Amirul Momineen (a.s.) in
the chapter of 400:

“Allah starts with us. Allah destroys by us what He wishes to destroy.
Allah establishes everything through us. Allah will fend off hard times
from you due to us. Allah will send down rain due to us. You should not
be deceived and turn away from Allah due to your pride.

There has been no drops of mercy from the heavens since the Almighty
Allah closed the gates of Paradise. Once our Qaim arises there will come
down drops of rain from the heavens; plants will grow out of the ground;
hatred will be removed from the hearts of the people; beasts and other
animals will be in peace with each other such that a woman can walk from
Iraq to Syria stepping on greenery all the way with her adornments on
and no beast would frighten her.”

**12-** ***Al-Khisaal:*** It is narrated from Ibnul Walid from Saffar
from Hasan bin Ali bin Abdullah bin Mughira from Abbas bin Aamir from
Rabi bin Thuwair bin Abu Faqta from his father from Ali bin Husain
(a.s.) that he said:

“When our Qaim arises, Allah, the Mighty and Sublime would remove the
troubles of our Shia and make their hearts like iron ingots and each of
them would become as strong as forty men and they shall become the
rulers and leaders of the earth.”

**13-** ***Qisasul Anbiya:*** It is narrated from the chains of Saduq
from Muhammad bin Ali bin Mufaddal from Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Ammar
from his father from Hamadan Qalanasi from Muhammad bin Jamhur from
Maryam bin Abdullah from Abu Basir from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he
said:

“O Abu Muhammad, as if I can see Imam Qaim (a.s.) entering Masjid Sahla
with his family members.

I asked: Would it be the residence of the Imam?

He replied: Yes, it had been the residence of Prophet Idris (a.s.) as
well. All the prophets sent by the Almighty Allah prayed in this Masjid.
One who lives in it is like one who lives in the tent of the Messenger
of Allah (s.a.w.s.). Every believer man and woman is inclined to this
Masjid. Also day and night angels visit this Masjid and pray in it. O
Abu Muhammad, if I had lived in your neighborhood, I would not have
prayed anywhere else. Thus when the Qaim will rise up, he will take
revenge from the people on behalf of Allah, the Prophet and all of us.”

**14-** ***Ilalush Sharai:*** My father has narrated from Saad from
Ahmad bin Muhammad from Ali bin Hasan Teemi from his brothers, Muhammad
and Ahmad from Ali bin Yaqub Hashmi from Marwan bin Muslim from Saeed
bin Umar Jofi from an Egyptian from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he
said:

“When the Qaim appears, he will cut off the hand of Bani Shaibah and
hang it upon the Kaaba and on it write: These are the thieves of the
Kaaba.”

**15-** ***Amali Tusi:*** It is narrated from Mufeed from Ibne Quluwayh
from Kulaini from Ali from his father from Yaqtini from Yunus from Amr
bin Shimr from Jabir from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said:

“One who lives till the time of Imam Qaim (a.s.) and dies fighting on
his side will earn the status of two martyrs and one who fights on his
side and kills even one of our opponents will earn the reward of twenty
martyrs.”

**16-** ***Adad:*** It is narrated from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that
he said:

“Indeed the Book of Allah and the Sunnah of the Prophet is so mingled in
the heart of our Qaim like a nice vegetation that has taken growth. If
one of you lives till that time and meets him, he should say:

“Peace be upon you, O Ahle Bayt of mercy and prophethood, repository of
knowledge and the site of messengership. Peace be on you, O the remnant
of Allah.”

**17-** ***Basairud Darajaat:*** It is narrated from Ahmad bin Muhammad
from Ja’far bin Muhammad Kufi from Hasan bin Hammad Tai from Saad from
Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said:

“Our traditions are not difficult, they are very difficult to understand
and not everyone can bear them. Only the proximate angel, a messenger
prophet or one whose heart Allah has tested for faith can bear them. No
one else can bear them. When our kingdom arrives and our Mahdi
reappears, each of our followers will be braver than a lion and sharper
than a spear; he will trample our enemies and give them a sound beating,
At that time divine mercy will descend and the door of deliverance will
open up for the people.”

**18-** ***Basairud Darajaat:*** It is narrated from Ahmad bin Muhammad
from Ibne Sinan from Rafid, the freed slave of Abu Hubaira from Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“O Rafid, what will be your condition when you see the companions of the
Qaim having pitched their tents in Kufa Masjid, after which the Imam
will set an example, which will be very hard on the Arabs?

I asked: May I be your ransom, what would that be?

He replied: Slaughter.

I asked: Would he not deal according to the practice of Imam Ali (a.s.)?

He replied: No, O Rafid, Imam Ali (a.s.) acted on what was mentioned in
the White scroll and it was reconciliation, although he knew what
oppressions they will wreak and his Shia after him. Imam Qaim (a.s.)
will deal with them according to what is mentioned in the Red scroll and
it is slaughter. Because he knows that now they would not be able to
oppress his Shia anymore.”

**19-** ***Basairud Darajaat:*** It is narrated from Salma bin Khattab
from Abdullah bin Muhammad from Mani bin Hajjaj Basri from Majashe from
Mualla from Muhammad bin Faiz from Muhammad bin Ali (a.s.) that he said:

“The staff of Prophet Musa (a.s.) initially belonged to Prophet Adam
(a.s.); after whom it reached to Prophet Shuaib (a.s.). After that it
came in the possession of Prophet Musa (a.s.). It is now in our
possession and it is still fresh as if it is just detached from a tree.
When it is spoken to, it responds. It is kept for our Qaim (a.s.). He
would perform all the tasks through it that Musa (a.s.) had performed.
And it would do whatever it is appointed to. When it moves forward, it
devours all the deceptions. Its two lips would be so huge that when it
opens its mouth, one lip touches the floor

and the other touches the ceiling. There is a distance of forty hands
between the two lips. It would devour anything that comes before it.”

**20-** ***Basairud Darajaat:*** It is narrated from Ibne Hashim from
Barqi from Bazanti etc. from Abu Ayyub Hazza from Abu Basir that he said
to Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.):

“O son of Allah’s Messenger, may I be your ransom it is my sincere wish
to touch your holy chest.

He said: You may do so.

After being accorded the permission I happily touched his holy chest and
shoulders.

He said: But, O Abu Muhammad, what was the need of it?

I said: May I be your ransom. I have heard your respected father say:
Imam Qaim will have a broad chest and the shoulders will be wide.

The Imam said: O Abu Muhammad, my respected father put on the armor of
the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and it dangled till the ground. After that
when I put it on, it proved the same for me as well. Now it is reserved
for Imam Qaim and it would fit him like it fitted the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.). [Moreover, I am more than forty years of age.] Whereas Imam
Qaim would not seem to be more than forty years of age.”

**21-** ***Basairud Darajaat:*** It is narrated from Abdullah bin Ja’far
from Muhammad bin Isa from Yunus from Huraiz that Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) said:

“The world will not end till a man from us, Ahle Bayt (a.s.) is not born
and he does not arise, who will judge like Prophet Dawood (a.s.) and the
progeny of Dawood (a.s.). He will not ask for evidence in any of the
cases. He will judge each case on the basis of his knowledge.”

**22-** ***Basairud Darajaat:*** It is narrated from Ahmad bin Muhammad
from Ibne Sinan from Aban from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“The world will not end till a man from us does not arise, who will rule
like the progeny of Dawood (a.s.). He will not ask for evidence in any
of the cases. He will judge each case on the basis of his knowledge.”

**23-** ***Basairud Darajaat:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Husain
from Safwan bin Yahya from Abu Khalid Qummat from Humran bin Ayyan that
he said:

I asked Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.): Are you prophets?

He replied: No. I said: But I have heard from a reliable person that you
are prophets.

He said: It must be Abul Khattab who has spread this rumor.

Yes, I said.

He said: That is why you also repeated this nonsense!

I asked: Then on what basis do you judge cases?

He replied: We judge cases on the same basis that the progeny of Dawood
(a.s.) used to judge.”

**24-** ***Basairud Darajaat:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Isa
from Muhammad bin Ismail from Mansur bin Yunus from Fudhail Awar from
Abi Ubaidah that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said:

“When the Qaim of Aale Muhammad (a.s.) arises, he will also judge
according to the judgment of Prophet Dawood and Prophet Sulaiman (a.s.)
and he will not ask for evidence.”

**25-** ***Dawaat Rawandi:*** It is narrated from Hasan bin Tareef that
he said:

“I wrote to His Eminence, Abu Muhammad Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.) asking
about the Qaim that when he rises up, on what basis would he judge among
the people? I also wanted to ask His Eminence about the cure of Nubian
fever, but I forgot to mention it. The reply arrived as follows: “You
asked about the Imam, when he reappears he would judge among the people
on the basis of his own knowledge, like Prophet Dawood (a.s.) he will
not ask for proof.”

**26-** ***Basairud Darajaat*** **&** ***Ikhtisaas:*** It is narrated
from Ibrahim bin Hashim from Sulaiman Dailami from Muawiyah Dahni from
His Eminence, Abu Abdullah Sadiq (a.s.) that he said regarding the
verse:

<p dir="rtl">
يُعْرَفُ الْمُجْرِمُونَ بِسِيمَاهُمْ فَيُؤْخَذُ بِالنَّوَاصِي
وَالْأَقْدَامِ
</p>

***“The guilty shall be recognized by their marks, so they shall be
seized by the forelocks and the feet.” (Surah Rahman 55:41)***

“O Muawiyah, what do they say about this verse? He replied: They think
that the Almighty Allah would recognize the sinners by their faces
in*Qiyamat* . Then it would be ordered that they be caught by their
forelocks and feet and thrown into the fire. The Imam asked, “How come
the Almighty Allah the most powerful would be in need of recognizing a
creature, whom He Himself has created?” I said: “May I be sacrificed
upon you, then what does it mean?” He replied, “When our Qaim rises up,
the Almighty Allah would bestow him the power of identifying faces. Thus
he would order that the infidels be caught by their forelocks and feet.
Then he would put them to the sword.”

**27-** ***Basairud Darajaat*** **&** ***Ikhtisaas:*** It is narrated
from Ahmad bin Muhammad from Ibne Sinan from Abu Khalid and Abu Salam
from Surah from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said:

**“Dhulqarnain was given a choice between two clouds and he chose the
tame one and the hard cloud is saved for your master. The narrator says:
I asked: Which is the hard one? He replied: That which is having
lightning and thunder. Your master would ride on that cloud; once he
will ride the cloud and reach to the ‘Sevens’ the seven heavens and the
seven earths, five for building and two for demolishing.”**

**28-***Basairud Darajaat*** **&** ***Ikhtisaas:*** It is narrated from
Muhammad bin Harun from Sahl bin Ziyad Abu Yahya that Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) said:**

“The Almighty Allah gave Dhulqarnain the choice of two, hard and tame
clouds and he chose the tame one and it is one in which there is no
lightning and thunder. And if he had chosen the hard one, it would not
have become available for him, because the Almighty Allah has stored it
for Qaim (a.s.).”

**29-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Hamadani from Ali from
his father from Ali bin Mabad from Husain bin Khalid that Imam Ali Reza
(a.s.) said:

“One who does not have piety does not have religion and whosoever does
not have dissimulation*(Taqayyah)* does not have faith and indeed the

most honored among you near Allah is the one most pious of you. His
Eminence was asked: Till when does he have to observe*Taqayyah?* He
replied: Till the day of the appointed hour and on that day is the
reappearance of our (Ahle Bayt’s) Qaim. Thus whosoever
abandons*Taqayyah* before his reappearance is not from us. It was asked:
O son of Allah’s Messenger, from which of Ahle Bayt is the Qaim? He
replied: He is my fourth descendant, the son of the best of the
maidservants. The Almighty Allah would, through him, purify the earth
from every kind of oppression and remove every type of injustice from
it. He is the one in whose birth the people would doubt and he is the
one who would have an occultation before his reappearance. And when he
arises, the earth shall be lit up with his effulgence. He would
establish the scales of justice among the people so that no one may
oppress the other. He is the one for whom the earth would warp itself
and he would not throw a shadow. And he is the one by whose name the
caller would call out from the sky inviting people to the Imam which all
the people of the earth would be able to hear. The caller would say:
Know that the Proof of Allah has appeared near the House of Allah, so
follow him as truth is with him, and that is the meaning of the
statement of the Almighty Allah:

<p dir="rtl">
إِن نَّشَأْ نُنَزِّلْ عَلَيْهِم مِّن السَّمَاء آيَةً فَظَلَّتْ
أَعْنَاقُهُمْ لَهَا خَاضِعِينَ
</p>

***“If We please, We should send down upon them a sign from the heaven
so that their necks should stoop to it.” (Surah Shoara 26:4)***

**30-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq in*Ikmaaluddin* has narrated
from Hamadani from Ali from his father from Riyan bin Sult that he said
to Imam Ali Reza (a.s.):

“Are you the*Sahibul Amr* (Master of Affair)? He replied: I am
also*Sahibul Amr* but not the*Sahibul Amr* who will fill the earth with
justice as it would have been fraught with tyranny and oppression. And
how can I be that person? While you can see that I am physically weak.
Whereas the Qaim is the one who at the time of his reappearance will be
senior in age, but will appear as a youth. His body shall be so strong
that if he catches hold of the biggest tree of the earth, he shall be
able to uproot it and if he shouts between the mountains, their stones
will roll down. The staff of Prophet Musa and the seal ring of Prophet
Sulaiman (a.s.) are with him. He is my fourth descendant. The Almighty
Allah will keep him in occultation as long as Divine wisdom dictates.
Then He will reveal him so that he may fill the earth with justice and
equity just as it would be fraught with injustice and oppression.”

**31-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Muzaffar Alawi from Ibne
Ayyashi from his father from Muhammad bin Naseer from Muhammad bin Isa
from Hammad bin Isa from Amr bin Shimr from Jabir Jofi from Jabir Ansari
that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said:

“Dhulqarnain was a righteous servant of Allah whom the Almighty Allah
appointed as a Divine Proof on the people. So he called his people to
God and piety. They slashed on one side of his head and he disappeared
from them for a long time till they began to debate about him saying: He
has died or he has gone into which wilderness? After that he reappeared
and came

back to his community, but once again they happened to strike at his
head. And there is among you (Muslims) someone who is on his practice
and manner. And indeed Allah, the Mighty and Sublime settled Dhulqarnain
in the earth and bestowed him with a cause of everything. He reached up
to the eastern and the western limits of the earth. The Almighty Allah
would repeat his Sunnah in the Qaim of my progeny till he conquers the
east and the west of the earth. Till there does not remain any wet and
dry place, mountain and highland, that Dhulqarnain had crossed. And the
Almighty Allah would expose for him the treasures and mines and He would
help him by giving him awe and through him He would fill the earth with
justice and equity in the same way as it would be full of injustice and
oppression.”

**32-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Saad from Abu Hashim
Ja’fari that he said:

“I was with Abu Muhammad (a.s.) when he said: When the Qaim arises, he
will order the demolishing of the minarets and maqsoorahs[^8] of the
mosques.

I (the narrator) says: I wondered what it denoted.

The Imam turned to me and said: It means that all these are innovations.
Neither they were sanctioned by the Prophet nor his true successors.”

**33-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq (r.a.) has narrated from Ibne
Idris from his father from Ibne Isa from Ahwazi from Ibne Abu Umair from
Abu Ayyub from Abu Basir that he said: A man from Kufa asked Abi
Abdullah (a.s.):

“With how many men would the Qaim arise? It is said that he will appear
with 313 persons, equal to the martyrs of Badr?” The Imam said: “He will
not appear till he has the required number of people and that number is
not less than 10000.”

The author says: The implication of the Imam is that the companions of
Qaim at the time of reappearance will not be 313. This number will be of
those who gather around him in the beginning of his uprising.

**34-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Attar from his father
from Ibne Abil Khattab from Muhammad bin Sinan from Abu Khalid Qummat
from Zaris from Abu Khalid Kabuli from Imam Zainul Abideen (a.s.) that
he said:

“Those who will be missing from their beds will be 313 persons, equal to
the number of the martyrs of Badr. And they shall be in Mecca in the
morning. And that is the interpretation of the verse:

<p dir="rtl">
أَيْنَ مَا تَكُونُواْ يَأْتِ بِكُمُ اللّهُ جَمِيعًا
</p>

***“Wherever you are, Allah will bring you all together.” (Surah Baqarah
2:148)***

And they are the companions of the Qaim.”

**35-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Ibnul Walid from Muhammad
Attar from Ibne Abil Khattab from Safwan Ibne Yahya from Manzar from
Bakkar bin Abu Bakr from Abdullah bin Ajlan that he said:

We were discussing the advent of the Qaim in the company of Abi Abdullah
(a.s.) when I asked him: “How would we know about this?” He replied:
“When you get up in the morning, a slip of paper will be found

below your head with the following written on it: Obedience with
recognition.”

And it is narrated that the following shall be written on the banner of
Imam Mahdi (a.s.): “The Allegiance is for Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime.”

**36-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Ibne Mutawakkil from
Sadabadi from Barqi from his father from Ibne Abu Umair from Ali bin Abu
Hamza from Abu Basir from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said
regarding the words of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime:

<p dir="rtl">
هُوَ الَّذِي أَرْسَلَ رَسُولَهُ بِالْهُدَى وَدِينِ الْحَقِّ لِيُظْهِرَهُ
عَلَى الدِّينِ كُلِّهِ وَلَوْ كَرِهَ الْمُشْرِكُونَ
</p>

***“He it is Who sent His Apostle with guidance and the religion of
truth, that He might cause it to prevail over all religions, though the
polytheists may be averse.” (Surah Taubah 9:33)***

“The interpretation of this verse has not yet been actualized and
neither will it actualize till the advent of the Qaim (a.s.). Not a
single denier in the Almighty Allah and polytheist will remain except
that he will detest the Imam and if the disbeliever or polytheist hides
in the center of a rock; that rock will say: O believer, there is a
disbeliever in my center, break me up and eliminate him.”

**37-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Majiluwayh from Muhammad
Attar from Ibne Isa from Ibne Abil Khattab together from Muhammad bin
Sinan from Abul Jarud that Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) said:

“When Qaim (a.s.) sets out from Mecca, a caller of His Eminence would
announce: ‘None of you must carry any food and water.’ His Eminence
would be having with himself the stone of Musa bin Imran that weighs a
camel load. Thus he does not halt at any stage, but that streams burst
forth from that stone and anyone that feels hunger eats from it and any
that feels thirsty drinks from it. The beasts of burden also get their
feed from that till they reach Najaf at the rear of Kufa.”

**38-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Ibnul Walid from Saffar
from Ibne Yazid from Ibne Abu Umair from Aban bin Uthman from Aban bin
Taghlib that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said:

“When the Qaim (a.s.) reappears, there will be a sign for every person
by which he would recognize whether he is righteous or an evil-doer. And
in it is the sign for those who possess reason and it is the right
path.”

**39-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from the same chains from Aban
bin Taghlib that he said: Abi Abdullah (a.s.) said:

“Two bloods are made lawful by Allah, the Mighty and Sublime and no one
can issue a judgment regarding them; till the time Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime will send the Qaim from Ahle Bayt (a.s.) and he will judge
according to the command of Allah. Thus at that time testimony will not
be needed. The married fornicator will be stoned to death and the one
who refuses to pay the Zakat will be beheaded.”

When Imam Zamana (a.s.) stages an uprising in Najaf
---------------------------------------------------

**40-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from the same chains from Aban
bin Taghlib that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said:

“As if I can see the Qaim outside Najaf, astride a black speckled horse,
which has a white mark between its eyes. When his horse moves no one
will remain in any town who does not think that he is in that town.

When he waves the flag of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) 13000 angels
will come down to him. Of them 13 will be awaiting for the Qaim. These
angels are same who were with Prophet Nuh (a.s.) in his Ark, who were
with Prophet Ibrahim (a.s.) when he was thrown into the fire and who
were with Prophet Isa (a.s.) when he was taken up to the heavens.

And 4000 will be following him with flags. 313 are those angels who were
present in the Battle of Badr and 4000 are those who came down to
accompany Imam Husain (a.s.) in fighting against the Yazidite forces.
However they were not allowed to take part in the battle. So they
returned to Allah to take the permission but when they came down once
more, Imam Husain (a.s.) was already martyred. Thus today they remain
with disheveled hair and dust smeared condition at the grave of Imam
Husain (a.s.) where they will continue to lament till Judgment Day. And
there is constant coming and going of angels between the grave of Imam
Husain (a.s.) and the heavens.”

**41-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from the same chains from Aban
bin Taghlib from Thumali that Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) said:

“As if I can see Qaim (a.s.) appearing in Kufa at the back of Najaf.
When he arrives at Najaf, he would unfurl the standard of the Messenger
of Allah (s.a.w.s.). Its pole would be a pillar of the*Arsh* and those
who accompany it would be helpers of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime. He
would not bring it down for anyone, but that the Almighty Allah would
destroy that person.”

The narrator says: I asked in a polite manner: “Is that flag with him or
it would be brought for him?” He said: “It would be brought for him by
Jibraeel (a.s.).”

**42-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Majiluwayh from his uncle
from Kufi from his father from Muhammad bin Sinan from Mufaddal bin Umar
that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said:

“As if I can see Qaim (a.s.) on the pulpit of Kufa surrounded by his 313
men equal to the people of Badr. They are the standard bearers and they
are the divine rulers on His (Allah’s) earth over His creatures.

Till he would bring out from his cloak a parchment sealed with a golden
seal. A covenant from the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.). Then they would
go away and disperse from him like tongueless sheep and none would
remain with him except the deputy and eleven chiefs - as had remained
with Musa bin Imran (a.s.) - then they would wander in the earth, but
will not be able to find a way except to him. Then they would come back
to him. By Allah, I know what he will say to them, which they will
deny.”

**43-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** My father has narrated from Saad from Ahmad
bin Husain from Muhammad bin Jamhur from Ahmad bin Abi Harasa from
Ibrahim bin Ishaq from Abdullah bin Hammad from Amr bin Shimr from Jabir
from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said:

**“As if I can see the companions of the Qaim (a.s.) that have filled up
the earth from the east to the west. Everything, even the wild beasts
and the jungle birds will obey them, and everything will seek his**

**satisfaction, so much so that a piece of land will pride itself over
others and say: Today a companion of the Imam passed over me.”**

**44-***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Ibne Masrur from Ibne Aamir
from his uncle from Ibne Abu Umair from Ali bin Abu Hamza from Abu Basir
from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:**

“When Prophet Lut (a.s.) told his people:

<p dir="rtl">
لَوْ أَنَّ لِي بِكُمْ قُوَّةً أَوْ آوِي إِلَى رُكْنٍ شَدِيدٍ
</p>

***“Ah! that I had power to suppress you, rather I shall have recourse
to a strong support.” (Surah Hud 11:80)***

He did not mean to say anything except that he was wishing for the power
of Qaim (a.s.) and ‘a strong support’ are his companions, each of whom
would have the strength of forty men and their hearts would be more
solid than a mountain of iron, such that if they wanted, they could move
a mountain of iron from its place. And they shall not lay down arms till
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime is satisfied.”

**45-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Majiluwayh from Muhammad
bin Yahya from Muhammad bin Husain from Muhammad bin Ismail from Abu
Ismail Sarraj from Ja’far bin Bashir from Mufaddal bin Umar from Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“Do you know what the garment of Yusuf was? ‘No,’ replied I. He said:
“When fire was lit for (burning) Ibrahim (a.s.) Jibraeel brought a
garment of Paradise for him and dressed him in it. That garment
protected him from heat and cold and when his death approached, he made
it into an arm band and tied it to Ishaq; Ishaq in turn tied it to Yaqub
and when Yusuf was born Yaqub tied it on him.

And it was tied to his arm till those circumstances befell him. Thus
when Yusuf removed it from the arm band in Egypt, Yaqub perceived its
fragrance and it is about the same that Allah quotes him saying:

<p dir="rtl">
لَأَجِدُ رِيحَ يُوسُفَ لَوْلاَ أَن تُفَنِّدُونِ
</p>

***“Most surely I perceive the fragrance of Yusuf, unless you pronounce
me to be weak in judgment.” ( Surah Yusuf 12:94)***

It is the same garment that had come down from Paradise.”

Mufaddal said: May I be sacrificed on you, whom did this garment reach
after him? He replied, “To the one deserving of it. It is with our Qaim
and he would have it when he reappears. Then he said: All knowledge or
things inherited by every prophet have reached to [the progeny of]
Muhammad (s.a.w.s.).”

**46-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from the same chains from
Mufaddal bin Umar from Abu Basir from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he
said:

“When the Qaim establishes his rule, Allah, the Mighty and the High will
exalt all downtrodden ones and debase all exalted ones. The earth will
become a palm of hand for him and who is it that has a strand of hair on
his palm and he cannot see it?”

**47-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Ibne Masrur from Ibne
Aamir from Mualla from Washa from Muthanna Hannat from Qutaibah Aashi
from Ibne Abi Yafur from the freed slave of Bani Shaiban from Imam
Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said:

“When our Qaim arises, he will stroke the heads of the people, which
will gather their intellects and perfect their understandings.”

**48-** ***Kaamiluz Ziyaraat:*** It is narrated from Husain bin Muhammad
bin Aamir from Ahmad bin Ishaq from Sadan bin Muslim from Umar bin Aban
from Aban bin Taghlib from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“As if I can see the Qaim in the elevated parts of Kufa wearing the
armor of Allah’s Messenger. He will shake the armor and it will wrap
itself around him, after which he will cover it with a brocade robe. He
will be mounted on a jet-black horse with whiteness on its forehead. He
will move the horse in such a way that people in every country will see
him as if he is with them in their own country. In this way he will
unfold the standard of Allah’s Messenger. Its pole is from pillars of
Arsh, whereas the rest is from Allah’s victory! If he points it to
anything, Allah will destroy it. When he waves it, the heart of every
believer will become like a strong iron piece and each believer will be
given the strength of forty men. Every believer who has died will feel
the joy (of the Qaim’s rising) in his grave. They (dead believers) will
begin visiting one another in their graves and give glad tidings to one
another about the Qaim’s uprising. Then thirteen thousand three hundred
and thirteen angels will join the Imam.

I (the narrator) asked, “So many angels will join him?”

Imam (a.s.) replied: Yes, they are as follows:

A. The angels who were with Nuh (a.s.) in the ark

B. Who were with Ibrahim (a.s.) when he was cast into the inferno

C. Who were with Musa (a.s.) when he split the sea for Bani Israel

D. And who were with Isa (a.s.) when Allah raised him to the heavens.

E. Four thousand equipped angels and one thousand angels who came in
unbroken succession who were with the Prophet.

F. Three hundred and thirteen angels who fought in the Battle of Badr

G. Four thousand angels who descended to fight along with Imam Husain
(a.s.) but who were not permitted to fight. They remain by the grave of
Imam Husain (a.s.), disheveled and covered with dust. They will cry over
him until Judgment Day. Their chief is an angel named Mansur. These
angels receive all who visit the grave of Imam Husain (a.s.) and
accompany them when they bid farewell. They visit them if they become
ill, pray on them at their funerals and seek forgiveness for them after
their death. All these angels are on this earth, waiting for the Qaim’s
uprising.”

In*Ghaibat Nomani* also a similar report is narrated from Abdul Wahid
from Muhammad bin Ja’far from Abu Ja’far Hamadani from Musa bin Sadan
from Abdullah bin Qasim from Umar bin Aban.

Another similar report is mentioned in*Ghaibat Nomani* from Ibne Uqdah
from Ali bin Hasan from Hasan and Muhammad sons of Ali bin Yusuf from
Sadan bin Muslim from Ibne Taghlib.

**49-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Fazal from Ali bin Hakam
from Muthanna from Abu Basir that he said: Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
said:

“The Almighty Allah will assist Imam Mahdi (a.s.) through people who
have no religion and faith. When he reappears, there will be people who
had till date been idolaters, but they will give up idolatry and join
the Imam.”

**50-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Fazal from Hamani from
Muhammad bin Fudhail from Ajlah from Abdullah bin Huzail that he said:

“Judgment Day will not arrive till all the believers do not gather in
Kufa.”

**51-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from a group of scholars from
Talakbari from Ali bin Habashi from Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Malik from
Ahmad bin Abi Naeem from Ibrahim bin Salih from Muhammad bin Ghazzal
from Mufaddal bin Umar that Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) said:

“When the Qaim (a.s.) arrives in Kufa, not a believer would remain but
that he would be present there or would travel to that place. Thus
according to the statement of Amirul Momineen (a.s.), he will address
his companions thus: Come with me to fight this transgressor and rebel
(Sufyani).”

**52-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Mufaddal that he said: I
heard His Eminence, Abu Abdullah Sadiq (a.s.) say:

“When the Qaim (a.s.) arises, the earth would light up with the
luminescence of its Lord and the people would become needless of
sunlight. In his rule all will have such long lifespans that each person
will beget a thousand sons. Daughters will not be born to them. He will
build a mosque on the outskirts of Kufa, which will have a thousand
doors and the houses of Kufa will be connected to the river of Kerbala.
So wide would habitation spread that if a person travels on a mule to
pray the Friday Prayer, he will not be able to reach in time.”

**53-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Abu Muhammad Muhammadi
from Muhammad bin Ali bin Fazal from his father from Muhammad bin
Ibrahim bin Malik from Ibrahim bin Banan Khathami from Ahmad bin Yahya
bin Motamar from Amr bin Thabit from his father from Imam Muhammad Baqir
(a.s.) that he said in a long tradition:

“He will enter Kufa and there will be three standards, which will have
become confused. They will be clear to him. He will go in until he comes
to the pulpit. Then he will preach, but the people will not know what he
says, because of the weeping. On the second Friday, the people will ask
him to pray the Friday Prayer with them. He will order that a place of
prostration be marked for him with red dye and he will pray there with
them. Then he will order that a river should be dug from the back of the
shrine of Imam Husain (a.s.), which would flow to the Ghariyyan so that
the water would descend into Najaf. At its entrance bridges and mills
will be working. It is as if I could see an old woman, on her head a
basket, in which is wheat, which is brought to those mills and they
grind it free of charge.”

**54-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Fazal from Uthman bin
Isa from Salih bin Abul Aswad from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said
when Masjid Sahla was mentioned in his presence:

“It will be the residence of our Sahibul Amr (Imam Mahdi (a.s.) when he
occupies it with his family.”

A similar tradition is mentioned through Muhammad bin Yahya from Ali bin
Hasan from Uthman in*Al-Kafi* .

**55-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Fazal from Ibne Mahbub
from Amr bin Shimr from Jabir from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he
said:

“When one of you meets our Qaim, he should greet him in the following
words: Peace be on you, Ahle Bayt (a.s.) of prophethood, mine of
knowledge and site of messengership.”

**56-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Fazal from Abdur Rahman
bin Abu Hashim from Ali bin Abu Hamza from Abu Basir from Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“The companions of Musa (a.s.) were tested by the stream and it is that
which the Almighty Allah has said:

<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّ اللّهَ مُبْتَلِيكُم بِنَهَرٍ
</p>

***“Surely Allah will try you with a river…” (Surah Baqarah 2:249)***

The companions of Qaim (a.s.) would also be tested in the same way.

**57-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Fazal from Abdur Rahman
from Ibne Abu Hamza from Abu Basir from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he
said:

“Qaim (a.s.) would demolish the Masjid al-Haraam till it returns to its
ancient form and he would also return the Prophet’s Masjid (Masjidun
Nabawi) to its original construction and he would return the Holy Kaaba
to its location and raise it on its own foundations. He will cut off the
hand of Bani Shaibah and hang it on the Kaaba as they are the thieves of
the Kaaba.”

**58-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Fazal from Ali bin Hakam
from Sufyan Jurairi from Abi Sadiq from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that
he said:

“Our state is the last of the states, no House which has a state will
remain, except that they ruled before us, so that they will not be able
to say when they see our actions, if we ruled, we would act in the same
way as these. It is the word of Allah, the Exalted:

<p dir="rtl">
وَالْعَاقِبَةُ لِلْمُتَّقِينَ
</p>

***“…and the end is for those who guard (against evil).” (Surah Araaf
7:128)***

**59-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Fazal from Abdur Rahman
bin Abu Hashim and Hasan bin Ali from Abu Khadija from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) that he said:

“When the Qaim arises, he will come with an unprecedented system.”

**60-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Fazal from Ali bin Hakam
from Rabi bin Muhammad Musli from Saad bin Tareef from Asbagh bin
Nubatah that Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said in his speech regarding the
Kufa Masjid that it was made from mud, bricks and clay. Then he said:

“When Qaim (a.s.) reaches Kufa Masjid, its walls would be made of solid
bricks and mortar, he would look at it and say: Woe be on the one who
demolished you, woe be on the one who facilitated your razing, and woe
be on the one who constructed you with solid bricks and changed
the*Qibla* of Nuh. And fortunate are those who would witness the razing
in the company of the Qaim of us, Ahle Bayt. They are the best of the
peoples.”

**61-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Fazal from Abdur Rahman
bin Abu Hashim from Ali bin Abu Hamza from Abu Basir that he said in a
tradition as follows:

“When the Qaim arises he would enter Kufa. Then he would order the
razing of four mosques upto their foundations and they will make them
like

the canopies of Musa (a.s.) and demolish the additions and additional
floors till they return to the form that they were in at the time of the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.). He will widen the main highways to be 60 hands
wide. Any Masjid that comes on the way would be demolished. He will shut
down all openings, balconies and structures jutting out towards the main
road. The Almighty Allah would command the heavens to reduce their
rotation during the tenure of his rule, thus a day of that time would be
equal to ten days of your period, one month equal to ten months of
yours, and one year equal to ten years of your time.

Not much time would pass that ten thousand rebels[^9] would come out of
Rameela ad-Daskara and their slogan would be: O Uthman, O Uthman. His
Eminence would summon one of his men and attach his sword to his waist.
He would go and slay the whole crowd single-handed and not one of them
would be spared. After that His Eminence would turn to Kabul Shah; it is
a city that no one has ever conquered, but he would conquer it. After
that he would return to Kufa and reside there after eliminating seventy
Arab tribes…”

**62-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Fazal from Ali bin Asbat
from his father, Asbat bin Saalim from Musa Abbar from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) that he said:

“The Arabs should be warned as it would be a very bad time for them,
because not one of them will arise with the Qaim,”

**63-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Fazal from Abdur Rahman
bin Abu Hashim from Amr bin Abu Miqdam from Imran bin Zabyan from Hakim
bin Saad from Amirul Momineen (a.s.) that he said:

**“The companions of the Qaim will be young men. There will be no old
men among them except like the kohl in an eye or like the salt in the
food and the least part of food is the salt.”**

**64-***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Fazal from Ahmad bin Umar
bin Muslim from Hasan bin Uqbah Nahmi from Abu Ishaq Banna from Jabir
Jofi from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said about the Qaim:**

“The allegiance of Imam Qaim (a.s.) will be given between Rukn and Maqam
by three hundred and thirteen persons equal to the fighters of the
Battle of Badr. Some nobles of Egypt, leaders of Syria and good persons
from Iraq will also be included among them and they will set out from
there when the Almighty Allah wants.”

**65-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Fazal from Muhammad bin
Ali from Wuhaib bin Hafas from Abu Basir from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
that he said:

“Amirul Momineen (a.s.) used to say that believers would go on
decreasing so much that no one would utter the name of Allah anymore. At
that time the leader of religion will rise up and the Almighty Allah
will send a group from around him who would gather with him like monsoon
clouds and by Allah, I even know their names, nationalities and the name
of their chief; and the Almighty Allah will raise them in any way He
likes. From some He will take one, from some He will take two, from some
He will take three, from some He will take four, from some He will take
five, from some

He will take six, from some He will take seven, from some He will take
eight and from some He will take nine; in this way 313 will come
together. Thus the Almighty Allah says:

<p dir="rtl">
أَيْنَ مَا تَكُونُواْ يَأْتِ بِكُمُ اللّهُ جَمِيعًا إِنَّ اللّهَ عَلَى
كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ
</p>

***“…wherever you are, Allah will bring you all together; surely Allah
has power over all things.” (Surah Baqarah 2:148)***

**66-** ***Sahifatur Reza:*** It is narrated from Imam Ali Reza (a.s.)
from his forefathers that Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) said:

“One who fights us in the last period of time will fight as if he is on
the side of Dajjal.

Abul Qasim Tai says: I asked Imam Ali Reza (a.s.): Which of you will he
fight in the last period of time?

He replied: Associate of Prophet Isa bin Maryam (a.s.); that is he will
fight Imam Mahdi (a.s.).”

**67-** ***Kharaij:*** It is narrated from Abu Saeed Khurasani from
Ja’far bin Muhammad from his father (a.s.) that he said:

**“When Qaim (a.s.) camps in Mecca and intends to move to Kufa, an
announcer would say: None of you may carry any food or water on the
journey. And His Eminence would carry with himself the stone of Musa bin
Imran, from which had gushed out twelve streams. Then he did not halt at
any stage, but that he fixed it and streams burst forth from that stone
and anyone that felt hunger, ate from it and any that felt thirsty,
drank from it. Thus it would be their only source of food and water till
they reach Najaf, which is before Kufa. When they arrive there, water
and milk would continuously flow out of it. Anyone that feels hunger,
satiates himself from it and any that feels thirsty, drinks from it.”**

**68-***Kharaij:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Abdul Hamid from
Abu Jamila from Abu Bakr Hadhrami from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that
he said:**

“One who lives till the time of the Qaim of my Ahle Bayt (a.s.); if he
is ill, he will be cured and if he is physically weak, he will become
strong.”

**69-** ***Kharaij:*** It is narrated from Abu Bakr Hadhrami from Abdul
Malik bin Ayyan that he said:

Once I arose from the assembly of Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) resting my
hand on the floor and moaned in weakness and old age. Then I said:

“O son of Allah’s Messenger, I wish for the time of Imam Zamana (a.s.)
so that I may become strong once again.

He said: Are you not pleased with the fact that your enemies fight among
themselves and destroy each other whereas you sit in peace at home? And
even if you have to fight, each of you would become as strong as forty
men and your hearts will be like iron ingots such that if they wanted,
they could shatter a mountain. Only you will become the rulers and
leaders of the earth.”

**70-** ***Kharaij:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Isa from Safwan
from Muthanna from Amr bin Shimr from Jabir from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) that he said:

“(After the reappearance of the Qaim) The Almighty Allah will remove
fear from the heart of Shia and fill terror in the hearts of our
enemies. Each of our Shia would become sharper than spear and stronger
than a lion. He would attack the enemies with the spear, cut them into
pieces with his sword and trample them under his feet.”

**71-** ***Kharaij:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Isa from Safwan
from Muthanna from Abu Khalid Kabuli from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.)
that he said:

**“When our Qaim arises, he will stroke the heads of the people, which
will gather their intellects and perfect their understandings.”**

**72-***Kharaij:*** It is narrated from Ayyub bin Nuh from Abbas bin
Aamir from Rabi bin Muhammad from Abu Rabi Shami that Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) said:**

**“When our Qaim arises, Allah, the Mighty and Sublime would increase
the hearing and sight of our Shia, so much so that there would be no
need of any correspondence between them and the Qaim. His Eminence would
speak and they would hear as if he were in front of them.”**

**73-***Kharaij:*** It is narrated from Musa bin Umar from Ibne Mahbub
from Salih bin Hamza from Aban from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he
said:**

“Knowledge consists of twenty-seven letters - all that the prophets
brought is two letters and people have not received till date more than
two letters. And when our Qaim arises, he would bring another
twenty-five letters and spread them among the people and add them to the
two letters and spread the knowledge of twenty-seven letters.”

**74-** ***Kharaij:*** It is narrated from Saad from Yaqtini from Safwan
from Abu Ali Khurasani from Aban bin Taghlib from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) that he said:

“As if I can see a bird perching on Hajar Aswad and a man has appeared
below it, who is judging cases like Prophet Dawood and Sulaiman (a.s.)
without asking for evidence.”

**75-** ***Irshad:*** It is narrated from Hajjal from Thalaba from Abu
Bakr Hadhrami from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said:

“It is as if I can see the Qaim (a.s.) on the sand dunes of Kufa. He
came there from Mecca with five thousand angels. Jibraeel was on his
right and Mikaeel on his left. The believers were standing in front of
him and he was scattering the soldiers into the land.”

**76-** ***Irshad:*** It is narrated in the report of Mufaddal that Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said:

“When the Qaim Aale Muhammad (a.s.) rises, he will build a mosque on the
outskirts of Kufa, which will have a thousand doors and the houses of
Kufa will be connected to the river flow of Kerbala.”

**77-** ***Irshad:*** It is narrated from Abdul Kareem Khathami that he
said: I asked His Eminence, Abu Abdullah Sadiq (a.s.):

“How long would Qaim (a.s.) rule?” He said: He replied: “Seven years,
the days and the nights would be prolonged so much that a year would be
as long as ten years of yours. Thus his rule would be equal to seventy
years

according to your standards. And when the time comes for his end in the
month of Jumadi II ten days before Rajab, there would be such heavy
rainfall as the people had not seen before. Then the Almighty Allah by
that would expose the flesh and bodies of the believers in their graves.
And as if I could see them coming from Jehna, shaking off dust from
their hair…”

“When the time comes for his reappearance in the month of Jumadi II and
ten days of Rajab, there would be such heavy rainfall as people have not
seen before. Through it, the Almighty Allah would expose the flesh and
bodies of the believers in their graves. As if I could see them coming
from Jahina shaking off dust from their hair.”

Mufaddal bin Umar has narrated that: I heard Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
say: “When our Qaim rises, the earth will shine with the light of its
Lord. Men will not need a light of the sun and darkness will vanish. In
his dominion a man will live long enough to have a thousand male
children born to him without a single female. The earth will expose its
treasures, so that the people will see them on its surface. Men will
search for someone among you to receive their money and to take their
alms (Zakat), but they will find no one to accept that from them. The
people will not need it, because of what Allah has provided for them out
of His beneficence.”

**78-** ***Irshad:*** It is narrated from Mufaddal bin Umar that Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said:

“When the Almighty Allah accords permission to the Qaim (a.t.f.s.) to
reappear, His Eminence, will go on the pulpit and invite the people
towards him and he would put them under the oath of the Almighty and he
would invite them to his own rights. He would observe the manners and
behavior of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) among them and he would
perform all his actions. Then the Almighty Allah will send Jibraeel to
him, who would reach him near the*Hateem* and ask: ‘Towards what are you
inviting?’ The Qaim will inform him about it. Then Jibraeel will say: ‘I
am the first to pay allegiance to you, give me your hand.’ Thus he would
clasp his hand while 300 odd person will be present with the Imam. Then
they would all also pay allegiance to His Eminence. He would remain in
Mecca till the number of his followers increase to 10000, then he would
march to Medina.”

**79-** ***Irshad:*** It is narrated from Abdullah bin Mughira from Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“When the Qaim reappears, he will pick up 500 persons from the Quraish
and have them executed. Then he will in the same way pick 500 people of
non-Quraishite origin and also have them executed. He will repeat this
procedure six times. The narrator says: I asked: Will their number be
such at that time?” He replied: “Yes, by himself and his followers.”

**80-** ***Irshad:*** It is narrated from Abu Basir that Imam Sadiq
(a.s.) said:

“When the Qaim (a.s.) rises up, he will demolish the Masjidul Haraam
upto its original construction and restore the*Maqam-e-Ibrahim* to its
prior location. And he will cut off the hand of Bani Shaibah and hang it
upon the Kaaba and on it write: These are the thieves of the Kaaba.”

**81-** ***Irshad:*** It is narrated from Abul Jarud from Imam Muhammad
Baqir (a.s.) in a long tradition that he said:

“When the Qaim (a.s.) rises, he will go to Kufa and ten thousand persons
called the Batriyya, who will be wearing arms, will come out against
him. They will say: ‘Go back where you came from. We have no need of the
sons of Fatima.’ He will put them to sword until he comes to the last of
them. Then he will enter Kufa. There he will kill every doubting
hypocrite and he will destroy their palaces. He will kill those who
fight for them until the Almighty Allah is satisfied.”

**82-** ***Irshad:*** It is narrated from Abu Khadija from Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“When the Qaim rises, he will come with a new commandment from Allah,
just as the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) summoned men to a new set of
commandments at the beginning of Islam.”

**83-** ***Irshad:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Uqbah from his father
from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“When the Qaim rises, he will rule with justice. In his time, injustice
will be removed and the roads will be safe. The earth will produce its
benefits and every due will be restored to its proper person. No people
of any other religion will remain without being shown Islam and
confessing faith in it. Have you not heard the Almighty Allah say:

<p dir="rtl">
<p dir="rtl">
وَلَهُ أَسْلَمَ مَن فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأَرْضِ طَوْعًا وَكَرْهًا
</p>
وَإِلَيْهِ يُرْجَعُونَ
</p>

***“…and to Him submits whoever is in the heavens and the earth,
willingly or unwillingly, and to Him shall they be returned.” (Surah
Aale Imran 3:83)***

He will judge between the people with the judgment of Prophet Dawood and
the law of Muhammad (s.a.w.s.). At that time, the earth will reveal its
treasures and show its blessings. Men will not find any place to give
alms nor be generous, because wealth will encompass all the believers.”
Then he added: “Our state is the last of the states, no House which has
a state will remain, except that they ruled before us, so that they will
not be able to say when they see our actions, if we ruled, we would act
in the same way as these. It is the word of Allah, the Exalted:

<p dir="rtl">
وَالْعَاقِبَةُ لِلْمُتَّقِينَ
</p>

***“…and the end is for those who guard (against evil).” (Surah Araaf
7:128)***

**84-** ***Irshad:*** It is narrated from Abu Basir from Imam Muhammad
Baqir (a.s.) that he said in a lengthy tradition:

“When the Qaim arises, he will go to Kufa. There he will destroy four
mosques. There will not remain a mosque on the face of the earth, which
has a verandah, except he will destroy it and make it flat. He will
expand the main street and every building that juts out along the road
will be destroyed. He will destroy drain pipes that jut out on to the
roads. There will no innovation left which he does not remove and no
religious practice (Sunnah) which he does not establish. He will conquer
Constantinople, China and mountains of Dailam. He will remain doing that
for seven years. Each year being ten of your years. Then Allah will do
what He wishes.”

“May I be your ransom, how will He lengthen the years?” I asked.

“Allah, the exalted, will order the universe to slow down and lessen its
movement and the days and the years will be longer because of that,” he
answered.

“It is said that if the universe changes, it will be destroyed,” I said.

“Those are the words of the atheists,” he replied. “There is no way for
a Muslim to hold that view. Allah, the Exalted, has split the moon for
His Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and He has sent the sun back to its earlier
position for Yusha. He has informed us of the length of the day of
Resurrection. It will be like a thousand years in your reckoning.”

**85-** ***Irshad:*** It is narrated from Jabir that Imam Muhammad Baqir
(a.s.) said:

“When the Qaim Aale Muhammad (a.s.) arises, he will set up encampments
and he will teach the people the Quran as it was revealed by the
Almighty Allah. The greatest difficulty will be for those who have
learnt it as it is today, because it differs from its original
composition.”

**86-** It is narrated from Abdullah bin Ajlan from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) that he said:

“When the Qaim of Aale Muhammad arises, he will judge between the people
according to the judgment of His Eminence, Dawood. He will not need
testimonies or evidence. The Almighty Allah will inspire him and then he
will judge according to his knowledge. He will inform the people about
what they conceal in themselves and he will distinguish his friends from
the enemies. The Almighty Allah says:

إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ لآيَاتٍ لِّلْمُتَوَسِّمِينَ {75} وَإِنَّهَا لَبِسَبِيلٍ
مُّقيمٍ

***“Surely in this are signs for those who examine. And surely it is on
a road that still abides.” (Surah Hijr 15:75-76)***

**87-** ***Irshad:*** It is narrated that:

“The period of time of the state of the Qaim will be nineteen years,
whose days and months will be lengthened as we have already described.
This is a matter which is hidden from us. From it, it has been made
known to us that what Allah, the Exalted, does is through the condition
that He, may His name be exalted, knows the best interest. We do not
positively assert any one of the two matters (whether the state will be
seven or nineteen years), even though the reports about the seven years
are clearer and more numerous.”

**88-** ***Dawaat Rawandi:*** Mualla bin Khunais said:

“I said to Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.): Alas, if you had been in power; we
would have led a life of comfort.

He said: By Allah, if we had been in power, you would have to eat coarse
food and wear coarse clothes.”

It is narrated from Mufaddal bin Umar that the Imam said:

“If we had been in power, you would have had to lead life as the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) led and follow the practice of Amirul
Momineen (a.s.).”

**89-** ***Tafsir Ayyashi:*** It is narrated from Rafa bin Musa that
Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said:

“When the Qaim (a.s.) arises there would not remain any place where the
following statement does not echo: There is no god, except Allah and
Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.).”

**90-** ***Tafsir Ayyashi:*** It is narrated from Ibne Bukair that he
asked Imam Musa Kazim (a.s.) about the words of Allah:

<p dir="rtl">
وَلَهُ أَسْلَمَ مَن فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأَرْضِ طَوْعًا وَكَرْهًا
</p>

***“…and to Him submits whoever is in the heavens and the earth,
willingly or unwillingly…” (Surah Aale Imran 3:83)***

He said: This verse was revealed about Imam Qaim (a.s.). When he
reappears, he would present Islam to all the Jews, Christians, atheists,
apostates and infidels; whoever would accept it willingly, will be
ordered to observe the duties incumbent on a Muslim and he would execute
one who does not accept Islam. After that no one would remain in the
world but that he would be a monotheist.

I asked: May I be your ransom, non-Muslims are in majority; how he would
subdue them all?

He replied: When the Almighty Allah makes an intention, He would make
the more less and the less, more.”

**91-** ***Tafsir Ayyashi:*** It is narrated from Abdul Alaa Halabi that
Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) said with reference to the qualities of Imam
Qaim (a.s.) and the practice of His Eminence during the period of his
reappearance:

“Imam Qaim (a.s.) will go into occultation from one of these passes and
he pointed out to Zeetawa. Then he said: When two days remain from his
rising, one of his special servants would come to his particular
companions and ask: How many of you are there? He would reply: We are
forty people. Then he will ask: What will you do if you see your Sahibul
Amr? They will reply: If he goes from here and takes refuge at any
mountain, we would also be with him.

On the following night he would come and say: You may discuss among your
friends. When they reach consensus and come with him the servant will
bring them to the Imam. He would promise to them about the coming night.

Then Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) said: By Allah, as if I can see the Qaim
leaning on Hajar Aswad and adjuring the people in the name of Allah and
saying: O people, whoever argues with me about Allah, I am the worthiest
of Allah. Whoever argues with me about Adam, I am the worthiest of Adam.
Whoever argues with me about Nuh, I am the worthiest of Nuh. Whoever
argues with me about Ibrahim, I am the worthiest of Ibrahim. Whoever
argues with me about Musa, I am the worthiest of Musa. Whoever argues
with me about Isa, I am the worthiest of Isa. Whoever argues with me
about Muhammad (s.a.w.s.), I am the worthiest of Muhammad (s.a.w.s.).
Whoever argues with me about the Book of the Almighty Allah, I am the
worthiest of the Book of Allah.

After that he will go to the Place of Ibrahim and pray two units of
prayer and adjure the people in the name of Allah.

Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) then said:

<p dir="rtl">
أَمَّن يُجِيبُ الْمُضْطَرَّ إِذَا دَعَاهُ وَيَكْشِفُ السُّوءَ
وَيَجْعَلُكُمْ خُلَفَاء الْأَرْضِ
</p>

***“Or, Who answers the distressed one when he calls upon Him and
removes the evil, and He will make you successors in the earth.” (Surah
Naml 27:62)***

In this verse, the word of ‘distressed’ denotes Imam Qaim (a.s.).

After that first of all Jibraeel will pledge allegiance to him in the
form of a bird perching on the niche; followed by three hundred and some
persons.

Then Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) said: Thus one who is capable to travel
to him will immediately come to him and one who can’t will be taken away
from his bed at night. And it is with regard to them that Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) has said: It is these who would disappear from their
beds and the Almighty Allah has said:

<p dir="rtl">
فَاسْتَبِقُواْ الْخَيْرَاتِ أَيْنَ مَا تَكُونُواْ يَأْتِ بِكُمُ اللّهُ
جَمِيعًا
</p>

***“Therefore hasten to (do) good works; wherever you are, Allah will
bring you all together.” (Surah Baqarah 2:148)***

Then he said: In this verse, ‘good works’ denotes Wilayat.

On another occasion, the Almighty Allah says:

<p dir="rtl">
وَلَئِنْ أَخَّرْنَا عَنْهُمُ الْعَذَابَ إِلَى أُمَّةٍ مَّعْدُودَةٍ
</p>

***“And if We hold back from them the punishment until a stated period
of time (reappearance of Imam Zamana (a.s.))…”(Surah Hud 11:8)***

In this verse, “stated period of time” denotes the 313 companions of
Imam Qaim (a.s.) who would join him in an hour.

All will gather at Mecca, like shreds of clouds gather in rainy season
and they will call people to follow the Book of Allah and Sunnah of the
Prophet, but very few would harken to them. Then the Imam will appoint a
deputy in Mecca and set out from there; but on the way he would be
informed about his assassination. So he will come back to Mecca and
fight the Meccans. But he will not take anyone as prisoner.

After that he will set out from there calling to the Book of Allah,
Sunnah of the Prophet, Wilayat of Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) and
aloofness from his enemies. But he will not mention anyone by name. In
this way, he would reach Baidha and there he will be confronted by
Sufyani’s army. At that time the Almighty Allah would command the earth
to swallow them all. And the army of Sufyani would sink in the desert.

It is with regard to this that the Almighty Allah has said:

<p dir="rtl">
وَلَوْ تَرَى إِذْ فَزِعُوا فَلَا فَوْتَ وَأُخِذُوا مِن مَّكَانٍ قَرِيبٍ
</p>

***“And could you see when they shall become terrified, but (then) there
shall be no escape and they shall be seized upon from a near place.”
(Surah Saba 34:51)***

That is they should believe in the Qaim of Aale Muhammad (a.s.) although
before that they had refused to believe in him (when the divine
chastisement descended and they began to sink in the ground their
acceptance of faith was of no use to them).

From that army except for two men: Watar and Watira, none will survive
and their heads will also be turned to their backs and they will go and
report the fate of their associates.

After that Imam Mahdi (a.s.) will enter Medina and the Quraish will say
to the people to Medina: Come with us to fight this rebel. By Allah, if
he had been a descendant of Muhammad, he would never have behaved in
this (cruel) manner, if he had been an Alawite, he would never have
behaved in this manner, if he had been a descendant of Lady Fatima, he
would never have behaved in this manner. Then the Imam will fight them,
take their children as prisoners and move to Shaqra, where he will
receive information that his deputy has been assassinated. So he would
return and initiate such a slaughter that the attack of Harra (on
Medina) will be nothing in comparison.

Then he would call people to the Book of Allah, Sunnah of the Prophet,
Wilayat of Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) and immunity from his enemies. When
he reaches the Thalaba stage, a relative of his who would be physically
strong and brave. He will ask: What are you doing? By Allah, you are
herding them like animals. Do you have any authority from the Messenger
of Allah (s.a.w.s.)?

The special servant of the Imam will say: Keep quiet or I will break
your head. But the Imam will restrain him and say: I have the permission
of the Prophet; it is kept in so-and-so bag; go and bring it here.

When he brings it there, that man will read it and say: May I be your
ransom, give me your head so that I may kiss it. Then he will renew his
allegiance to him.

Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) said: As if I can see that the Qaim is
accompanied by 313 men, whose hearts are like ingots of iron; he is
flanked by Jibraeel and Mikaeel and he is on his way from Medina to
Najaf and Kufa; his awe precedes him to a distance of a month’s travel
all around him. And the Almighty Allah will send with him 5000 angels to
assist him. When he reaches Najaf Ashraf, he would say to his
companions: You may spend this night in worship. Thus they will spend
the whole night in worship. In the morning, he would order them to march
to Nakhila. They will reach Masjid Ibrahim in Nakhila. They will pray
two units of prayer. Meanwhile some army men of Murjia and some Sufyanis
will march to him and he would ask his men to remain in ambush and then
he will order them to attack.

At last he will enter Kufa and fight Sufyani who would be arrested and
brought to the Imam. He will slaughter him with his own hands.

Then he will send some men to Rome (where the survivors of Bani Umayyah
would be taking refuge) to bring the Umayyads. When they refuse to
surrender to him, he will go over there and rout them.

فَلَمَّا أَحَسُّوا بَأْسَنَا إِذَا هُم مِّنْهَا يَرْكُضُونَ {12} لَا
تَرْكُضُوا وَارْجِعُوا إِلَى مَا أُتْرِفْتُمْ فِيهِ وَمَسَاكِنِكُمْ
لَعَلَّكُمْ تُسْأَلُونَ {13} قَالُوا يَا وَيْلَنَا إِنَّا كُنَّا
ظَالِمِينَ {14} فَمَا زَالَت تِّلْكَ دَعْوَاهُمْ حَتَّى جَعَلْنَاهُمْ
حَصِيدًا خَامِدِينَ {15} وَمَا خَلَقْنَا

***“So when they felt Our punishment, lo! they began to fly from it. Do
not fly (now) and come back to what you were made to lead easy lives in
and to your dwellings, haply you will be questioned. They said: O woe to
us! surely we were unjust. And this ceased not to be their cry till We
made them cut off, extinct.” (Surah Anbiya 21:12-15)***

Then he would return to Kufa and send those three hundred and thirteen
persons to all the parts of the world. He would (also) stroke their
shoulders and chests, (by which) they would not face any difficulty in
any judgment and every part of the earth would echo with the call of:
‘There is no god except Allah, Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah.’

And the master of this affair is not such that he would agree to accept
Jizya like the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.). And that is the meaning of the
statement of the Almighty Allah:

<p dir="rtl">
وَقَاتِلُوهُمْ حَتَّى لاَ تَكُونَ فِتْنَةٌ وَيَكُونَ الدِّينُ لِلّهِ
</p>

***“And fight with them until there is no persecution, and religion
should be only for Allah…” (Surah Baqarah 2:193)***

Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) said: By Allah, they will fight so much that
all would submit to the oneness of the Almighty Allah and no polytheist
would be left. And there will be so much security in the world that even
if an unaccompanied old lady wishes to travel from the east to west, she
will not face any trouble. The Almighty Allah will germinate every seed
from the earth and send down rain from the sky. People will carry their
taxes on their shoulders and bring it to Imam Mahdi (a.s.). At that the
Almighty Allah will bestow prosperity to our Shia.

Then Imam Zamana (a.s.) would issue his commands and would be speaking
about some religious practices when a clamor will arise from outside the
Masjid. Some people would try to attack to him, but he would ask his men
to crush them. His men would apprehend the attackers on the way and
present them to Imam Qaim (a.s.); after that they would be killed; and
this would be the last attack on him.

In*Ghaibat Nomani,* Ibne Uqdah has narrated from Muhammad bin Ali from
Ibne Bazi from Mansur bin Yunus from Ismail bin Jabir from Imam Muhammad
Baqir (a.s.) a similar report.

**92-** ***Tafsir Ayyashi:*** It is narrated from Mufaddal bin Umar from
Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“When the Qaim Aale Muhammad (a.s.) reappears, he will enliven and bring
out twenty-seven persons from the back of the Kaaba, and raise from the
graves twenty-five persons from the community of Prophet Musa (a.s.) who
used to judge equitably, seven people from the folks of the cave, Yusha
bin Nun, legatee of Prophet Musa (a.s.), believer of the nation of
Firon, Salman Farsi, Abu Dujana Ansari and Malik Ibne Ashtar.”

In*Irshad* a similar report is mentioned from Mufaddal bin Umar on the
topic of Rajat.

**93-** ***Tafsir Ayyashi:*** It is narrated from Abil Miqdam from Imam
Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said with regard to the interpretation of
the following verse:

<p dir="rtl">
لِيُظْهِرَهُ عَلَى الدِّينِ كُلِّهِ وَلَوْ كَرِهَ الْمُشْرِكُونَ
</p>

***“…that He might cause it to prevail over all religions, though the
polytheists may be averse.” (Surah Taubah 9:33)***

No one will remain without confessing to the prophethood of the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) during the period of the reappearance of
the Imam.”

And in another traditional report he said: During the period of Rajat,
the Almighty Allah will make Islam dominant over all the faiths of the
world.

**94-** ***Tafsir Ayyashi:*** It is narrated from Samaa from Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (a.s.) that he said with regard to the interpretation of the
following verse:

<p dir="rtl">
هُوَ الَّذِي أَرْسَلَ رَسُولَهُ بِالْهُدَى وَدِينِ الْحَقِّ لِيُظْهِرَهُ
عَلَى الدِّينِ كُلِّهِ وَلَوْ كَرِهَ الْمُشْرِكُونَ
</p>

***“He it is Who sent His Apostle with guidance and the religion of
truth, that He might cause it to prevail over all religions, though the
polytheists may be averse.” (Surah Taubah 9:33)***

When Imam Qaim (a.s.) reappears, every polytheist and infidel will be
compelled to come out of polytheism and infidelity.”

**95-** ***Tafsir Ayyashi:*** It is narrated from Saad bin Umar that a
person was saying in the assembly of Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.):

The house of Salih and Isa bin Ali was safe and sound so far… that is he
was talking about the period of Bani Abbas. Another man said: May Allah
destroy it Himself or at our hands.

Imam (a.s.) said: Don’t say like that; it is the residence of Imam Qaim
(a.s.) and his men; and the words of the Almighty Allah are:

<p dir="rtl">
وَسَكَنتُمْ فِي مَسَاكِنِ الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُواْ أَنفُسَهُمْ
</p>

***“And you dwell in the abodes of those who were unjust to themselves…”
(Surah Ibrahim 14:45)***

**96-** ***Majalis:*** It is narrated from Jaabi from Ibne Uqdah from
Umar bin Isa bin Uthman from his father from Khalid bin Aamir bin Abbas
from Muhammad bin Suwaid Ashari that he said:

“Once we and Fitar bin Khalifah came to meet Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
and he offered us some dates. Then he offered some to Fitar as well, and
he asked Imam (a.s.):

O son of Allah’s Messenger, please tell me about the tradition narrated
by Abdul Tufayl in which it is mentioned that the day the Almighty Allah
will bring together the key persons of Shaam and the royals of Iraq,
would be the worst day for our enemies.

Imam (a.s.) said: May Allah have mercy on you, first we (Imams) get
involved in calamities and after that you fall into difficulties. In the
same way there would be happiness for us first and then for you. May
Allah have mercy on one who creates among the people love for us and not
enmity and hatred.”

**97-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Ahmad from
Ubaidullah bin Musa from Abdullah bin Jabla from Ibne Bataini from his
father from Abu Basir that Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) said:

“The master of this matter has aspects like those that four of the
prophets have had; an aspect of Musa, one of Jesus Christ, one of Joseph
and one of Muhammad (peace be upon them).”

I asked: “Which aspect of Musa (a.s.)?” He said: “Afraid and lying in
wait.” I said: “Which one of Jesus Christ (a.s.)?” He said: “It will be
said about him (Imam Mahdi) as that has been said about Jesus Christ
(a.s.).” I said: “Which of Joseph?” He said: “Prison and disappearance.”
I said: “Which of Muhammad (s.a.w.s.)?” He said: “If he (Imam Mahdi)
appears, he will imitate his grandfather, Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) but he
will unsheathe his sword for eight months, during which there will be
commotion, until Allah becomes pleased.” I said: “How will it be known
that Allah becomes pleased?” He said: “Allah will put mercy into his
(the Imam’s) heart.”

**98-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Ahmad
bin Yusuf from Jofi Abul Hasan from his book from Ismail bin Mahran from
Ibne Bataini from his father from Wuhaib from Abu Basir from Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“There will be a very few Arabs with the Qaim (a.s.).” It was said to
him: “But those, who talk about this matter among the Arabs, are so much
many.” He said: “People must be tried, sifted and purified. Much many
people will be discarded from the sieve.”

**99-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ahmad bin Muhammad bin
Saeed from Yahya bin Zakariya from Yusuf Ibne Kalib from Ibne Bataini
from Ibne Hamid from Thumali from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he
said:

“When the Qaim of Muhammad’s family appears, Allah will support him with
His angels. Jibraeel will be in front of him, Mikaeel on the right and
Israfeel on the left. Awe will precede him about a month’s travel before
him, behind him, on the right side and on the left side. The close
angels will be beside him. The first one to follow him will be Muhammad
(s.a.w.s.) and the second one will be Ali (a.s.). He will conquer Rome,
Daylam, Sind, India, Kabul and the area of the Caspian.

The Qaim (a.s.) will not appear unless his appearance is preceded by
great terror, earthquakes, seditions, calamities, spread of plague,
killing among the Arabs, great disagreements among people, separation in
religion and bad conditions until one wishes to die day and night,
because of what madness he sees among people and their trying to eat
each other. The Qaim (a.s.) will appear after people reach a very high
extent of despair. Blessed is he, who sees the Qaim (a.s.) and becomes
one of his supporters, and woe unto whoever opposes him, disobeys his
orders and becomes his enemy.

He appears with a new method, new principles and new judgments. He will
be severe with the Arabs. He will just kill without forgiving anyone and
without caring for any blame, because he will act according to the will
of Allah.”

**100-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Qasim
bin Muhammad bin Husain from Ubais bin Hisham from Ibne Jabla from Ali
bin Abi Mughira from Abdullah bin Shareek from Bashar bin Ghalib Asadi
that he said: Imam Husain bin Ali (a.s.) said to me:

“O Bishr, when the Qaim al-Mahdi appears, he will bring five hundred men
of those, who have remained of Quraish (the Arabs), and kill them. Then
he brings other five hundred men and kills them. Then he brings other
five hundred and kills them.”

Bashir bin Ghalib, the brother of Bishr, said: “I witness that Husain
bin Ali (a.s.) has mentioned to my brother six times five hundreds.”

**101-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from
Muhammad bin Mufaddal bin Ibrahim from Muhammad bin Abdullah Ibne
Zurarah from Harith bin Mughira and Zarih Maharibi that they said: Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said:

**“Nothing remains between us and the Arabs, except slaughter. (He
pointed at his throat).”**

**102-***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Husain from
Muhammad bin Attar from Muhammad bin Hasan Raazi from Muhammad bin Ali
Sairafi from Muhammad bin Sinan from Muhammad bin Ali Khathami from
Sudair Sairafi from an Algerian who had vowed to offer his bondmaid and
had come with her to Mecca, he said:**

“I met the door keepers (of the Kaaba). I told them about my vow and my
bondmaid. Everyone of them said to me: “Bring her to me and Allah will
accept your vow.” I felt afraid of that. I told one of our companions of
Mecca about that and he said to me: “Would you listen to me?” I said:
“Yes, I would.” He said: “Look at that man, who is sitting beside Hajar
Aswad surrounded by people. He is Abu Ja’far Muhammad bin Ali bin Husain
(Baqir) (a.s.). Go to him. Tell him of your story and see what he will
say to you and act according to it.”

I went to him and said: “May Allah have mercy upon you! I am a man from
the Arabia. There is a bondmaid with me. I have vowed to offer her to
the House of Allah (the Kaaba). I told the doorkeepers of that and each
of them asked me to give him the bondmaid and that Allah would accept my
vow. I felt too afraid of that.” Abu Ja’far Baqir (a.s.) said: “O you
slave of Allah, the House neither eats nor drinks. Sell your bondmaid
and look for someone from among the people of your country who has come
to perform the Hajj and now has no money to go back home. Give him the
money so that he can return to his home.” I did as he had said to me.

I met the doorkeepers again. They asked me about the bondmaid and I told
them what Abu Ja’far Baqir (a.s.) had asked me to do. They said: “He is
a liar and ignorant. He does not know what he says.” I mentioned that to
Abu Ja’far Baqir (a.s.). He said to me: “Would you inform of what I tell
you?” I said: “Yes, I would.” He said: “Tell them that Abu Ja’far says
to you: How about you when your hands and legs are cut and hung on the
Kaaba and then you are asked to announce loudly: we are the thieves of
the Kaaba?” When I wanted to get up, he said: “It is not me, who will do
that, but it is a man from my descendants.”

**103-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from the same chains from
Muhammad bin Ali Ibne Mahbub from Amr bin Shimr from Jabir that he said:

“A man came to Abu Ja’far Baqir (a.s.) and said: “May Allah bless you!
Please take these five hundred dirhams from me. They are the Zakat of my
wealth.”

Abu Ja’far Baqir (a.s.) said: “You take them and divide them among the
poor Muslims of your neighbors and brothers.” Then he said: “When the

Qaim of Ahlul Bayt rises, he will divide the wealth equally and rule
justly over the people. Whoever obeys him certainly obeys Allah and
whoever disobeys him disobeys Allah. He is named as Mahdi, because he
guides to a hidden matter. He takes the Torah and the rest of the divine
Books of Allah from the cave of Antakya (Antioch). He will judge among
the people of the Torah with the Torah, among the people of the Bible
with the Bible, among the people of Psalms (of Prophet Dawood) with the
Psalms and among the people of the Quran with the Quran. The wealth of
the world is gathered to him from above the ground and from under the
ground. He says to people: Come on to the wrong you have done to your
kin! Come on to the bloods you have shed wrongfully! Come on to the sins
you have committed! He will offer something that no one has ever offered
before him. He will fill the world with justice, equity and light after
it has been filled with injustice, oppression and evil.”

**104-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from
Muhammad bin Mufaddal from Sadan bin Ishaq and Ahmad bin Husain and
Muhammad Qatwani together from Ibne Mahbub from Abdullah bin Sinan from
His Eminence, Abu Abdullah Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“The Staff of Musa (a.s.) was a myrtle stick from the tree of Paradise
which Jibraeel (a.s.) brought to him when he wanted to move to Madayan;
and that Staff with the coffer of Adam is in the hatch of Tiberia; it
neither decays not changes, till the time Qaim (a.s.) brings it out
during his reappearance.”

**105-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ahmad bin Hawza from
Nahawandi from Abdullah bin Hammad from Abul Jarud from Imam Muhammad
Baqir (a.s.) that he said:

“When Qaim (a.s.) reappears, he would do so with the flag of the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.), the ring of Prophet Sulaiman (a.s.) and
the staff and stone of Musa (a.s.). Then he would command an announcer
to say that none of his men must carry with themselves rations and
fodder for their beasts. His men would comment: It seems he wants to
starve us and our animals. But when they halt at the first station, he
would strike at the stone and out of it will gush forth food, water and
fodder. So they would all eat and drink from it and also feed their
animals. In this manner they would cross each stage of the journey till
they arrive at the rear of Kufa.”

**106-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from the same chains from
Abdullah from Ibne Bukair from Humran bin Ayyan that Imam Muhammad Baqir
(a.s.) said:

“As if I see your religion agitating in its blood and then no one will
restore it as it has been before except a man from us Ahlul Bayt. He
will give you two gifts a year and two incomes a month. You will be
granted wisdom at his time until a woman can judge with the Book of
Allah and the Sunnah of the Prophet (s.a.w.s.) in her house.”

**107-** ***Al-Kafi:*** It is narrated from a group of scholars from
Sahl from Ibne Mahbub from some of his associates from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) that he said:

“As if I can see the Qaim (a.s.) upon the pulpit wearing his cloak. He
takes out from his cloak a sealed proclamation. Then he breaks the seal
and

reads out the proclamation. The people become horrified and scatter away
from him like goats and sheep and except for his close confidants none
remains with him. Then he says something, hearing which those who had
run away from him are compelled to return. And I know what he would
say.”

**108-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Abdul Wahid bin
Abdullah from Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Rabah from Ahmad bin Ali Himyari
from [Hasan bin Ayyub from Abdul Karim Khathami from Ahmad bin] Hasan
bin Aban from Abdullah bin Ataa that he said:

I asked Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.): “When the Qaim (a.s.) rises, what will
he do to people?” He said: “He will annul all that has been established
before him as the Prophet (s.a.w.s.) has done and he will resume Islam
anew.”

**109-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Husain from
Muhammad bin Attar from Muhammad bin Hasan Raazi from Muhammad bin Ali
Kufi from Bazanti from Ibne Bukair from his father from Zurarah:

I asked Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.): “I want you to mention to me the
name of one of the virtuous men - I meant the Qaim (a.s.).” He said:
“His name is like mine.” I said: “Will he act like Muhammad (s.a.w.s.)?”
He said: “O Zurarah, how far! He will not act as the Prophet (s.a.w.s.)
has acted.” I asked: “May I be your ransom! Why not?” He said: “The
Prophet (s.a.w.s.) acted leniently towards his Ummah. He entreated
people kindly whereas the Qaim (a.s.) will use his sword with them. He
has been ordered by the book, which is with him, to do so. He will kill
(bad) people without forgiving anyone. Woe unto whoever opposes him
then.”

**110-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Ali Kufi
from Abdur Rahman bin [Abi] Hashim from Abil Khadija from Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (a.s.) that he said: Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said:

“I could have killed the fleers and finished off the wounded (warriors)
but I did not do fearing for the end of my companions that if they might
be wounded, they would not be killed. But the Qaim (a.s.) is permitted
to kill the fleers and to finish off the wounded.”

**111-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Ali
bin Hasan from Muhammad bin Khalid from Thalaba Ibne Maimoon from Hasan
bin Harun that he said:

“I was with Abu Abdullah Imam Sadiq (a.s.) when Mualla bin Khunais
asked: ‘Will the Qaim (a.s.), when he appears, act unlike the way, in
which Ali (a.s.) acted?’ He replied: ‘Yes, he will. Ali acted with
leniency and forgiveness, because he knew that his Shia were going to be
oppressed after him. But when the Qaim (a.s.) appears he would kill and
capture, because he knows that his Shia will never be defeated again.’”

This report is mentioned through another source in*Tahdhib Shaykh Tusi*
.

**112-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Ali
bin Hasan from his father from Rafa from Abdullah bin Ataa that he said:

I asked His Eminence, Abu Ja’far Baqir (a.s.): When Qaim (a.s.)
reappears how would he behave among the people? He replied: “He would
raze the foundations preceding him just as the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.) had done and he would initiate Islam anew.”

**113-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Husain from
Muhammad bin Attar from Muhammad bin Hasan from Muhammad bin Ali Kufi
from Bazanti from Alaa from Muhammad from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.)
that he said:

“If people know what the Qaim (a.s.) will do when he appears, most of
them would wish him not to appear. He would kill a large number
beginning with Quraish. He would kill so many until people say: He is
not from Muhammad’s progeny. If he were from Muhammad’s progeny, he
would have been merciful!”

**114-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from the same chains from
Bazanti from Asim bin Hamid Hannat from Abu Basir that he said: Imam
Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) said:

“The Qaim will rise with a new task, new principles and new judgments.
He will be severe with the Arabs. He will do nothing but killing. He
will not forgive anyone and he will not care for any blame, because he
acts for the sake of Allah.”

**115-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from the same chains from
Muhammad bin Ali Kufi from Ibne Mahbub from Bataini from Abu Basir that
His Eminence, Abu Abdullah Sadiq (a.s.) said:

“Why are you impatient for the advent of Qaim (a.s.)? By Allah, there
will be no garments except the coarse ones and no food except barley
with bran. His advent is not except with the sword and death under the
shade of the sword.”

**116-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Ahmad
bin Yusuf bin Yaqub from Ismail bin Mahran from Ibne Bataini from his
father from Wuhaib from Abu Basir from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he
said:

“When the Qaim appears, there will be nothing between him and between
the Arabs and Quraish except the sword. There will be nothing save
killing. So why do they urge on his appearance? By Allah, he wears rough
cloths and eats coarse barley. It will be just the sword and killing
under the shadow of the sword.”

**117-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Ali
bin Hasan Taimili from his father from Hasan bin Ali bin Yusuf and
Muhammad bin Ali from Sadan bin Muslim from some persons from Abu
Abdullah Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“In the same way that the person will be standing before His Eminence,
Qaim (a.s.) and His Eminence, will be enjoining good and forbidding
evil. Suddenly he would order that he should be brought back to him.
They will bring him back to His Eminence. His Eminence will order his
execution. Then there would be no one in the whole world but that he
would be afraid of His Eminence.”

**118-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Hamam
from Hamid bin Ziyad from Hasan bin Muhammad bin Samaa from Ahmad bin
Hasan from his uncle, Husain bin Ismail from Yaqub bin Shuaib from Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“Abu Abdullah Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said to me: Shall I show you the shirt
that the Qaim will put on when he rises?” I said: “Yes, please!” He
opened a case and took a shirt out of it. He spread the shirt. There was
some blood on

its left sleeve. He said: “This is the shirt of the Prophet (s.a.w.s.).
This blood dropped on it from the Prophet’s mouth on the day when his
front teeth had been struck.” I kissed the spots of blood and put them
on my face. Then Abu Abdullah (a.s.) folded the shirt and put it back in
its place.”

**119-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Ahmad from
Ubaidullah bin Musa from Ali bin Hasan from Ali bin Hassan from Abdur
Rahman bin Kathir that Abu Abdullah Imam Sadiq (a.s.) had said about
this Quranic verse:

<p dir="rtl">
أَتَى أَمْرُ اللّهِ فَلاَ تَسْتَعْجِلُوهُ
</p>

***“Allah’s commandment has come, therefore do not desire to hasten it…”
(Surah Nahl 16:1)***

“It is our matter (the appearance of the Qaim). Allah has ordered not to
hasten it until it is assisted with three armies; the angels, the
believers and terror. His (the Qaim’s) advent will be like the advent of
the Prophet (s.a.w.s.). Allah has said: “Even as your Lord caused you to
go forth from your house with the truth, though a party of the believers
were surely averse.

**120-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ahmad bin Hawza from
Ibrahim bin Ishaq from Abdullah bin Hammad from Bataini that Imam (a.s.)
said:

“When the Qaim (a.s.) rises, 313 angels will descend. A third of them
will be on gray horses, a third on piebald horses and a third on red
horses.”

**121-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from the same chains from
Bataini from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“When the Qaim rises, the swords will be brought down. On each sword
there will be the name of the man, who will use it in fighting, and the
name of his father.”

**122-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Ali
bin Hasan Taimili from Abbas bin Aamir from Musa bin Bukair from Bashir
Nubal that he said: and also narrated to me Ali bin Ahmad from Abdullah
bin Muslim from Ayyub bin Nuh from Safwan from Bashir in the words of
the report of Ibne Uqdah that he said:

When I came to Medina I went to the house of Abu Ja’far Baqir (a.s.). I
found that his mule was saddled at the door. I sat in front of the
house. He came out. I greeted him. He dismounted and came towards me. He
asked me: “Where are you from?” I said: “I am from Iraq.” He said:
“Which part of Iraq?” I said: “From Kufa.” He said: “Who has accompanied
you on your way?” I said: “Some people of Muhadditha.” He said: “What is
Muhadditha?” I said: “Murjia.” He said: “Woe unto these Murjias! To whom
will they resort tomorrow when our Qaim appears?” I said: “They say: If
that occurs, we and you will be the same before justice.” He said:
“Whoever repents, Allah accepts his repentance, whoever conceals
hypocrisy, Allah damns him and whoever announces something of hypocrisy,
his blood is to be shed.”

Then he said: “By Allah, he (the Qaim) will slaughter them as a butcher
slaughters sheep,” pointing to his throat.

I said: “They say: If he appears and controls the affairs, he will not
shed even a drop of blood.”

He said: “It is not as they say. I swear by Him, in Whose hand my soul
is! It will be so terrible until we and you wipe blood and sweat
together.”

**123-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** A similar tradition is narrated from Ibne
Uqdah from Muhammad bin Muslim from Uthman bin Saeed from Ahmad bin
Sulaiman from Musa bin Bakr from Bashir Nubbal, except that he said:

“When I said to Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.): “They say: If he appears and
controls the affairs, he will not shed even a drop of blood.”

He said: “It is not as they say. I swear by Him, in Whose hand my soul
is! It will be so terrible until we and you wipe blood and sweat
together.”

I said: “I hope that his matter (rising) will be so easy.”

He said: “It will be not so until you wipe blood and sweat together.”
Then he touched his forehead.

**124-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Ahmad from
Ubaidullah bin Musa from Hasan bin Muawiyah from Ibne Mahbub from Isa
bin Sulaiman from Mufaddal that he said:

“I heard Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (a.s.) mentioning the Qaim (a.s.). I
said: ‘I hope that his matter (rising) will be so easy.’

He said: “It will not be so until you wipe blood and sweat together.”

**125-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Abdul Wahid bin
Abdullah from Muhammad bin Ja’far from Ibne Abil Khattab from Muhammad
bin Sinan from Yunus bin Zabyan that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said:

“The followers of truth will always spend their days in distress. Know
that the period of distress will be short and the period of Qaim’s rule
will be long.”

**126-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Husain from
Muhammad bin Yahya from Muhammad bin Hasan Raazi from Muhammad bin Ali
from Mamar bin Khallad that he said:

Once the Qaim was mentioned before Abul Hasan Reza (a.s.); he said:
“Today you are at ease more than that day (when the Qaim will appear).”
They asked: “How is that?” He said: “When our Qaim (a.s.) appears, there
will be nothing save blood, sweat and sleeping on the saddles. His
cloths are not but rough and his food is not but coarse.”

**127-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Abdul Wahid from
Ahmad bin Hawza from Nahawandi from Abdullah bin Hammad from Mufaddal
that he said:

Once I was with Abu Abdullah Imam Sadiq (a.s.) during the
circumambulation (around the Kaaba). He looked at me and said: “O
Mufaddal, you seem distressed and uneasy! What is the matter?”

I said: “May I be your ransom! I think of the Abbasids and their
prevailing rule and tyranny. If it (the rule) is in your hands, then we
will be with you!”

He said: “O Mufadhdhal, if it is so, it will be politics in the night,
achieving people’s affairs in the day, eating coarse food and wearing
rough cloths like Amirul Momineen (a.s.); otherwise it will be (going
to) Hell. It has gone away from us. We eat and drink. Have you ever seen
an oppression that Allah has made as a blessing like this?!”

**128-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from the same chains from
Abdullah bin Hammad from Amr bin Shimr that he said:

Once I was with Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (a.s.) in his house. The house was
crowded and people were asking him about different things. Whenever he
was asked about something, he gave the sufficient answer. I began to
cry. He asked: “O Amr, why are you crying?”

I said: “May I be your ransom! How do I not cry? Is there anyone other
than you in this Ummah? You are imprisoned here, the door is closed and
the curtain is lowered before you!”

He said: “O Amr, do not cry! We eat good foods and wear soft cloths. If
what you say occurs, we will eat coarse foods and wear rough cloths like
Amirul Momineen Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s.); otherwise putting on ties in
Hell.”

Flag of the Qaim is same as the flag of the Prophet
---------------------------------------------------

**129-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from the same chains from
Abdullah bin Hammad from Abdullah bin Sinan from Abi [Abdullah] Ja’far
[bin Muhammad] that he said:

“The Almighty Allah has fixed the time of the reappearance of Imam
Zamana (a.s.) against the time fixed by the time-fixers. The flag of the
Qaim is the same flag as that of the Prophet, which Jibraeel brought
from the heavens in the Battle of Badr and he waved it during the
battle.

Jibraeel said: “O Muhammad, by Allah, this flag is not of cotton, flax
or silk.” I said: “Then what is it of?” He said: “It is of the leaves of
Paradise. The Prophet (s.a.w.s.) spread it on the day of Badr and then
he has folded it and gave it to Imam Ali (a.s.). It was still with Imam
Ali (a.s.) until he spread it on the day of the battle of Jamal against
the people of Basra and gained victory. Then he folded and kept it safe.
It is with us and no one is to spread it until the Qaim (a.s.) appears.
When he appears, he will spread it and then everyone in the east and the
west will curse it. Terror will move a month before it, a month behind
it, a month on its right side and a month on its left side.”

Then he said: “O Abu Muhammad, he (the Qaim) will appear depressed and
angry because of the anger of Allah with the human beings. He will
appear wearing the Prophet’s shirt, which the Prophet put on in the
battle of Badr, turban, armor and holding the Prophet’s sword Zulfiqar.
He will unsheathe the sword for eight months. He will kill excessively.

He will begin with Bani Shaibah. He will cut their hands and will hang
them on the Kaaba. Then his caller will call out: “These are the thieves
of the Kaaba.” Then he will move to kill the people of Quraish. He will
not leave anyone of them safe from his sword.

The Qaim (a.s.) will not appear except after that two books will have
been read openly; one in Basra and the other in Kufa. By these books
people will declare their immunity of (believing in) Ali (a.s.).”

**130-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Abdul Wahid bin
Abdullah from Muhammad bin Ja’far from Ibne Abil Khattab from Muhammad
bin Sinan from Hammad bin Abi Talha from Thumali from Imam Muhammad
Baqir (a.s.) that he said:

“Once Abu Ja’far Baqir (a.s.) said to me: “O Thabit, as if I can see the
Qaim of my family coming near to your Najaf.” He pointed to Kufa and

then added: “When he comes to your Najaf, he will spread the banner of
the Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and then the angels of Badr will descend to him.”

I asked him: “What is the banner of the Prophet (s.a.w.s.)?” He said:
“Its pole is from the pole of the Throne of Allah and from His mercy.
The rest of it is from the assistance of Allah. Everything that he
swoops on with this banner Allah will make it perish.” I asked: “Is it
kept with you until the Qaim (a.s.) appears or it is brought then?” He
said: “No. It is brought then.” I asked: “Who will bring it?” He
replied: “Jibraeel (a.s.).”

**131-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from
Muhammad bin Mufaddal from Muhammad bin Abdullah bin Zurarah from
Muhammad bin Marwan from Fudhayl bin Yasar that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
said:

“When our Qaim appears, he will receive harms from the ignorant people
more and bitterer than that the Prophet (s.a.w.s.) had received from the
ignorant people of the pre-Islamic age.” I said: “How is that?” He said:
“The Prophet (s.a.w.s.) came to people while they used to worship idols
of stone and wood whereas when the Qaim comes to people, they will
protest against him by interpreting the Book of Allah according to their
fancies. By Allah, he (the Qaim) will insert his justice into their
houses like the entering of hot and cold. “

**132-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Abdul Wahid from
Muhammad bin Ja’far from Ibne Abil Khattab from Muhammad bin Ibne Sinan
from Husain bin Mukhtar from Thumali from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.)
that he said:

**“When the man of this matter (the Qaim) appears, he will receive
(harm) from people worse than what the Prophet (s.a.w.s.) has
received.”**

**133-***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Hamam from
Hamid bin Ziyad from Hasan bin Muhammad bin Samaa from Ahmad bin Hasan
Mithami from Muhammad bin Abi Hamza from some of his associates from
Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:**

**“The Qaim will face (difficulties) in his wars more than what the
Prophet (s.a.w.s.) faced. The Prophet (s.a.w.s.) came to the people
while they used to worship stone and wood, whereas the people of the
Qaim will protest against him by the means of the Book of Allah and will
fight him by the means of the Book of Allah.”**

**134-***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Ahmad from
Ubaidullah bin Musa Alawi from Muhammad bin Husain from Muhammad bin
Sinan from Qutaibah Aashi from Aban bin Taghlib that he heard Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) say:**

“Abu Abdullah Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said: “When the banner of the truth (the
Mahdi) appears, the people of the east and the west will curse it. Do
you know why?” I said: “No, I do not.” He said: “That is because of what
harms the people receive from his (the Mahdi’s) family before his
appearance.”

**135-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Abdul Wahid from
Muhammad bin Ja’far from Muhammad bin Husain from Muhammad bin Sinan
from Qutaibah from Mansur bin Hazim from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that
he said:

“When the banner of the truth is raised, it will be cursed by the people
of the east and the west.” I said: “What for?” He said: “That is because
of what people receive from the Hashemites (before the appearance of the
Qaim).”

**136-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Ahmad from
Ubaidullah bin Musa and Ahmad bin Ali Alam from Muhammad bin Ali Sairafi
from Muhammad bin Sadaqah and Ibne Uzniya Abdi from Muhammad bin Sinan
together from Yaqub Sarraj that Abu Abdullah Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said:

“The Qaim will fight the people of thirteen cities and nations and they
will fight him; Mecca, Medina, Basra, Dast Maysan, Shaam, the Umayyads,
the Kurds, the Arab nomads, the people of the tribes of Dhabba, Ghaniy,
Bahila, Azd and the people of Rayy (a town in Iran).”

**137-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Ahmad
bin Ziyad from Ali bin Sabah from [Abi] Ali bin Muhammad Hadhrami from
Ja’far bin Muhammad from Ibrahim bin Abdul Hamid that he said: Someone
heard Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) say:

“When the Qaim (a.s.) appears, those who have thought themselves as his
followers will apostatize and those, who are somehow like the
worshippers of the sun and the moon, will believe in him.”

**138-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Ahmad
bin Yusuf from Ismail bin Mahran from Ibne Bataini from Mufaddal bin
Muhammad from Hariz from Abi Abdullah from his father from Ali bin
Husain (a.s.) that he said:

“When the Qaim appears, Allah will cure every sick believer and restore
to him his power.”

**139-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Ali
bin Husain from Husain and Muhammad sons of [Ali bin] Yusuf bin Sadan
bin Muslim from Sabbah Mazni from Harith bin Hasira Habbatul Arni that
Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said:

“As if I see our Shia in the mosque of Kufa setting up pavilions to
teach the people the Quran as it has been revealed but when our Qaim
appears, he will destroy it (the mosque) and level its mihrab to the
ground.”

**140-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Husain from
Muhammad bin Yahya from Muhammad bin Hasan Raazi from Muhammad bin Ali
Kufi from Abdullah bin Muhammad Hajjal from Ali bin Uqbah that Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said:

“As if I see the Shia of Ali with the Quran in their hands teaching
people the divine principles.”

**141-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ahmad bin Hawza from
Nahawandi from Abdullah bin Hammad from Sabbah Mazni from Harith bin
Hasira from Ibne Nubatah from Amirul Momineen (a.s.) that he said:

“I heard Ali (a.s.) say: “As if I see the Persians setting up their
pavilions in the mosque of Kufa and teaching people the Quran as it has
been revealed!”

I said: “O Amirul Momineen, is the Quran not as it has been revealed?”

He said: “No, it is not. The names of seventy persons of Quraish have
been removed from it. The name of Abu Lahab has been left (in the Quran)

just to remind the Prophet (s.a.w.s.) of something, because he is the
Prophet’s uncle.”

**142-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Ahmad from
Ubaidullah bin Musa from Ja’far bin Yahya from his father from Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“How about you when the companions of the Qaim (a.s.) set up their
pavilions in the mosque of Kufa and then he (the Qaim) appears with new
ideals and a new rule? He will be severe with the Arabs.”

**143-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Hamam
from Fazari from Abi Tahir Warraq from Uthman bin Isa from Abi Sabbah
Kanani that he said:

Once I was with Abu Abdullah Imam Sadiq (a.s.) when an old man came to
him and said: “My sons became undutiful to me and my brothers turned
away from me.” Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said: “Do you not know that the truth
has a government and the untruth also has a government? Each of them is
low in the state of the other. Whoever enjoys the ease of falsehood will
be punished in the state of truth.”

**144-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ahmad bin Hawza from
Nahawandi from Abdullah bin Hammad Ansari from Muhammad bin Ja’far that
Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said:

“When Qaim (a.s.) rises up, he will appoint a person in every province
of the earth and tell him: If you ever be in a position when you cannot
understand or you do not know that what judgment you should deliver,
glance at the palm of your hand and act upon what is mentioned there.
And he would dispatch an army to Constantinople. When it reaches the
gulf they would write something with their feet and walk on the surface
of the water. The people of Constantinople will say: They are the
companions of one who walks on water, then what would be his own
excellence? At that moment they would open up the gates of the city for
them. They would enter the city and order whatever they desire.”

**145-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Abdul Wahid from
Muhammad bin Ja’far Qarshi from Ibne Abil Khattab from Muhammad bin
Sinan from Hariz from Aban bin Taghlib that he said: I heard Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (a.s.) say:

“This world does not end until a caller from the heavens will call out:
“O people of the truth, come together!” They will crowd in one place.
Then the caller will call out again: “O people of falsehood, come
together!” They will crowd in one place.” I said: “Can these people mix
with those people?” He said: “No, by Allah, they cannot. Allah has said:
‘On no account will Allah leave the believers in the condition, which
you are in until He separates the evil from the good.”

**146-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Ahmad
bin Yusuf from Ismail bin Mahran from Ibne Bataini from his father from
Wuhaib from Abu Basir from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“Everyone of you is to prepare himself for the appearance of the Qaim
even if it be with one arrow, because if Allah knows that one intends
that sincerely, He may prolong his life that he may live until the
appearance of the Qaim and then he becomes one of his assistants and
supporters.”

**147-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Ali
bin Hasan Taimili from Muhammad and Ahmad sons of Hasan from their
father from Thalaba from Jomi Kunnasi from Abu Basir from Kamil from
Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“When our Qaim will appear he will call the people to a new faith like
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) has called and indeed Islam has begun
strange and it will return strange as it has begun. Blessed are the
strangers!”

**148-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Abdul Wahid from
Muhammad bin Ja’far Qarshi from Ibne Abil Khattab from Muhammad bin
Sinan from Ibne Muskan from Abu Basir that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
said:

“Islam has begun strange and it will return strange as it has begun.
Blessed are the strangers!” Abu Basir said: “Please, explain to me what
this means!” He said: “The Qaim will invite to a new mission as the
Prophet (s.a.w.s.) has done.”

**149-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from the same chains from
Ibne Muskan from Malik Jahni that he said: I said to Imam Muhammad Baqir
(a.s.):

“We describe the man of this matter (the Qaim) with the aspects that no
one of the people has ever had.”

He said: “No, by Allah, it is not so. It is he himself, who will argue
with you about that and will invite you to it.”

**150-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Abdul Wahid from
Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Rabah from Muhammad bin Abbas Ibne Isa from Ibne
Bataini from Shuaib Haddad from Abu Basir that he said:

“I asked Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) to explain to me the saying of Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) “Islam has begun strange and it will return strange as
it has begun. Blessed are the strangers!”

He said: “O Abu Muhammad, when the Qaim (a.s.) appears, he will invite
to a new mission as the Prophet (s.a.w.s.) did.”

I got up, kissed his head and said to him: “I witness that you are my
Imam in this life and in the afterlife. I support your guardians and
resist your enemies. I witness that you are the guardian of Allah.”

He said: “May Allah have mercy upon you!”

**151-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Hamam
from Ahmad bin Mabandad from Ahmad bin Halil from Ibne Abi Umair from
Abi Mughra from Abu Basir that he said: His Eminence, Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) said:

“When Amirul Momineen (a.s.) confronted the Basrans, he unfurled his
standard, that is the standard of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.), therefore
they were routed and the sun had not yet set when they called out: O son
of Abu Talib, you have destroyed us (or we bring faith).[^10] At that
time His Eminence ordered that the prisoners not be killed, the wounded
must not be attacked, the runaways must not be pursued and whosoever
drops his weapons would be secure and whosoever shuts the door, his
house (and one who remains there) is safe.”

In the battle of Siffeen (the companions of His Eminence) requested him
to wave that flag once more but the Imam did not agree to it. They
petitioned him through the mediation of Hasan, Husain (a.s.) and Ammar

Yasir (r.a.). His Eminence said to Husain (a.s.): “My son, a time period
is appointed for these people and they would reach it, and it is a flag
that none would wave after me, except Qaim (a.s.).”

**152-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Yahya
bin Zakariya bin Shaiban from Yunus bin Kalib from Ibne Bataini from his
father from Abu Basir that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said:

“The Qaim will not appear until the chain is completed.” I said: “How is
the chain completed?” He said: “With ten thousand (fighters), Jibraeel
will be on his (the Qaim’s) right and Mikaeel to his left. Then he will
shake the banner and move. Everyone in the east and in the west will
curse the banner. After that people will gather around it one by one.”

**153-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Ali
bin Hasan Taimili from Hasan and Muhammad, sons of Ali bin Yusuf from
Sadan bin Muslim from a person from Mufaddal bin Umar that he said: Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said:

“When the Imam (Mahdi) calls out the Azaan, he will pray to Allah with
His Hebrew name and then his companions, who will be three hundred and
thirteen men, will be permitted to join him. They will gather like the
cloudlets of autumn. They will be the bearers of the banners. Some of
them will be missed in their beds in the night and in the morning find
themselves in Mecca. Some of them will be seen traveling on the clouds
during the day. They will be known by their names, their fathers’ names
and their lineages.”

I said: “May I be your ransom! Which of them is greater in faith?”

He said: “It is those, who travel on the clouds during the day. They are
the missed ones. About these companions Allah has revealed this verse:

<p dir="rtl">
أَيْنَ مَا تَكُونُواْ يَأْتِ بِكُمُ اللّهُ جَمِيعًا
</p>

***“…wherever you are, Allah will bring you all together…” (Surah
Baqarah 2:148)***

**154-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Abdul Wahid from
Muhammad bin Ja’far Qarshi from Ibne Abil Khattab from Muhammad bin
Sinan from Zaris from Abu Khalid Kabuli from Ali bin Husain and Muhammad
bin Ali (a.s.) that he said:

“Al-Fuqada’ are persons, who will be missed in their beds and in the
morning they will be found in Mecca. It is they, who are missing or
absent persons.” This is the meaning of the verse:

<p dir="rtl">
أَيْنَ مَا تَكُونُواْ يَأْتِ بِكُمُ اللّهُ جَمِيعًا
</p>

***“…wherever you are, Allah will bring you all together…” (Surah
Baqarah 2:148)***

That is they are the companions of the Qaim.

**155-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ahmad bin Hawza from
Nahawandi from Abdullah bin Hammad from Ibne Bukair from Aban bin
Taghlib that he said:

I was with Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) in the Masjid of Mecca when he took
my hand and said: “O Aban, Allah will send three hundred and thirteen
men to this mosque of yours in Mecca. The people of Mecca know that
those men’s fathers and grandfathers are not created as yet. They will
have swords, on which one thousand words are written. Each word is a
clue for

one thousand words. Then Allah will send the wind from every valley to
say: “This is Mahdi. He rules like Prophet Dawood and Sulaiman (a.s.).
He does not ask for evidence.”

**156-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Ahmad from
Ubaidullah bin Musa from Harun bin Muslim from Masadah bin Sadaqah from
Abdul Hamid Tawil from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) regarding the verse:

<p dir="rtl">
أَمَّن يُجِيبُ الْمُضْطَرَّ إِذَا دَعَاهُ وَيَكْشِفُ السُّوءَ
وَيَجْعَلُكُمْ خُلَفَاء الْأَرْضِ
</p>

***“Or, Who answers the distressed one when he calls upon Him and
removes the evil, and He will make you successors in the earth.” (Surah
Naml 27:62)***

“This verse is revealed about the Qaim (a.s.) and Jibraeel who sits on
the spout in the form of a bird. Jibraeel will be the first to pay
allegiance to the Qaim and then the three hundred and thirteen
companions will pledge allegiance. Those (of the Qaim’s companions), who
are able to travel will arrive in time and those who cannot would
disappear from their beds. It is the same that is mentioned in the
saying of Allah:

<p dir="rtl">
فَاسْتَبِقُواْ الْخَيْرَاتِ أَيْنَ مَا تَكُونُواْ يَأْتِ بِكُمُ اللّهُ
جَمِيعًا
</p>

***“Therefore hasten to (do) good works; wherever you are, Allah will
bring you all together.” (Surah Baqarah 2:148)***

**The good work is the belief in the guardianship (Wilayat) of Ahlul
Bayt.**

**157-***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ahmad bin Hawza from
Nahawandi from Abdullah bin Hammad from Abul Jarud from Imam Muhammad
Baqir (a.s.) that he said:**

**“The companions of the Qaim will be three hundred and thirteen men.
They will be foreigners. Some of them will be carried on the clouds
during the day. They will be known by their names, their fathers’ names,
their qualities and lineages. Some of them will be taken from their beds
to be in Mecca in the morning without any appointment.”**

**158-***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Husain from
Muhammad bin Yahya from Muhammad bin Hasan Raazi from Muhammad bin Ali
Kufi from Ali bin Hakam from Bataini from Abu Basir from Imam Muhammad
Baqir (a.s.) that he said:**

“The Qaim will come from the defile of Mt. Thi Tuwa with three hundred
and thirteen men equal to the number of fighters in the Battle of Badr.
He will lean against Hajar Aswad and wave his victorious banner.”

**Ali bin Abu Hamza said: “I mentioned that to Abul Hasan Musa bin
Ja’far Kazim (a.s.) and he said: “It is a published book.”**

**159-***Ghaibat Nomani:*** Ahmad bin Hawza has narrated from Nahawandi
from Abdullah bin Hammad from Bataini that he said: Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) said:**

**“While the young men of the Shia are sleeping on the roofs of their
houses, they will be taken to their companion (the Qaim) within the same
night without any appointment. In the morning they will find themselves
in Mecca.”**

**160-***Ghaibat Nomani:*** Ibne Uqdah has narrated from Ali bin Faddal
from Muhammad bin Hamza from Muhammad bin Saeed from Uthman bin Hammad
from Sulaiman bin Harun Ajali from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he
said:**

“The companions of the Qaim are reserved for him. Even if all the
peoples will have gone, Allah will bring him his companions. It is they,
about whom Allah has said:

<p dir="rtl">
فَإِن يَكْفُرْ بِهَا هَـؤُلاء فَقَدْ وَكَّلْنَا بِهَا قَوْمًا لَّيْسُواْ
بِهَا بِكَافِرِينَ
</p>

***“…therefore if these disbelieve in it We have already entrusted with
it a people who are not disbelievers in it.” (Surah Anam 6:89)***

…and has said:

<p dir="rtl">
فَسَوْفَ يَأْتِي اللّهُ بِقَوْمٍ يُحِبُّهُمْ وَيُحِبُّونَهُ أَذِلَّةٍ
عَلَى الْمُؤْمِنِينَ أَعِزَّةٍ عَلَى الْكَافِرِينَ
</p>

***“…then Allah will bring a people, He shall love them and they shall
love Him, lowly before the believers, mighty against the unbelievers…”
(Surah Maidah 5:54)***

**161-** ***Kashful Ghumma:*** It is narrated from Jabir from Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“The Almighty Allah will put awe into the hearts of our Shia and when
our Qaim arises and our Mahdi will reappear, each of his followers will
become braver than a lion and sharper than a spear.”

**162-** ***Al-Kafi:*** It is narrated from a group of scholars from
Sahl from Ibne Shammun from Asamma from Malik bin Atiyyah from Ibne
Taghlib that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said to him:

“Two bloods are made lawful by Allah, the Mighty and Sublime and no one
has applied that law till now; now when the Qaim of Ahle Bayt (a.s.)
arises, he will apply this law and will not ask for any testimony or
proof. The married fornicator will be stoned to death and the one who
refuses to pay the Zakat will be beheaded.”

**163-** ***Al-Kafi:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Abu Abdullah
and Muhammad bin Hasan from Sahl bin Ziyad from Muhammad bin Yahya from
Ahmad bin Muhammad together from Hasan bin Abbas Harish from Abu Ja’far
the second (a.s.), Imam Muhammad Taqi (a.s.) that he said: Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (a.s.) said:

“Once my respected father was doing Tawaf of Kaaba when a person waited
for him with his head covered with a sheet. He left the Tawaf for his
sake and he took him to a house, which was at the side of mount Safa.
Then he sent a person to us and we were three persons. When I reached
there he said: Welcome of son of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.).

After that he placed his hand on my head and said: O trustee of Allah
after your respected forefathers, may Allah bless you.

O Abu Ja’far, if you like you can narrate to me or if you like I can
narrate to you. If you like you can ask me and if you like I can ask
you. And if you like you can testify for me and if you like I can
testify for you.

Then he said: I want all this.

The conversation continued till that person said:

Thus I desire that your eyes should be with the Mahdi of this Ummah and
that the angels remain between the earth and the sky with the swords of
the

progeny of Dawood and continue to chastise the souls of the infidels and
continue to make the souls of the living with them.

Then he removed a sword and said: This is also one of those swords.

My respected father said: By the one who selected Muhammad from all the
human beings. That person removed the sheet from his head and said: I am
Ilyas (prophet of God). Whatever I asked about you was not that I was
unaware of it. On the contrary it was so that this tradition should
become a strong proof for your men.

The conversation continued after this as well and then the gentleman
(Ilyas) arose and departed from there beyond the sight of the
onlookers.”

**164-** ***Ikhtisaas:*** It is narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
that he said:

“During the rule of Imam Qaim (a.s.) our Shia will hold high offices and
command great respect; each of them will be given the strength of forty
men.”

Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) said: “At this time the heart of our Shia are
full of the awe of our enemies; but when our rule arrives and our Mahdi
reappears, each of followers will be more daring than a lion and sharper
than a spear. He would trample our enemy and cut off his head himself.”

Through the same chain of narrators, Rabai has narrated from Buraid
Ajali who says that once Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) was told that there
was a large population of Shia in Kufa. If the Imam calls them, they
will obey him and act on his orders.

He said: “Is it possible for a believer to put his hand in the bag of
another believer brother and take out as much money as he requires,
without the latter objecting to him?”

“No, such a thing is not possible.”

Imam said: “When such is case with money, what can be said about
sacrificing ones life on another?”

Then he said: “Know that, this is a time to maintain status quo; during
this period we would marry among each others families, inherit each
other, apply penalties on them and also return their trusts; but during
the reappearance of Imam Qaim (a.s.) it would be a period of true
friendship and amity. At that time, a believer would be able to put his
hand in the bag of another believer brother and take out as much money
as he requires, without the latter objecting to him.”

**165-** ***Tafsir Furat:*** It is narrated from Ja’far bin Muhammad
Fazari from Imran bin Dahir that a man asked Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.):

“Can we greet Imam Qaim (a.s.) as Amirul Momineen (a.s.)?”

He replied: ‘No, it is the title that the Almighty Allah had reserved
only for Amirul Momineen Ali (a.s.). Anyone who adopted the either
before or after him was a denier.’

“Than what should we address him as?”

He replied: “You should greet him as: Peace be on you O the remnant of
Allah.” After that the Imam recited the following verse:

<p dir="rtl">
بَقِيَّةُ اللّهِ خَيْرٌ لَّكُمْ إِن كُنتُم مُّؤْمِنِينَ
</p>

***“What remains with Allah is better for you if you are believers…”
(Surah Hud 11:86)***

**166-** ***Tafsir Furat:*** It is narrated from Husain bin Ali bin Bazi
from Zaid bin Ali that he said:

“When the Qaim Aale Muhammad (a.s.) reappears, he would say: We are
those whom the Almighty Allah has promised in His Book in the following
verse:

<p dir="rtl">
الَّذِينَ إِن مَّكَّنَّاهُمْ فِي الْأَرْضِ أَقَامُوا الصَّلَاةَ وَآتَوُا
الزَّكَاةَ وَأَمَرُوا بِالْمَعْرُوفِ وَنَهَوْا عَنِ الْمُنكَرِ وَلِلَّهِ
عَاقِبَةُ الْأُمُورِ
</p>

***“ Those who, should We establish them in the land, will keep up
prayer and pay the poor-rate and enjoin good and forbid evil; and
Allah’s is the end of affairs.” (Surah Hajj 22:41)***

**167-** ***Tafsir Furat:*** It is narrated from Qasim bin Ubaid from
Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said with regard to the following verse
of the Holy Quran:

الَّذِينَ يَمْشُونَ عَلَى الْأَرْضِ هَوْنًا وَإِذَا خَاطَبَهُمُ
الْجَاهِلُونَ قَالُوا سَلَامًا {63} وَالَّذِينَ يَبِيتُونَ لِرَبِّهِمْ
سُجَّدًا وَقِيَامًا {64} وَالَّذِينَ يَقُولُونَ رَبَّنَا اصْرِفْ عَنَّا
عَذَابَ جَهَنَّمَ إِنَّ عَذَابَهَا كَانَ غَرَامًا {65} إِنَّهَا سَاءتْ
مُسْتَقَرًّا وَمُقَامًا {66} وَالَّذِينَ إِذَا أَنفَقُوا لَمْ يُسْرِفُوا
وَلَمْ يَقْتُرُوا وَكَانَ بَيْنَ ذَلِكَ قَوَامًا {67} وَالَّذِينَ لَا
يَدْعُونَ مَعَ اللَّهِ إِلَهًا آخَرَ وَلَا يَقْتُلُونَ النَّفْسَ الَّتِي
حَرَّمَ اللَّهُ إِلَّا بِالْحَقِّ وَلَا يَزْنُونَ وَمَن يَفْعَلْ ذَلِكَ
يَلْقَ أَثَامًا {68} يُضَاعَفْ لَهُ الْعَذَابُ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ
وَيَخْلُدْ فِيهِ مُهَانًا {69} إِلَّا مَن تَابَ وَآمَنَ وَعَمِلَ عَمَلًا
صَالِحًا فَأُوْلَئِكَ يُبَدِّلُ اللَّهُ سَيِّئَاتِهِمْ حَسَنَاتٍ وَكَانَ
اللَّهُ غَفُورًا رَّحِيمًا {70} وَمَن تَابَ وَعَمِلَ صَالِحًا فَإِنَّهُ
يَتُوبُ إِلَى اللَّهِ مَتَابًا {71} وَالَّذِينَ لَا يَشْهَدُونَ الزُّورَ
وَإِذَا مَرُّوا بِاللَّغْوِ مَرُّوا كِرَامًا {72} وَالَّذِينَ إِذَا
ذُكِّرُوا بِآيَاتِ رَبِّهِمْ لَمْ يَخِرُّوا عَلَيْهَا صُمًّا
وَعُمْيَانًا {73} وَالَّذِينَ يَقُولُونَ رَبَّنَا هَبْ لَنَا مِنْ
أَزْوَاجِنَا وَذُرِّيَّاتِنَا قُرَّةَ أَعْيُنٍ وَاجْعَلْنَا
لِلْمُتَّقِينَ إِمَامًا {74} أُوْلَئِكَ يُجْزَوْنَ الْغُرْفَةَ بِمَا
صَبَرُوا وَيُلَقَّوْنَ فِيهَا تَحِيَّةً وَسَلَامًا {75} خَالِدِينَ
فِيهَا حَسُنَتْ مُسْتَقَرًّا وَمُقَامًا {76}

***“Who walk on the earth in humbleness, and when the ignorant address
them, they say: Peace. And they who pass the night prostrating
themselves before their Lord and standing. And they who say: O our Lord!
turn away from us the punishment of hell, surely the punishment thereof
is a lasting evil. Surely it is an evil abode and (evil) place to stay.
And they who when they spend, are neither extravagant nor parsimonious,
and (keep) between these the just mean. And they who do not call upon
another god with Allah and do not slay the soul, which Allah has
forbidden except in the requirements of justice, and (who) do not commit
fornication and he who does this shall find a requital of sin. The
punishment shall be doubled to him on the day of resurrection, and he
shall abide therein in abasement. Except him who repents and believes
and does a good deed; so these are they of whom Allah changes the evil
deeds to good ones; and Allah is Forgiving, Merciful. And whoever
repents and does good, he surely turns to Allah a (goodly) turning. And
they who do not bear witness to what is***

***false, and when they pass by what is vain, they pass by nobly. And
they who, when reminded of the communications of their Lord, do not fall
down thereat deaf and blind. And they who say: O our Lord! grant us in
our wives and our offspring the joy of our eyes, and make us guides to
those who guard (against evil). These shall be rewarded with high places
because they were patient, and shall be met therein with greetings and
salutations. Abiding therein; goodly the abode and the resting-place.”
(Surah Furqan 25:63-76)***

It is talking about the successors who would adopt a very gentle stance
on the earth; but when Imam Mahdi (a.s.) reappears and the Ahle
Bayt-haters are presented before him, if they accept faith in Wilayat it
is all right, otherwise he would have them executed or compel them to
pay Jizya like disbelievers have to.”

**168-** ***Al-Kafi:*** It is narrated from some scholars from Ahmad bin
Muhammad from Ali bin Hasan Teemi from his brothers, Muhammad and Ahmad
from Ali bin Yaqub Hashmi from Marwan bin Muslim from Saeed bin Umar
Jofi from an Egyptian from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

**“When the Qaim will appear he will cut off the hands of Bani Shaibah
and circle the Kaaba with them saying: These are the thieves of
Allah.”**

**169-***Al-Kafi:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Yahya etc. from
Ahmad bin Hilal from Ahmad bin Muhammad from a man from His Eminence,
Abu Abdullah Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:**

“The first thing on the agenda of justice that Qaim (a.s.) would perform
is that: the announcer of His Eminence would call out: Those who are
performing the recommended Hajj may please leave the Black Stone and
circumambulation for those who are performing obligatory Hajj.”

**170-** ***Al-Kafi:*** It is narrated from Ali from his father from
Ibne Abi Umair from Hammad from Halabi that he asked Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.):

“Is it detestable (*Makruh* ) to pray in covered Masjids (having roof)?

He replied: Yes, however nowadays there is no problem in it; but see
what he does when the time of justice arrives.”

**171-** ***Al-Kafi:*** It is narrated from Hasan bin Ali Alawi from
Sahal bin Jamhur from Abdul Azeem Ibne Abdullah Alawi from Hasan bin
Husain Arani from Amr bin Jami’ that he asked Imam Muhammad Baqir
(a.s.):

“What is the legal position about praying in Masjids having pictures?

He replied: I consider it detestable (*Makruh* ), however at present
there is no problem in it for you; but when justice is established, you
see what he does about it.”

**172-** ***At-Tahdhib:*** It is narrated from Ahmad bin Muhammad from
Yaqub bin Abdullah from Ismail bin Zaid, freed slave of Kahili from Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said: Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said about
Masjid Kufa:

“(In it) there is a fountain of oil, a fountain of milk, a fountain of
water for the believers to drink from and a fountain of water for the
believers to purify themselves.”

**173-** ***At-Tahdhib:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Ahmad bin
Yahya from Muhammad bin Husain from Muhammad bin Ismail from Salih bin

Uqbah from Amr bin Abil Miqdam from his father from Habbatul Arani that
he said: It is narrated from Amirul Momineen (a.s.) that he said in
Hira:

“This place will join with that (pointing to Kufa). So much so that the
land between them would be sold for a dinar per cubit. A Masjid will
come up at Hira having 500 gates and the Caliph of Imam Qaim will lead
prayer in it, because the Kufa Masjid would be overcrowded and twelve
just Imams would be leading prayers in it.

I (the narrator) said: O Amirul Momineen (a.s.), Kufa Masjid is
considered to be so spacious?

He replied: Another four Masjids would be built there and the Kufa
Masjid would be the smallest. This Masjid and two Masjids would be on
this side of Kufa and on the other side. Then he pointed to the Basrin
and Gharrin streams.”

**174-** ***Kitab Husain bin Saeed:*** It is narrated from Abul Hasan
bin Abdullah from Ibne Abi Yafur that he said:

“I came to Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) to find him with some of his
companions. He asked: O Abu Yafur, have you read the Holy Quran?

I replied: Yes, O son of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.), but this
same Quran, which is current among us.

He said: Yes, I am also asking about the same.

I said: All right, but why did you ask me that?

He replied: Because, Prophet Musa (a.s.) told his people something which
they could not bear; so they attacked him in Egypt and Musa (a.s.) had
to fight and eliminate them. And I also asked you about it, because Isa
(a.s.) had told something to his community which they could not bear and
they attacked him in Tikrit. So he also had to fight his people and
eliminate them. Thus regarding this is the saying of the Almighty Allah:

<p dir="rtl">
فَآَمَنَت طَّائِفَةٌ مِّن بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ وَكَفَرَت طَّائِفَةٌ
فَأَيَّدْنَا الَّذِينَ آَمَنُوا عَلَى عَدُوِّهِمْ فَأَصْبَحُوا
ظَاهِرِينَ
</p>

***“So a party of the children of Israel believed and another party
disbelieved; then We aided those who believed against their enemy, and
they became uppermost.” (Surah Saff 61:14)***

Thus when from us, Ahle Bayt (a.s.), a Qaim reappears and tells you
something, you will not bear it and you would rise up against him in
Ramila. He would fight and eliminate you. And this would be the last
attack on Imam Qaim (a.s.).

**175-** ***Al-Kafi:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Yahya from
Ahmad bin Muhammad from Ibne Mahbub from Ahwal from Salam bin Mustanir
from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said:

“When Imam Qaim (a.s.) reappears, every Ahle Bayt-hater (Nasibi) will be
offered faith; if he accepts it with sincerity it is all right;
otherwise he would be beheaded or he would have to pay Jizya like today
only the Zimmi Kafir has to pay. Or he would have to take up exile in
Abyssinia.”

**176-** ***Al-Kafi:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Muhammad from Salih
bin Abi Hammad from Muhammad bin Abdullah bin Mahran from Abdul Malik
bin Bashir from Itham bin Sulaiman from Muawiyah bin Ammar from Abi
Abdullah Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“If one of you is desirous to see the period of Imam Qaim (a.s.) he
should also pray for his deliverance, because the Almighty Allah has
sent Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) as mercy and kindness and He would send
Imam Qaim (a.s.) for severity.”

**177-** It is quoted from*Mazaar Kabeer* from the author’s own chain of
reporters from Abu Basir from His Eminence, Abu Abdullah (a.s.) that he
said:

“O Abu Muhammad, as if I can see Imam Qaim (a.s.) landing at Masjid
Sahla along with his family members.

I asked: “May I be your ransom, would that be his residence?”

“Yes,” he replied, “It was the residence of Prophet Idris (a.s.) as well
and then residence of Prophet Ibrahim (a.s.). And all prophets sent by
the Almighty Allah have prayed in it. And it is also the residence of
His Eminence, Khizr (a.s.). One who stays there is as if he has stayed
in the tent of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) and every believer man
and woman is inclined to it.”

I said: “May I be your ransom, would Imam Qaim (a.s.) reside there
forever?”

“Yes,” he said.

I asked: “And after him?”

He replied: “Till the end of the world.”

I asked: “What would be the fate of Kafir Zimmi during his time?”

He replied: “He would make peace with them with the condition that they
should pay Jizya.”

I asked: “And what will be the fate of the enemies of Ahle Bayt (a.s.)?”

He replied: “O Abu Muhammad, there would be no scope for our enemies
during our rule. The Almighty Allah has made their blood lawful for us
after the reappearance of Imam Qaim (a.s.), which is at present unlawful
for us. None of us should be deceived. When Imam Qaim (a.s.) reappears,
he would take full revenge for of us.”

**178-** Sayyid Ali bin Abdul Hamid has quoted from the book,*Al-Anwaar
al-Mudhiya* in a traditional report from Ishaq bin Ammar that he said:

“I asked His Eminence about the saying of Allah that He has given
respite to the Satan till the known hour as mentioned in the following
verse:

قَالَ فَإِنَّكَ مِنَ الْمُنظَرِينَ {37} إِلَى يَومِ الْوَقْتِ
الْمَعْلُومِ

***“He said: So surely you are of the respited ones, Till the period of
the time made known.” (Surah Hijr 15:37)***

What is that hour Allah is talking about? He said: “The known hour is
the time of the advent of the Qaim of Aale Muhammad. When the Almighty
Allah makes him reappear in the Masjid of Kufa, Iblis will come on his
knees saying: ‘O woe be on these days.’ At that time the Imam will catch
him by his forelocks and put him to death. That time is the day of the
known hour when his time would be up.”

**179-** ***Ikhtisaas:*** It is narrated from Abul Qasim Sherani
directly from Ibne Zabyan from Ibnul Hajjaj from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) that he said:

“When Imam Qaim (a.s.) reappears, he would come to Rahba, Kufa on foot
(so saying he pointed in a direction).

Then he said: He would say: Dig this place. They would dig at that spot
and take out 12000 coats of mail, 12000 swords and 12000 helmets. At
that time he would summon 12000 (followers or servants) retainers and
non-Arabs and arm them with these items. Then he would say: Eliminate
whoever does not have faith in which you believe.”

**180-** ***Al-Kafi:*** It is narrated from Ali from his father from
Ibne Faddal from Thalaba bin Maimoon from Badr bin Khalil Azdi from Imam
Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said about the verse of Quran:

فَلَمَّا أَحَسُّوا بَأْسَنَا إِذَا هُم مِّنْهَا يَرْكُضُونَ {12} لَا
تَرْكُضُوا وَارْجِعُوا إِلَى مَا أُتْرِفْتُمْ فِيهِ وَمَسَاكِنِكُمْ
لَعَلَّكُمْ تُسْأَلُونَ {13} قَالُوا يَا وَيْلَنَا إِنَّا كُنَّا
ظَالِمِينَ {14} فَمَا زَالَت تِّلْكَ دَعْوَاهُمْ حَتَّى جَعَلْنَاهُمْ
حَصِيدًا خَامِدِينَ {15}

***“So when they felt Our punishment, lo! they began to fly from it. Do
not fly (now) and come back to what you were made to lead easy lives in
and to your dwellings, haply you will be questioned. They said: O woe to
us! surely we were unjust. And this ceased not to be their cry till We
made them cut off, extinct.” (Surah Anbiya 21:12-15)***

“When Imam Qaim (a.s.) reappears, he would send his army to eliminate
them in Syria. They would flee from there to Rome, but the Romans would
tell them that if they don’t embrace Christianity, they cannot enter
that country; so they would put crosses around their necks and enter.

But when the companions of Imam Qaim (a.s.) enter their territory, the
Roman would sue for peace. However they would be told to surrender the
Bani Umayyah refugees first. Thus they would be compelled to give up
Bani Umayyah people to the Muslims. With regard to this, the Almighty
Allah has said:

<p dir="rtl">
لَا تَرْكُضُوا وَارْجِعُوا إِلَى مَا أُتْرِفْتُمْ فِيهِ وَمَسَاكِنِكُمْ
لَعَلَّكُمْ تُسْأَلُونَ
</p>

***“Do not fly (now) and come back to what you were made to lead easy
lives in and to your dwellings, haply you will be questioned.” (Surah
Anbiya 21:13)***

That they would be asked about their treasure trove although they would
be aware of it. Then they will say:

قَالُوا يَا وَيْلَنَا إِنَّا كُنَّا ظَالِمِينَ {14} فَمَا زَالَت تِّلْكَ
دَعْوَاهُمْ حَتَّى جَعَلْنَاهُمْ حَصِيدًا خَامِدِينَ {15}

***“They said: O woe to us! surely we were unjust. And this ceased not
to be their cry till We made them cut off, extinct.” (Surah Anbiya
21:14-15)***

That is we cut them into pieces.”

**181-** ***Al-Kafi:*** It is narrated from Ali from his father from
Ibne Abi Umair from Ibne Uzniya from Muhammad bin Muslim that he asked
Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) about the following verse of Quran:

<p dir="rtl">
وَقَاتِلُوهُمْ حَتَّى لاَ تَكُونَ فِتْنَةٌ وَيَكُونَ الدِّينُ كُلُّهُ
لِلّه
</p>

***“And fight with them until there is no more persecution and religion
should be only for Allah…” (Surah Anfal 8:39)***

The interpretation of this verse has not been actualized as yet. The
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) allowed them to stay due to exigencies.
But when the interpretation of this verse would actualize; no excuse
would be accepted from them and all of them would be eliminated so that
there is no more polytheism and all start believing in One God.”

**182-** ***Al-Kafi:*** It is narrated from Husain bin Muhammad from
Mualla from Washa from Ali bin Abi Naseer that:

“A man came to Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) and said: You Ahle Bayt (a.s.)
are mercy personified and the Almighty Allah has made you as such.

Imam (a.s.) said: It is so by the grace of Allah. We never fall into any
deviation and never leave the path of guidance. The world would not come
to an end till the Almighty Allah does not send from among us a man who
would act on the Book of Quran as it deserves and who would negate all
the evil.”

**183-** ***Amali Tusi:*** It is narrated from Faham from his uncle from
Ahmad bin Abdullah bin Ali from Abdur Rahman bin Abdullah from Yahya bin
Mughira from his brother, Muhammad from Muhammad bin Sinan from Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) from his father (a.s.) that he said:

“M-H-M-D will reappear in the last period of time. There would be a
white cloud over his head, which would be shading him from the Sun. A
call will be made in such a clear voice that all the Jinns and human
beings in the east and the west of the earth would hear it. It will say:
He is Mahdi from Aale Muhammad, he would fill the earth with justice and
equity like it would have been fraught with injustice and oppression.”

**184-** ***Ikmaaluddin, Uyun Akhbar Reza*** **&** ***Amali Saduq:*** It
is narrated from Attar from his father from Ibne Abdul Jabbar from
Muhammad bin Ziyad Azdi from Aban bin Uthman from Thumali from Imam
Zainul Abideen (a.s.) from his father from his grandfather from the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) that he said:

**“There will be twelve Imams after me. The first of them is you, O Ali
and the last of them is the Qaim by whom Allah, the Mighty and Sublime
will conquer the east and the west of the earth.”**

**185-***Ikmaaluddin*** **&** ***Uyun Akhbar Reza:*** It is narrated
from Taliqani from Muhammad bin Hamam from Ahmad bin Mabandad from Ahmad
bin Hilal from Ibne Abi Umair from Mufaddal from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) from his forefathers from the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) that
he said:**

“When I was taken to the heavens during the ascension (*Meraj* ) my Lord
revealed to me: …till he said: “So I raised my head and saw the lights
of Ali, Fatima, Hasan, Husain, Ali bin Husain, Muhammad bin Ali, Ja’far
bin Muhammad, Musa bin Ja’far, Ali bin Musa, Muhammad bin Ali, Ali bin
Muhammad, Hasan bin Ali and Muhammad bin Hasan al-Qaim. And among them
one shone like a brilliant star.

**I asked: ‘O Lord, who is that?’ He replied, ‘They are the Imams, and
he is the Qaim, who will ordain My lawful as lawful and My unlawful as
unlawful. And through him I shall take revenge from My enemies. And he
is the source of comfort for My friends. He is the one who will bestow
your Shia and followers respite from the infidels. And he will**

**bring out Laat and Uzza fresh and burn them up. Indeed the trial and
test of the people by him will be much more difficult than the mischief
of the Calf and Samari.’”**

**186-***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Amirul Momineen (a.s.)
that he said: The Prophet (s.a.w.s.) has said to me:**

“The name of the last of them is like my name. He will appear to fill
the world with justice and equity

Ghaibat Nomani:

after it has been filled with injustice and oppression. People will come
to him asking for money, which will be accumulated. He will say to them:
“Take (as much as you like)!”

**187-** ***Kifayatul Athar:*** It is narrated from the same chains from
the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) that he said:

“The ninth of them is the Qaim of my family and the Mahdi of this
nation. And in looks and speech most resembling me among all the people.
Indeed, he shall reappear after a prolonged occultation and reveal the
religion of God. And he shall get the support of Allah and His help, and
he will be backed with divine angels. Then he would fill up the earth
with equity and justice as it would have been fraught with injustice and
tyranny.”

**188-** Missing in*Biharul Anwar*

**189-** ***Kifayatul Athar:*** It is narrated from Imam Ali (a.s.) from
the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) that after enumerating the Holy Imams
(a.s.), he said:

**“After that the Imam from them would disappear from your view till the
Almighty Allah wills. He would have two occultations; one of which is
longer than the other. The narrator says: Then the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) addressed us and speaking in a raised voice he said: Beware,
when the seventh descendant of my fifth descendant goes into
occultation. Ali (a.s.) asked: O Messenger of Allah, what will be the
situation during occultation? He replied: He would remain patient till
the Almighty Allah permits him to reappear. Thus he would reappear from
a village called Kara with my turban over his head and wearing my coat
of mail. He would be having the Zulfiqar with him and a caller would be
announcing: This is Mahdi, the Caliph of God; follow him.”**

**190-***Al-Kafi:*** It is narrated from some of our associates directly
from Muhammad bin Sinan from Dawood bin Kathir Riqqi that he asked Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.):**

“What is the meaning of saluting the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.)?

He replied: Indeed, when the Almighty Allah created His Prophet, his
successor, his daughter, their two sons, all Imams and their Shia He
took a promise from them that they would all adopt patience and advise
patience to each other; they would remain in contact with each and they
would remain pious and continue to fear the Almighty Allah.

And promised to them that He would give them the blessed earth, the
sanctuary of peace and send down the Baitul Mamoor for them and give
them a high roof, rid them of their enemies and the earth which Allah
has changed to security would give them whatever there is in it
regarding which their enemies would not be able to fight them. And in it
they would get

everything which they wish. Thus the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) took
a promise from all the Imams and their Shia about this.

Now saluting the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) is a reminder of this
same covenant and renewal of the divine oath so that because of this
reminder it is possible that the Almighty Allah would make haste in
fulfilling His promise and you get this secure earth and whatever is
present in it.

**191- The author says:** The author of*Mazaar Kabeer* has narrated
through his chains of reporters from Abu Basir from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) that he said:

“O Abu Muhammad, as if I can see Imam Qaim (a.s.) landing at Masjid
Sahla along with his family members.

I asked: May I be your ransom, would that be his residence?

Yes, he replied, It was the residence of Prophet Idris (a.s.) as well
and then residence of Prophet Ibrahim (a.s.). And all prophets sent by
the Almighty Allah have prayed in it. And it is also the residence of
His Eminence, Khizr (a.s.). One who stays there is as if he has stayed
in the tent of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) and every believer man
and woman is inclined to it.

I said: May I be your ransom, would Imam Qaim (a.s.) reside there
forever?

Yes, he said.

I asked: And after him?

He replied: Till the end of the world.

I asked: What would be the fate of Kafir Zimmi during his time?

He replied: He would make peace with them with the condition that they
should pay Jizya.

I asked: And what will be the fate of the enemies of Ahle Bayt (a.s.)?

He replied: O Abu Muhammad, there would be no scope for our enemies
during our rule. The Almighty Allah has made their blood lawful for us
after the reappearance of Imam Qaim (a.s.), which is at present unlawful
for us. None of us should be deceived. When Imam Qaim (a.s.) reappears,
he would take full revenge for of us.

**192-** ***At-Tahdhib:*** It is narrated from Saffar from Ibne Abil
Khattab from Ja’far bin Bashir and Muhammad bin Abdullah bin Hilal from
Alaa from Muhammad that he asked Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.):

“On whose line would Imam Mahdi (a.s.) act when he reappears?

Imam (a.s.) replied: He would adopt the same conduct that the Messenger
of Allah (s.a.w.s.) had adopted till Islam becomes dominant.

I asked: What was the conduct of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.)?

He replied: He rendered as invalid all the customs of the period of
Jahiliyya and made the people incline to justice. In the same way when
Imam Qaim (a.s.) reappears he would invalidate all the customs followed
by the people during armistice and he would call them to justice.”

Reply to the objection of opponents
-----------------------------------

Our respected teacher, Allamah Tabarsi has written in his*Elaamul Wara*
that if an opponent says that there is no prophet after the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.s.). but you believe that when Imam Qaim (a.s.) reappears,
he will not accept Jizya from the People of the Book and he would
execute anyone who

is twenty years old but has not learnt about religion; that he would
raze Masjids and tombs and deliver judgment on the lines of Prophet
Dawood (a.s.). And many similar points mentioned in your traditional
reports. This would lead to the invalidation of the Islamic Shariah. It
means that you don’t call him a prophet but imply his prophethood.

Its reply is that: The points mentioned in objection that he would not
accept Jizya and that he would execute all who are twenty years old but
ignorant of Muslim law, are not mentioned in any of our traditional
reports and even if we suppose they are, they are not absolute and
unreliable.

As for the matter of demolishing of Masjids and tombs, if their
foundation is placed in opposition to piety and the command of Allah,
their razing is in accordance with Islamic law. And the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.s.) had himself practiced it.

And the traditional report in which it is mentioned that he would judge
on the lines of the progeny of Prophet Dawood (a.s.), and will not ask
for any proof or testimony, this report is also conditional. And even if
we suppose that it is correct, it would mean that he would judge
according to his unseen knowledge. And it is inevitable that if the
judge is personally cognizant of the facts of a case, he would act
accordingly. And why should he ask for any testimony and it cannot
necessitate the abrogation of Shariah.

Moreover, not acceptance of Jizya or not taking into consideration any
proof, even if it is right, how would it abrogate the Shariah, when the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) has said: Imam Qaim is from my progeny, it
is obligatory to obey him. Thus if he issues any command which is
against precedent, it will not abrogate the Shariah; it is acting on the
command of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.), which is actual Shariah.”

**193- The author says:** Husain bin Masud has narrated in*Sharh Sunnah*
, through his chains of narrators from the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.)
that he said:

“By the one in whose control my life is, very soon Ibne Maryam would
descend among you with command and justice, he would break the cross and
kill the swine, he will abrogate Jizya and would be so generous that no
one would remain needful.

After that in the explanation of the above tradition, he writes:
Breaking of the cross means that he would abrogate Christianity and
‘command’ implies that he would decide cases according to Islamic law.

Killing of the swine means that he would declare its use in food and
clothing as unlawful, because it is impure in essence and Isa (a.s.)
would kill it in accordance with the command of religion as it is not
allowed to waste something which is pure for use.

His saying that he would abrogate Jizya means that he would convert all
of them to Islam.

Thus Abu Huraira has narrated from the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.)
with regard to the descent of Isa (a.s.) that he said: During his time,
except for Islam, all the religious groups would become extinct. Dajjal
would be killed, and then Isa (a.s.) would remain alive for forty years.
When he passes away, the Muslims would offer his funeral prayers.

The statement of the Prophet that Imam Qaim would abrogate Jizya means
that there would be excess of wealth at that time and it would be
impossible to find any way for spending Jizya money. He will offer
money, but no one would accept it.

The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) also said: What would be your
condition when you see Ibne Maryam descending from the sky and your Imam
would be from among you?

Request: Such traditional reports are mentioned not only in our books,
on the contrary authors like Husain bin Masud have mentioned it in his
book of*Sharhus Sunnah* and other scholars have also reported such
traditions and attributed all these statements to Prophet Isa (a.s.).
But along with it they have written that your Imam would be from among
you.

Therefore, regarding this whatever would be the reply of Ahle Sunnat the
same is our reply and this objection is applicable to both equally.

**194- The author says:** Sayyid bin Tawus (q.s.) has mentioned
in*Saadus Saud* that he found in the scrolls of Idris (a.s.) in the
questions of Iblis and answers of Allah that Iblis said:

“O Lord, give me respite till Judgment Day.

The Almighty Allah replied: No, you are respited only till the Known
Hour.

Because I have absolutely decided to purify the earth from disbelief,
polytheism and disobedience. And for that time I have selected such
persons, whose hearts I have tested for faith, sincerity and patience.
And I have decided to appoint them as my successors on the earth and I
would appoint them in charge of the religion I have chosen for them. In
spite of that they would worship only Me and not attribute any partner
to Me. They would establish prayer, pay Zakat, enjoin goodness and
prohibit evil.

And in that time I shall bestow security to the world. Thus nothing will
receive harm from anything. And no living thing shall fear any other
creature. At that time the quadrupeds shall be among the humans and they
shall not harm each other. I shall take away the sting of every stinging
creature and make their venom ineffective. And I will send the blessings
from the heavens and the earth will become green with its vegetation and
all types of fruits will grow and put forth different kinds of perfumes
and I will put mercy and love among the people.

And wealth would be distributed equitably to all, which would enrich the
poor and no one would pride himself over others. The elders would be
merciful on youngsters and the youngsters would respect the elders. All
would follow the true religion and act with justice. Only they are My
friends, for whom We selected one prophet named Mustafa and a trustee
named Murtadha. We made him their Prophet and made them his Wali and
helpers; this is the same community which We have selected for Our
Prophet Mustafa and My trustee, Murtadha. I have concealed all of them
in My hidden knowledge and his being is inevitable. That day I will
destroy you and all your infantry and cavalry men. Go you are given
respite till the Known Hour.”

Now all that is mentioned in this report could not be achieved during
the lifetime of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.); hence it is obvious that it
would be accomplished during the time of Imam Qaim (a.s.).

**195-** It is narrated from Sayyid Ali bin Abdul Hamid in the*Book of
Ghaibah* that Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) said:

“When the Qaim of us, Ahle Bayt (a.s.) reappears, he would say:

<p dir="rtl">
فَفَرَرْتُ مِنكُمْ لَمَّا خِفْتُكُمْ فَوَهَبَ لِي رَبِّي حُكْمًا
</p>

***“So I fled from you when I feared you, then my Lord granted me
wisdom…” (Surah Shoara 26:21)***

I feared for my life but I reappeared when my Lord allowed me and when
He reformed my conditions.”

**196-** It is narrated through his chains from Ahmad bin Muhammad Ayadi
directly from Abu Basir from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“The Qaim would reappear when the majority of the people would have
denied his existence. Thus he would appear in the form of a young man
and only those would retain faith in him from whom the Almighty Allah
has taken a covenant in*Aalame Zar* (the first point of creation).”

And through his chains, it is narrated from Samaa that Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) said:

“As if I can see Imam Qaim (a.s.) is walking at Zaatuwa, according to
the practice of Prophet Musa (a.s.). When he reaches the place of
Ibrahim (a.s.), he would call the people to faith.”

**197-** It is narrated through his chains from Hadhrami from Imam
Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said:

“Jibraeel would be to his right and Mikaeel to his left.”

And he said: “When Imam Qaim (a.s.) reappears, he would go to Kufa and
at that time no believer would be left but that he or she would be
present there.”

**198-** It is narrated from the book of Fazal bin Shazan directly from
Saad from Abu Muhammad Hasan bin Ali (a.s.) that he said:

“I prefer to this house in Medina, the place which would be the
residence of that man (Imam Qaim).”

Saad bin Asbagh has narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“One who has a house in Kufa should retain it.”

**199-** It is narrated through his chains from Imam Muhammad Baqir
(a.s.) that he said:

“Imam Mahdi (a.s.) would defeat Sufyani in Hira, under a thick tree.”

**200-** It is narrated through his chains from Bashir Nubbal from Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he asked:

“Do you know from where Imam Qaim (a.s.) would begin his mission?

I (the narrator) said: No, O son of Allah’s Messenger.

He said: First of all he would remove the two fresh branches from their
graves and burn them up. Then he would blow their ashes to the wind.
After that he would demolish the Masjid.

Then he said: The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said: An awning like
that of Prophet Musa (a.s.).

Then he said: There was a mud platform in the Masjid of the Prophet on
one side of which was a trunk of a dried up date tree.”

**201-** It is narrated through his chains from Ishaq bin Ammar from
Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“When the Qaim comes forward to demolish the surrounding walls of the
room which contains the grave of the Prophet, the Almighty Allah would
send a severe storm and lightning and thunder. All would say that it is
because of it. Thus even his supporters would withdraw and he would be
left all alone. So he would pick up the pickaxe and start the demolition
and would be the first to strike the pickaxe. Gradually his men will
return. That day whoever does the most work would become eligible for
the most rewards. Thus the surrounding walls would be razed. Then they
will dig out the two palm trees and burn them up and scatter their ashes
in the winds.”

**202-** It is narrated through his chains from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
that he said:

“The kingdom of Imam Qaim (a.s.) would last for seven years, which would
be equivalent to seventy years by your count.

It is also narrated from the same Imam that he said: As if I can see
that Imam Qaim (a.s.) and his companions in Najaf Kufa and they are so
quiet as if birds are perching on their heads. They have exhausted the
provisions of their journey and their garments have become old. Their
foreheads bear the marks of prostration. During the day they would be as
brave as lions and during the nights, humble worshippers. Their heart
are like ingots of iron. Each of them have the strength of forty men.
They do not kill anyone, but the infidels and hypocrites; and the
Almighty Allah has described them in the following words in the Holy
Quran:

<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ لآيَاتٍ لِّلْمُتَوَسِّمِينَ
</p>

***“Surely in this are signs for those who examine.” (Surah Hijr
15:75)***

**203-** It is narrated through his chains from the book of Fazal bin
Shazan directly from Abdullah bin Sinan from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
that he said:

“When Imam Qaim reaches the market eliminating his enemies, he will meet
a relative of his (descendant of Imam Hasan Askari) who would be
physically strong and brave. He will ask: What are you doing? By Allah,
you are herding them like animals. Do you have any authority from the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.)?

The special servant of the Imam will say: Keep quiet or I will break
your head. But the Imam will restrain him and say: I do have the
permission of the Prophet; it is kept in so-and-so bag; go and bring it
here.

When he brings it there, that man will read it and say: May I be your
ransom, let me your kiss head. Then he will renew his allegiance to
him.”

**204-** It is narrated through his chains from Kabuli from Imam Zainul
Abideen (a.s.) that he said:

“When Imam Qaim eliminates the people of Medina and reach upto Ajfar,
his army would encounter severe hunger. Fruit-bearing trees would grow
up for them and they would feed on them and also gather provisions for
them. It is with regard to this that the Almighty Allah has said:

<p dir="rtl">
وَآيَةٌ لَّهُمُ الْأَرْضُ الْمَيْتَةُ أَحْيَيْنَاهَا وَأَخْرَجْنَا
مِنْهَا حَبًّا فَمِنْهُ يَأْكُلُونَ
</p>

***“And a sign to them is the dead earth: We give life to it and bring
forth from it grain so they eat of it.” (Surah Yasin 36:33)***

From there, he would move to Qadisiya and a large number of people would
gather in Kufa and pledge allegiance to Sufyani.”

**205-** It is narrated through his chains directly from His Eminence,
Abu Abdullah Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“Qaim (a.s.) will move forward and accompanied by his companions and
people, reach Najaf. At that time the army of Sufyani will come out
against His Eminence from Kufa. That day would be Wednesday. Then he
would demand them to heed his call and fulfill his rights and he would
announce that he is oppressed and he would say: Whoever has an argument
against me with regard to Allah, I am the person most proximate to
Allah.”

**206-** It is narrated through his chains directly from Jabir bin Yazid
from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said:

“When Sufyani gets the information that Imam Qaim (a.s.) has set out to
confront him from Kufa, he would march to fight the Imam with his men.
Imam (a.s.) would say: Send my cousin to me.

Thus Sufyani would come out of his circle and meet Imam Qaim (a.s.).
Imam Qaim (a.s.) would speak to him. After that Sufyani would pledge
allegiance to the Imam. When he returns to his men, they would ask him
what he had done.

He would reply: I have accepted him and given him my pledge.

His companions would say: May Allah debase you, so far you were Caliph
and people were under your authority, now you have submitted to someone
else’s authority? Step forward and fight him.

Thus they would spend the night there and initiate hostilities in the
morning, which would continue all day.

Then the Almighty Allah would make Imam Qaim (a.s.) and his companions
victorious on them. They would be completely routed and if one of them
hides under a tree or a rock, that tree or rock would call out: O
believer, an infidel is hiding here, come and get him. And he would
eliminate that infidel as well. Birds of prey and wild animals would
feed on their corpses.

Then Imam Qaim (a.s.) would remain there as long as he wishes, after
which he would prepare three armies: one would be sent to Constantinople
and the Almighty Allah would grant victory to it, another army would be
sent to China and the Almighty Allah would grant victory to it also and
the third battalion would be sent to the mountains of Dailam. It would
also be victorious.”

**207-** It is narrated through his chains from Abu Basir from Imam Abu
Ja’far Baqir (a.s.) that he said:

“Imam Qaim (a.s.) will judge a case according to the verdict of His
Eminence, Adam (a.s.) and some of his companions will oppose him. So he
would summon them and strike off their necks. Then he would judge the
second case according to Prophet Dawood (a.s.). Some people will oppose
it and they shall also be put to death. Then he will judge the third
case according to the judgment of Prophet Ibrahim (a.s.) and again some
will oppose and they shall also be eliminated. After that he will decide
the fourth

case according to the law of Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) and now there
will not be anyone who opposes him.”

**208-** It is narrated through his chains from Ibne Taghlib from Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“When Imam Qaim (a.s.) reappears, he will recognize anyone who comes
before him as righteous or evil.”

**209-** It is narrated through his chains directly from Abul Jarud that
he said to Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.):

“O son of Allah’s Messenger, tell me about the Sahibul Amr (a.s.).

He replied: His nights would be spent in the fear of Allah and his days
will pass in fearlessness (of enemies). He will receive divine
revelations day and night.

I asked in surprise: Would he also receive divine revelation?

He replied: O Abu Jarud, not prophetic revelation; on the contrary it
would be a sort of revelation that descended on Maryam binte Imran, the
mother of Musa (a.s.) and the honeybee.

O Abu Jarud, without any doubt, Imam Qaim (a.s.) is more honorable in
the view of Allah than Maryam binte Imran, the mother of Musa (a.s.) and
the honeybee.”

**210-** It is narrated through his chains directly from Abdullah bin
Sinan from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“When Imam Qaim (a.s.) reappears there would be nothing between him and
the people of Fars and Arabs, except the sword. And he would neither
give them anything without it and neither take anything from them.”

It is also narrated from the same Imam that he said: “The world would
not come to an end till the names of all the tribes are not destroyed.
And a tribe would be attributed to us and it will be said: this is the
son of so-and-so and when he would be addressed such and he does not
reply, he would be eliminated.”

**211-** It is narrated through his chains directly from Abu Khalid
Kabuli from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said:

“I saw written in the Book of Ali (a.s.) that: Indeed the whole earth
belongs to the Almighty Allah. He bestows it in inheritance to anyone of
His servants that He likes. And the end is only for the pious.

Thus if someone from the Muslims acquires land and inhabits it, he is
supposed to pay its tax to the appointee from us, Ahle Bayt (a.s.) and
till the Qaim of Ahle Bayt (a.s.) does not reappear, he can live off
that piece of land, because when Imam Qaim (a.s.) reappears, he would
confiscate all the land. Only the land belonging to our Shia would
remain with them on sharing basis.”

**212-** It is narrated through his chains from Jabir directly from His
Eminence, Abu Ja’far Baqir (a.s.) that he said:

“The Qaim will begin his mission from Antioch and he would take out the
Torah from a cave in which the Staff of Prophet Musa (a.s.) and the seal
ring of Prophet Sulaiman (a.s.) are also present. He said: And the most
fortunate with regard to him are the people of Kufa.

And he said: The Qaim is named Mahdi because he guides to all the hidden
matters. So much so that he would send his own man to kill such and

such person and people would not even know for what crime he is killed.
One would be afraid to even speak in ones home and think that the wall
might testify against him.”

Imam Baqir (a.s.) said: “Qaim (a.s.) shall rule for 309 years - equal to
the number of years the folks of the cave slept in their cave - he would
fill up the earth with justice and equity just as it would be fraught
with injustice and oppression. Then the Almighty Allah would conquer the
whole earth for him. He would eliminate people till there remains
nothing but the religion of Muhammad (s.a.w.s.). He would act like
Sulaiman bin Dawood and he would call out to the Sun and the Moon and
they shall reply to him. And the earth would be illuminated for him. He
would receive divine revelation and he would act according to the
command of Allah.”

Imam Baqir (a.s.) said: “When His Eminence, Qaim (a.s.) reappears and
enters Kufa, the Almighty Allah would send seventy thousand*Siddiqeen*
(who have testified him) and they shall join the ranks of his companions
and helpers. He would pay stipends to his followers twice a year and pay
such high salaries twice every month that there would not remain anyone
in need of*Zakat* . Those who are liable to pay*Zakat* would search for
eligible Shia to give their*Zakat* to; they would go to each of their
houses and call out, but the people would come out and say that they are
not in need of charity.”

Allamah Majlisi says: The tradition continues and further on the Imam
says:) “And all the wealth of the world, whether it be on the surface of
it or below its surface, would come together to collect with Qaim
(a.s.). He would say to the people: Come to that for which you used to
break off relations, shed unlawful blood and commit sinful acts. Then he
would give them so much money as none had ever paid before.”

**213-** It is narrated through his chains directly from Ibne Muskan
from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“In the time of the Qaim, a believer who is in the east would be able to
see his brother who is in the west and in the same way one who is in the
west would be able to see his brother in the east.”

**214-** ***Adad:*** Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said:

“As if I can see His Eminence, Qaim (a.s.) behind Najaf dressed in the
coat of mail of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) and covering it with a
satin cloth. He is astride a piebald horse having a white line on its
head; through this white line a powerful beam is emerging, which all can
see, and this is the special sign of his mount.

Then he would wave the flag of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) which
would illuminate the east and the west.”

Supplication of Hazrat Hujjat (a.t.f.s.)
----------------------------------------

Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said: “As if I can see Imam Qaim (a.s.) astride a
white-legged horse, which also has a white streak on its head. He has
crossed Wadius Salam and is headed to Masjid Sahla, reciting the
following supplication:

“There is no deity except the Almighty Allah; He is truth and only
truth. There is no deity except the Almighty Allah, with faith and
testimony. There is no deity except the Almighty Allah, from the aspect
of worship and helplessness. O Allah, O bestower of honor for the
believer who is alone,

and one who degrades every oppressor. When different paths have
exhausted me and the earth has become narrow from me, despite its
wideness, at such a time only You are my refuge.

O Allah, in fact You were not in need to create me, yet You created me.
It is a great favor from Your side and if Your assistance had not come
for my rescue, I would also have been of those where are destroyed. O
the sender of the rain of mercy from the center of mercy and the creator
of blessings from the mines of blessings. O one who has reserved
loftiness only for Himself, Your friends receive honor only because of
You. O one before whom the kings of the world have degraded themselves
and all of them are terrified of Your power. O my Lord, I adjure you in
the name of that pure name of Yours, through which You brought creation
into being and through which all Your creatures are obedient to You.

I beg You that You bless Muhammad and Aale Muhammad (a.s.) and take my
task to completion, hasten deliverance and victory for me. You be
sufficient for me and grant me security and fulfill my need at this
moment, at this moment, on this night, on this night. Indeed You are
powerful over everything.”


