


The Words of Jesus ('a)

Divine Omnipotence
1. It is said that Jesus the son of Mary ('a) was sitting and an old man
was working with a small shovel tilling the earth. Jesus ('a) said: “O
Allah! Extract his desire from him.” The old man put down the small
shovel and slept for an hour. Then Jesus ('a) said: “O Allah! Return the
desire to him.” Then he stood up and began to work. Jesus ('a) asked him
about it. He said: “When I was working my soul said to me: 'How long
will you work, being that you are an old man?' Then I put down the small
shovel and slept.' Then my soul said to me: 'By Allah! You have no
alternative but to live as long as you remain.' Then I stood up with my
small shovel.”*(Bihar al-anwar, xiv, 329* )

2. It is reported that Abu 'Abd Allah [Imam Sadiq] ('a) said:
“The*Devil* [*iblis* , the devil who tempted Adam and Eve. Cf. Qur'an
2:34; 7:11; 15:31; 38:74] said to Jesus the son of Mary: 'Does your Lord
have the power to put the earth into an egg without reducing the size of
the earth or enlarging the egg?' Then Jesus ('a) said: 'Woe unto you,
for weakness is not attributed to Allah. Who is more powerful than He
Who makes the earth subtle and makes the egg great?'*(Bihar al-anwar,
iv, 142)*

3. It is reported that Imam Sadiq ('a) said: “*Iblis* came to Jesus
('a), then he said: 'Do you not claim that you can revive the dead?'
Jesus said: 'Yes.'*Iblis* said: 'Then throw yourself down from the top
of the wall.' Then Jesus said: 'Woe unto you! Verily the servant does
not try his Lord.' And*Iblis* said: 'O Jesus! Can your Lord put the
earth in an egg while the egg remains in its form?' Then he said:
'Verily impotence is not attributed to Allah, the Supreme, but what you
said cannot be.' “*(Bihar al-anwar, xiv, 271)*

Of Human Poverty
4. One of the Imams is reported to have said: “It was said to Jesus the
son of Mary ('a): 'How did you begin the morning, O Spirit of Allah?' He
said: 'I began the morning with my Lord, the Blessed and Supreme, above
me and the fire (of hell) before me and death in pursuit of me. I do not
possess that which I hope for and I cannot avoid what I hate. So which
of the poor is poorer than me?' “*(Bihar al-anwar, lxxvi, 17)*

The World and the Hereafter

5. Jesus ('a) said: “O assembly of disciples! I have thrown the world
prostrate before you, so do not lift it up after me, for one of the
evils of this world is that Allah was disobeyed in it, and one of the
evils of this world is that the next world is not attained except by
abandoning this one. So pass through this world without making it your
home, and know that the root of all wrong is the love of this world.
Many a vain desire leaves a legacy of lasting sorrow.”*(Bihar al-anwar,
xiv, 327)*

6. [Jesus ('a)] said: “Blessed is he who abandons the present desire for
the absent promise.”*(Bihar al-anwar, xiv, 327)*

7. Jesus ('a) said: “Who would build a house on the waves of the sea?
This world is that house, so you should not take it as a
dwelling.''*(Bihar al-anwar,” xiv, 326)*

8. Jesus ('a) said: “Woe to the companion of the world! How he dies and
leaves it and how he relies on it and it deceives him, and how he trusts
it and it forsakes him! Woe unto those who are deceived! How that which
is repugnant encompasses them and that which is beloved separates from
them! And that which is promised will come to them. And woe to those
whose endeavors are only for the world and error. How he will be
disgraced before Allah tomorrow!”*(Bihar al-anwar, xiv, 328)*

9. Jesus, Peace be upon him, is reported to have said: “How can one be
of the people of knowledge if the next world is shown to him while he
remains involved in this world, and what harms him is more desirable to
him than what benefits him?''*(Majmu'at at warram, i, 83)*

10. It was said to Jesus ('a): “Teach us a deed for which Allah will
love us.” He said: “Detest the world and Allah will love you.*(Tanbih
al-khawatir, i, 134)*

11. It has been reported by Mujahid from Ibn 'Abbas from the Apostle of
Allah, may the Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon him and with his
folk: “Verily, Jesus. Peace be upon him, passed a city which had come to
ruin and whose foundations had collapsed. He said to some of his
disciples: 'Do you know what it is saying?' One said: 'No.' Jesus, Peace
be upon him, said: 'It says: “Verily, the true promise of my Lord has
come. My rivers have dried up, though once they were full; my trees have
withered, though once they were in bloom; my castles are in ruins and my
residents have died. Then, oh, these are their bones within me, and
their property that was gained lawfully along with their ill-gotten
gains are in my belly, and the inheritance of the heavens and the earth
is only for Allah.” '“*(Adab al-nafs, I, 122)*

12. The Messiah, Peace he upon him, said to the Apostles: “Verily, the
eating of barley bread and the drinking of plain water today in this
world is for he who would enter heaven tomorrow.”*(Adab al-nafs, ii,
225)*

13. It is reported that Abu 'Abd Allah [Imam Sadiq], Peace he upon him,
said: 'Jesus the son of Mary, may the blessings of Allah be upon him,
said: 'You work for the sake of this world while it is not by work that
you are provided for in it. And you do not work for the sake of the next
world, while it is only by work that you will be provided for in it. Woe
be unto you, evil learned ones ('ulama)! You take your wage and neglect
works. Soon the worker's work will he accepted, and soon you will be
driving forth from the narrowness of this world toward the darkness of
the grave. How can one be knowledgeable who is on the way to the next
world and yet his face is turned towards this world, and he likes the
things that harm him more than the things that benefit him?' '*(Al-Kafi,
ii, 319)*

14. Jesus ('a) said: “The love of this world and the next cannot come
together in the heart of a believer, like water and fire in a single
vessel.”*(Bihar al-anwar, xiv, 327)*

l5 It is reported that Abu 'Abd Allah [Imam Sadiq], Peace be upon him,
said that Jesus, Peace be upon him, said: ''It is hard to get any good
thing whether it is of the world or the hereafter. As to the good things
of this world they are hard to get because there' is nothing of it which
as soon as you extend your hand to get, some profligate does not grab
first, while the

good things of the other world are hard to obtain because you do not
find any helper who may help you to obtain it.''*(al-Kafi viii, 144)*

16. When Jesus passed by a house whose inmates had died and others had
taken their place, he said: “ woe to your owners who inherited you! How
they have learned no lesson from their late brothers.”*(Bihar al-anwar,
xiv, 329)*

17. Jesus ('a) said: “This world and the next one are rivals. When you
please one of them you displease the other.”*(Bihar al-anwar, LXXIII,
122)*

18. It has been reported that Abu 'Abd Allah, Peace he upon him, said:
“The world took the form, for Jesus ('a), of a woman whose eyes were
blue. Then he said to her: 'How many have you married?' She said: 'Very
many.' He said: 'Then did they all divorce you?' She said: 'No, but I
killed all of them.' He said: 'Then woe be to the rest of your husbands!
How they fail to learn from the example of the predecessors!'

19. It is reported that 'Ali ibn al-Husayn [Imam Sajjad], Peace be upon
him, said: “The Messiah, Peace be upon him, said to his Apostles:
'Verily, this world is merely a bridge, so cross over it, and do not
make it your abode.' ''*(Bihar al-anwar xiv, 319)*

20. I heard Imam Rida ('a) say: “Jesus the son of Mary, may Allah bless
him, said to the apostles: 'O Children of Israel! Do not grieve over
what you lose of this world, just as the people of this world do not
grieve over what they lose of their religion, when they gain this world
of theirs.' “*(Bihar al-anwar, xiv, 304; al-Kafi. ii, 127)*

21. Jesus ('a) said: “Do not take the world as a master, for it will
make you its slave. Keep your treasure with one who will not squander
it. The owners of the treasures of this world fear for its ruin, but he
who owns the treasure of Allah does not fear for its ruin.''*(Bihar
al-anwar, xiv, 327)*

22. Jesus ('a) said: ''In truth I say unto you, just as one who is sick
looks at food and finds no pleasure in it due to the severity of the
pain, the companions of this world find no pleasure in worship and do
not find the sweetness of it, for what they find is the sweetness of
this world. In truth I say unto you, just as an animal which is not
captured and tamed becomes hardened and its character is changed, so too
when hearts are not softened by the remembrance of death and the effort
of worship they become hard and coarse, and in truth I say unto you, if
a skin is not torn, it may become a vessel for honey, just as hearts, if
they are not torn by desires, or fouled by greed, or hardened by
pleasures, may become vessels for wisdom.''*(Bihar al-anwar, xiv, 325)*

23. It was said to Jesus ('a): “[Would it not be better] if you got a
house?” He said: “The remains which are left from those before us is
enough for us.''*(Bihar al-anwar, xiv, 327)*

On Wisdom
24. It is reported that Jesus ( 'a) said: ''O assembly of scholars (
'ulama)'. Just as the sovereigns have abandoned wisdom, leaving it to
you. So you should abandon sovereignty, leaving it for them.''*(Adab al
nafs. i, 134)*

25. And it was said to him [Jesus ( a)]: “Who trained you?” He said: “No
one trained me. I saw the ugliness of ignorance and I avoided
it.''*(Bihar al-anwar, xiv, 326)*

26. The apostle of Allah [Muhammad] (s) said: “Jesus the son of Mary
('a) stood up among the Children of Israel and said: 'O Children of
Israel! Do not speak with the ignorant of wisdom, for otherwise you do
injustice with it, and do not keep it from its folk, for otherwise you
do injustice to them, and do not help the unjust with his injustice, for
otherwise your virtue becomes void. Affairs are three: the affair whose
righteousness is clear to you, so follow it: the affair whose error is
clear to you, so avoid it'. and the affair about which there are
differences, so return it to Allah, the Almighty and Glorious.”*(Faqih,
iv, 400)*

27. Jesus the son of Mary ('a) said: “O assembly of Apostles! I have a
request of you. Fulfill it for me.” They said: “Your request is
fulfilled, O Spirit of Allah!” Then he stood up and washed their feet.
They said: “It would have been more proper for us to have done this, O
Spirit of Allah!” Then he said: “Verily, it is more fitting for one with
knowledge to serve the people. Indeed, I humbled myself only so that you
may humble yourselves among the people after me, even as I have humbled
myself among you.” Then Jesus ('a) said: “Wisdom is developed by
humility, not by pride, and likewise plants only grow in soft soil, not
in rocks.''*(Bihar al-anwar, ii, 62; Al-Kafi, vi, 37)*

28. Al-Sayyid ibn Tawus, may Allah have mercy on him, said: I read in
the Gospel that Jesus ('a) said: “I tell you, do not worry about what
you will eat or what you will drink or with what you will clothe your
bodies. Is not the soul more excellent than food, and the body more
excellent than clothes? Look at the birds of the air, they neither sow
nor reap nor store away, yet your heavenly Lord provides for them. Are
you not more excellent than they'? Who among you by worrying can add a
single measure to his stature'? Then why do you worry about your
clothes?''*(Bihar al-anwar, xiv, 317)* 6

Self-knowledge'
29 It is reported by Mufaddal, one of the companions of Imam al-Sadiq
('a), from Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq, Peace be upon him, in a long hadith,
that he said: “Jesus the son of Mary, Peace be upon our Prophet and upon
him, used to spend some time with the disciples and advise them, and he
used to say: 'He does not know me who knows not his soul, and he who
does not know the soul between his two sides, does not know the soul
between my two sides. And he who knows his soul which is between his
sides, he knows me. And he who knows me knows He Who sent me.' “*(Adab
al-nafs, ii, 213)*

On Prayer and Worship
30. Jesus ('a) said to a worshipper, “What do you do?” He answered, “I
worship.” He ('a) said, “Then who provides for you?” He said, “My
brother.” He ('a) said, “Your brother is more of a worshipper than you
are!”*(Adab al-nafs, i, 215)*

31. I asked Abu 'Abd Allah [Imam Sadiq ('a)] about the best thing by
which the servant may draw near to his Lord and what is most beloved by
Allah, the Almighty and Glorious. He said: “I know of nothing, after
knowledge (ma'rifah), better than the ritual prayer (salat). Do you not
see that the good servant Jesus the son of Mary ('a) said: 'And He
enjoined on

me the ritual prayer (salat) and the alms tax (zakat) for as long as I
live.'?”*(Al-Kafi, iii, 264)*

32. It is reported that Imam Sadiq ('a) said: “Jesus the son of Mary
('a) passed by a group of people who were crying. He asked why they were
crying. It was said to him that they were crying for their sins. He
said, they should pray about them and they will be forgiven.”*(Bihar
al-anwar, vi, 20)*

Pride of the Sanctimonious
33. Jesus ('a) said: “O group of Apostles! How many lamps the wind has
put out, and how many worshippers pride has corrupted.!”*(Bihar
al-anwar, lxxii, 322)*

On Chastity
34. Imam Sadiq ('a) said: “The Apostles met with Jesus ('a) and said to
him: 'O teacher of the good! Guide us!' He said to them: 'Verily Moses
the interlocutor of Allah ('a) commanded you not to swear by Allah, the
Blessed and Exalted, falsely, and I command you not to swear by Allah
falsely or truly.' They said: 'O Spirit of Allah! Guide us more!' Then
he said: 'Verily Moses the prophet of Allah ('a) commanded you not to
commit adultery, and I command you not to talk to yourselves about
adultery, let alone to commit adultery. Verily one who talks to himself
about adultery is like one who sets fire to a house that is decorated so
the smoke damages the decor, even though the house is not
burnt.'*(Al-Kafi, v, 542)*

35. Jesus (a) said: “Never stare at that which is not for you. If you
restrain your eyes you will never commit adultery; and if you are able
to avoid looking at the garments of women who are not permitted for you,
then do so.”*(Majmu'at al-Warram, i, 62)*

36. It is reported that Imam Sadiq ('a) said: “Jesus the son of Mary
('a) said, 'When one of you sits in his house, he should have clothes
on. Verily, Allah has allotted modesty for you, just as He has allotted
your sustenance.”“*(Bihar al-anwar, lxxi, 334)*

Looking at the Bright Side
37. It is reported that he [Jesus ('a)] passed by a carcass with his
disciples. Then the disciples said: “How putrid the smell of this dog
is!” Then Jesus ('a) said: “How intense is the whiteness of his
teeth!”*(Bihar al-anwar, xiv, 327)*

Hope and Fear
38. It is reported that Abu 'Abd Allah [Imam Sadiq] ('a) said: “Jesus
the son of Mary ('a) sent two of his companions on an errand. Then one
of them returned thin and afflicted and the other fat and chubby. He
said to the one who was thin: what did this to you, that I see you this
way?' He said: 'The fear of Allah.' And he said to the other who was
fat: 'What did this to you, that I see you this way?' He said: 'A good
opinion of Allah.' “*(Bihar al-anwar, lxx. 400)*

Death
39. It is reported from Imam Sadiq, Peace be upon him, from his father
that he said: “Jesus, Peace be upon him, used to say: 'Regarding the
terror

which you do not know when you will encounter [i.e. death], what
prevents you from preparing for it before it comes upon you
suddenly?'*(Bihar al-anwar, xiv, 330)*

Of Advice and Advisers
40. And he (Jesus ('a)) said: “How long will you be advised without
taking any advice? Certainly you have become a burden to the
advisors.”*(Adab al-nafs, i, 175)*

41. [Imam] al-Sadiq, Peace be upon him, said: “Verily, a man came to
Jesus the son of Mary, Peace be upon him, and said to him: 'O Spirit of
Allah! I have committed fornication [or adultery, sex between a man and
woman not married to each other, in Arabic: zina] so purify me.' Then
Jesus ordered the people to be called so that none should be left behind
for the purification of so-and-so.

Then when the people had been gathered together and the man had entered
into a hole, so as to be stoned, the man in the hole called out: 'Anyone
for whom Allah, the Supreme, has a punishment should not punish me.'
Then all the people left except for John and Jesus, Peace be upon them.

Then John, Peace be upon him, approached him and said to him: 'O sinner!
Advise me!' Then he said to him: 'Do not leave your self alone with its
desires or you will perish.' John, Peace be upon him, said: 'Say more.'
He said: 'Verily, do not humiliate the wrongdoer for his fault.' John,
Peace be upon him, said: 'Say more. He said: 'Do not become angry.'
John, Peace be upon him, said: 'That is enough for me.' “*(Bihar
al-anwar, xiv, 188)*

Goodness Imperishable
42. Jesus ('a) said to his companions: “Accord great regard for the
thing which is not eaten by the fire.” They said: ''What is that?” He
said: “That which is good (al-ma'ruf).”*(Bihar al-anwar. xiv, 330)*

Charity
43. Imam Sadiq ('a) said: ''Verily, when Jesus the son of Mary ( 'a)
passed along the shore of a sea, he threw a piece of his bread into the
water, Then some of the disciples said: 'O Spirit of Allah and His Word!
Why did you do this when that was your food.' He said: “I did this in
order that some animal among the animals of the sea may eat it, and the
reward of Allah for this is great.'*(Tahdhib, iv, 105)*

Moderation in Food and Sleep
44. Jesus ('a) said: “O Children of Israel! Do not be excessive in
eating, for those who are excessive in eating are excessive in sleeping,
and those who are excessive in sleeping are deficient in praying, and of
those who are deficient in praying, it is written that they are
negligent.”*(Sharh Nahj al-balaghah, xix, 188; Adab al-nafs. i, 189)*

45. Jesus the son of Mary ('a) stood up among the Children of Israel to
preach. He said. 'O Children of Israel! Do not eat before you become
hungry and when you become hungry eat but do not eat your fill, because
when you eat your fill your necks become thick and your sides grow fat
and you forget your Lord”*(Bihar al-anwar lxvi, 337)*

The blessed and the wretched
46 It is reported that [Imam] Ali (a) said: “Jesus the son of Mary (a)
said: ''Blessed is he whose silence is contemplation (fikr). whose
glance is an admonition, whose house suffices him and who cries over his
mistakes and from whose hand and tongue the people are safe.' ''*(Bihar
a1-anwar xiv, 319)*

47 Jesus said: “How can someone benefit himself while he trades himself
for all that is in this world, then he abandons that which he has traded
as inheritance to others and destroys himself. But blessed is the man
who purifies himself and prefers his soul to everything of this
world.''*(Bihar al-anwar xiv, 329)*

48. I heard Imam Sadiq ( 'a) say: ''Christ ( 'a) said to his disciples:
'If you are not lovers and my brothers, you must accustom yourself to
the enmity and hatred of the people, otherwise you will not be my
brothers. I teach you this that you may learn it; I do not teach you so
that you may become proud. Verily, you will not achieve that which you
seek unless you give up that which you desire, and by enduring patiently
that which you detest. And guard your gaze for it plants lust in the
heart, and it is sufficient to tempt one.

Happy are they who see that which they desire with their eyes, but who
commit no disobedience in their hearts. How far is that which is in the
past, and how near is that which is to come. Woe to those who have been
deluded when what they loathe approaches them, and what they love
abandons them, and there comes that which they were promised.

There is lesson in the creation of these nights and days. Woe to those
whose efforts are for the sake of this world, and whose achievements are
errors. How he will be disgraced before his Lord! And do not speak much
about anything other than the remembrance of God. Those who talk much
about things other than God have their hearts hardened, but they do not
know it. Do not look at the faults of others as if you have been
appointed to spy over them, but attend to the emancipation of your own
selves, for you are slaves, possessed.

How much water flows in a mountain without its becoming soft, and how
much wisdom you are taught without your hearts becoming soft. You are
bad slaves, not pious slaves, nor of those who are noble and free.
Indeed you are like unto the oleander: all who see it wonder at its
flowers, but when they eat from it they die. Peace be unto you.'*(Bihar
al-anwar, xiv, 324)*

Of wealth and Property
49. It is reported that Jesus ('a) found fault with property and said:
''It has three characteristics.'' It was said: ''And what are they', O
Spirit of Allah.''' He said: ''One acquires it illegitimately, and if it
is acquired legitimately, it keeps one from spending it in its right
place, and if one spends it in its right place, its management keeps one
from worshiping one's Lord.”*(Bihar al-anwar xiv 329)*

50). It is reported that the Commander of the faithful [Imam Ali], peace
be upon him, said: “Jesus the son of Mary, Peace he upon him, said:
'The*dinar* is the illness of religion, and the scholar*(al-'alim)* is
the physician of

religion. So if you see that the physician brings illness upon himself,
distrust him, and know that he is not to advise others.' “*(Bihar
al-anwar. xiv, 319)*

On Company
51 Imam Ali ('a) said: “Jesus the son of Mary ('a) said: 'Verily the
evil doer is infectious, and the associate of the wicked is brought
down. So beware of those with whom you associate.' “*(Al-Kafi, ii, 640)*

52. It is reported that Abu 'Abd Allah [Imam Sadiq], Peace he upon him,
said: The Apostle of Allah, may the Peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him and his progeny, said: 'The Apostles said to Jesus, Peace he upon
him: “O Spirit of Allah! With whom should we keep company?” He said: “He
the sight of whom reminds you of Allah, the speech of whom increases
your knowledge, and the works of whom make you desirous of the other
world.” ' “*(Al-Kafi, I, 39)*

The Incorrigible Fool
53. It has been reported that Abu 'Abd Allah [Imam Sadiq], Peace be upon
him, said: 'Verily, Jesus the son of Mary ('a) said: 'I treated the
sick, then I healed them by the permission of Allah, and I cured those
born blind and the lepers by the permission of Allah, and I treated the
dead and revived them by the permission of Allah, and I treated the
fool, but I could not correct him' Then it was said: 'O spirit of Allah.
What is a fool?' He said 'He is one who is admirable in his own view to
himself, He who considers all merit to be for him and not against him,
and who finds all rights to be for himself and does not find against
himself any right. Such is the fool for whom there is no way to cure
him.'“ (Bihar al anwar, xiv, 323)

The Heart's Sickness
54 And Jesus the son of Mary said: “There is no sickness of the heart
more severe than callousness, and no soul is more severely affected than
the one that goes without hunger, and these two are the halters of
expulsion [from divine mercy] and abandonment.” (Bihar al-anwar, lxvi,
337)

55. Verily, Jesus ('a) said: “Why do you come to me clothed in the
garments of monks while your hearts are those of ferocious wolves? Wear
the clothes of kings, but soften your hearts with fear.”*(Bihar
al-anwar, lxxiii, 208)*

Anger and Its Source
56. It is reported that Abu 'Abd Allah [Imam Sadiq] ('a) said “The
disciples said to Jesus the son of Mary ('a): 'O teacher of the good!
Teach us what is the most severe of things.' Then he said: the most
severe of things is the wrath of Allah.' They said: 'Then what prevents
the wrath of Allah?' He said: 'That you not be wrathful.' They said:
'What is the source of wrath?' He said: 'Pride, haughtiness and contempt
for the people.' ''*(Bihar al-anwar, xvi, 257)*

Five Evils
57. It is reported that Abu 'Abd Allah, [Imam Sadiq], Peace be upon him,
said: “The Messiah, Peace be upon him, used to say: 'He who has many
worries, his body becomes sick; he who is ill-tempered, his self becomes
his

torment; he who often talks, often stumbles; he who often lies, loses
his worth; he who quarrels with men, loses his manliness.'*(Bihar
al-anwar. xiv. 318)*

Evil Scholars
58. Imam Sadiq ('a) said: Jesus the son of Mary, Peace be upon our
Prophet and his progeny and with him. said: Woe unto the evil scholars!
How the fire inflames them!'*(Al-Kafi, i, 47)*

Satan's Clientele
59. Jesus ('a) met*Iblis* who was driving five donkeys. Loads were upon
them. Jesus ('a) asked him about the loads.*Iblis* said, “They are for
trade, and I am looking for buyers.” Jesus ('a) said, “What is the
merchandise?”*Iblis* said, “One of them is injustice.” He ('a) asked,
“Who buys it?” He said, “Rulers. And the second is pride.” He asked,
“Who buys it?” He said, “Village chiefs. And the third is envy.” He
asked, “Who buys it?” He said, “The learned. And the fourth is treason.”
He asked, “Who buys it?” He said, “Those who work for merchants. And the
fifth is trickery.” He said, “Who buys it?” He said, “Women.”*(Bihar
al-anwar, lxiv, 196)*

The Richest of All Men
60. Jesus, Peace be upon him, said: “My hands 'are my servant and my
feet are my mount; the earth is my bed, a stone my pillow; my blanket in
the winter is the east of the earth and my lamp in the night is the
moon; my stew is hunger and my motto is fear; my garment is wool and my
fruit and my basil what grows from the earth for wild beasts and cattle.
I sleep while I have nothing and I rise while I have nothing, and yet
there is no one on earth wealthier than I”*(Bihar al-anwar, xvii, 239)*

Seeking God's Pleasure
61. And Jesus ('a) used to say: “O apostles, love God through hatred of
the 'disobedient, and approach God by distancing [yourselves] from them,
and seek pleasure by their displeasure.”*(Bihar al-anwar xiv, 330)*

Criterion of Mutual Relations
62. It is reported that Imam Sadiq, Peace be upon him, said: “Jesus the
son of Mary, Peace be upon them, said to some of his companions: 'Do not
do to others what you do not like others to do to you, and if someone
strikes you on the right cheek, turn to him your left cheek too.7
*(Bihar al-anwar, x, 287)* .

Others Opinion of Oneself
63. The Messenger of God (s) said: “Jesus the son of Mary ('a) said to
John the son of Zachariah, 'If something is said of you which is true,
then know that it was a sin that you had committed, so ask God's
forgiveness for it, and if something is said of you which is not true,
then know that a good deed will be recorded for you for this, for which
you did not have to labor.' “*(Bihar al-anwar, xiv, 287)* .

On Having a Good Opinion of God
64. Al-Sayyid ibn Tawus, may God have mercy on him, said: “I read in the
Gospel that Jesus ('a) said: 'Who among you gives his son a stone when
he asks for bread? Or who hands out a snake when asked for a cloak? If
despite the fact that your evil is well-known you give good gifts to
your sons, then it is more fitting that your Lord should give good
things to one who asks.”*(Bihar al-anwar, xiv, 318; Sa'd al-su'ud, 56)*
8

Inner Chastity
65. Jesus ('a) said: “You heard what was said to the people of yore, 'Do
not commit adultery,' but I tell you, he who looks at a woman and
desires her has committed adultery in his heart. If your right eye
betrays you, then take it out and cast it away, for it is better for you
that you destroy one of your organs than cast your entire body into the
fire of hell. And if your right hand causes you to sin, cut it off and
cast it away, for it is better for you to destroy one of your organs
than that your entire body should go to hell.*(Bihar al-anwar, xiv,
3l7)* 9

The Life and Acts of Jesus ('a)
66. It is reported that Imam 'Ali ('a) said in one of his sermons: “If
you like, I will tell you about Jesus the son of Mary, Peace he upon
him. He used a stone as his pillow, wore course clothing and ate rough
food. His stew was hunger and his lamp in the night was the moon. His
cover in the winter was the east of the earth and its west. His fruit
and his basil is that which grows from the earth for the cattle. He had
no wife to try him, and no son to grieve him. He had no wealth to
distract him, nor greed to abase him. His mount was his feet and his
servant was his hands.”*(Nahj al-balaghah, Sermon 158)*

67. Imam Musa al-Kazim ('a) said: “John the son of Zachariah ('a) cried
and did not laugh, and Jesus the son of Mary ('a) laughed and cried; and
what Jesus did was more excellent than what John did.” (Al-Kafi, ii,
665)

68. Jesus, Peace he upon him, served a meal to the Apostles, and when
they had eaten it, he himself washed their hands. They said: “O Spirit
of God! It would have been more proper for us to wash yours!” He said:
“I did this only that you would do this for those whom you
teach.”*(Bihar al-anwar, xiv, 326)*

69. It is reported that Abu 'Abd Allah [Imam Sadiq], Peace he upon him,
said: “Verily, Jesus the son of Mary, Peace be upon him, came to the
tomb of John the son of Zachariah, Peace he upon him, and he asked his
Lord to revive him. Then he called him, and he answered him and he came
out from the grave and said to him: 'What do you want from me?' And he
said to him: 'I want you to be friends with me as you were in this
world' Then he said to him: 'O Jesus! The heat of death has not yet
subsided, and you want me to return to the world and the heat of death
would return to me. So he Jesus left him, and he returned to his grave.'
“*(Al-Kafi iii, 260)*

70. Jesus, Peace he upon him, passed by a grave whose occupant was being
chastised. Then he passed it the following year when he was not being
chastised. He said: “O Lord! I passed through this town last year and he
was being chastised, and I passed through it this year while he is not
being chastised.” Then God revealed to him: “O Spirit of God! Verily one
of his

children matured and removed obstacles from a road and sheltered an
orphan. Then I forgave him for the deeds of his child.”*(Al-Kafi. vi,
3)*

71. Imam Sadiq ('a) was asked: “Did Jesus the son of Mary raise anyone
from the dead, so that he ate and had a livelihood, and continued his
life for a term and had off spring?” He said: “Yes, he had a friend who
was a brother to him in God. And when Jesus passed by, he would go to
visit him. And Jesus ('a) would spend a while with him. Then he would
leave with salutations of Peace unto him.

Once his mother came out to him [Jesus] and she said to him: 'He died, O
Apostle of God!' He said to her: 'Would you like to see him?' She said:
'Yes.' He said to her: 'I will come tomorrow to raise him with the
permission of God. The next day he came and said to her: 'Accompany me
to his grave.' So they went to his grave. Jesus ('a) stopped and then he
called on God. Then the grave opened and her son came out alive.

When his mother saw him and he saw her, they cried. Jesus ('a) felt
compassion for them and said to him: 'Would you like to remain with your
mother in the world?' He said: 'O Apostle of God! With eating and a
daily bread and a term, or without a term and a daily bread?' Then Jesus
('a) said to him: 'Of course with daily bread and a term. You will live
for twenty years, marry and father a child.' He said: 'Yes, in that
case.' “ [Imam Sadiq] said: “Then Jesus ('a) returned him to his mother
and he lived for twenty years, married and fathered a child.”*(Bihar
al-anwar xiv, 233)* .

72. Abu al-Layth said in his commentary of the Qur'an: “The people asked
Jesus ('a) in ridicule: 'Create a bat for us and put a soul in it, if
you are one of the truthful. Then he took some clay and formed a bat and
breathed into it. Then it suddenly flew between the sky and the earth.
The clay was molded and breathed into by Jesus, but the creation was by
God, the Supreme. And it is said that they asked to create a bat because
it is more wonderful than other creatures.*(Bihar al-anwar, lxiv, 322)*

73. Al-Sayyid ibn Tawus, may God have mercy on him, said: “I read in the
Gospel that Jesus ('a) boarded a ship and his disciples were with him,
when suddenly there was a great confusion in the sea, so that the ship
came near to being covered by the waves. And it was as though [Jesus
('a)] was asleep. Then his disciples came to him and awakened him and
said: 'O master! Save us so that we do not perish.' He said to them: 'O
you of little faith! What has frightened you?' Then he stood up and
drove away the winds, and there was a great stillness. The people
marveled, and said: 'How is this? Verily the winds and the sea obey
him.' “10 *(Bihar al-anwar xiv, 266)*

74. It is reported that a woman from Canaan brought her invalid son to
Jesus, Peace he upon him. She said: “O Prophet of God! This my son is an
invalid. Pray to God for him.” He said: “That which I have been
commanded is only the healing of the invalids of the Children of
Israel.” She said: “O Spirit of God! Verily the dogs receive the
remnants from the tables of their masters after the meal, so, avail us
of that which may benefit us of your wisdom.” Then he supplicated God,
the Supreme, asking for permission. Then He gave His permission, and he
made him well.*(Bihar al-anwar xiv, 253)*

75. It is reported that Jesus ('a) passed by a man who was blind,
leprous and paralytic, and Jesus heard him giving thanks and saying:
“Praised be God Who has protected me from the trials with which He
afflicts most of men.” Jesus ('a) said: “What trial remains which has
not visited you?” He said: “He protected me from a trial which is the
greatest of trials, and that is unbelief” Then Jesus ('a) touched him,
and God cured him from his illnesses and beautified his face. Then he
became a companion of Jesus ('a) and worshipped with him.*(Bihar
al-anwar, lxxi, 33)*

God's Words Addressed to Jesus
76. Imam Ja'far Sadiq ('a) said: “Among things with which God, the
Blessed and Exalted, exhorted Jesus ('a) was: 'O Jesus! I am your Lord,
and the Lord of your fathers. My Name is the One (al-Wahid), and I am
one (Ahad) and single (Mutafarrid) in creating all things. All things
are My handiwork, and all My creations shall return to Me.' “*(Bihar
al-anwar, xiv, 289)*

77. It is reported that Abu 'Abd Allah [Imam Sadiq] ('a) said: “Jesus
the son of Mary ('a) ascended [to heaven] clad in garments of wool spun
by Mary, woven by Mary, and sewn by Mary. When he was brought up to
heaven it was called: 'O Jesus! Cast off from yourself the finery of the
world.' “*(Bihar al-anwar, xiv, 338)*

78. God confided to Jesus the son of Mary ('a): “O Jesus! Cut yourself
off from fatal desires and part with every desire that keeps you away
from Me, and know that you are near me at the station of a trusted
Apostle (rasul), so beware of Me.”*(Tuhaf al- 'uqul, 375)* .

79. It is reported that one day Jesus, Peace be upon him, came upon
severe rain and thunder, so he sought a place of shelter. He saw a tent
at a distance, and came to it. There he saw a woman in it, so he turned
away from it. Suddenly, he saw a cave in a mountain, and when he arrived
there he saw a lion in it.

So he rested his hand against the cave, and said: “My God! Everything
has a shelter, but You put no shelter for me.” Then God, the Supreme,
revealed to him: “Your shelter is in the abode of My Mercy. By My
Greatness, on the Resurrection Day, verily, I will marry you to a
hundred houris created by My hands, and verily for your wedding I will
lay out a feast for four thousand years, each day of which is like the
lifetime of the entire world. And I will command a crier to cry out:
Where are the ascetics of the world? Be present at the wedding of the
ascetic Jesus the son of Mary!”*(Bihar al-anwar xiv, 328)*

80. One of the Imams [Imam Sadiq or Imam Baqir] said: “Verily, a man of
the Children of Israel exerted himself for forty nights. Then he called
God, but He did not answer him. Then he came to Jesus complaining to him
and asking him to pray. So Jesus purified himself and prayed to God, the
Supreme. Then God revealed to him: 'O Jesus! Verily, he came to me by a
door other than that by which one should come. Verily, he called Me
while there was doubt about you in his heart. So had he called Me until
his neck broke or his fingers had fallen off, I would not have answered
him.' “*(Al-Kafi, ii, 400)*

81. God said to Jesus: “O Jesus! Verily I have granted unto you the poor
and made you merciful towards them. You love them and they love you.
They are pleased with you as a leader and guide, and you are pleased
with them as companions and followers. These are two of My qualities.
Whoever meets Me with these [qualities] meets Me with the purest of
deeds which are dearest to Me.”*(Bihar al-anwar lxxii 55)*

82. God revealed to Jesus ('a): “Be to the people like the ground below
in meekness, like the flowing water in generosity, and like the sun and
the moon in mercy, which shine on the good and the sinner alike.*(Bihar
al-anwar, xiv, 326)*

83. God revealed to Jesus: “Say to the Children of Israel: 'Do not enter
any of My houses without lowered eyes and clean hands. And inform them
that, verily, I will not answer the prayer of any of them while any of
My creation is oppressed by them.' “*(Bihar al-anwar, xiv, 327)*

84. God the Supreme revealed to Jesus: “O Jesus! I have honored nothing
in creation like My religion, and I have bestowed nothing on it like My
mercy. Wash your exterior by water and cure your interior by good deeds,
for verily you shall return to Me. Get ready, for that which is
approaching, and let me hear from you the sounds of sorrow.”*(Al-Kafi)*

Of Knowledge and us Seekers
85. Verily God the Supreme said to Jesus: “Honor those who possess
knowledge and know of their excellence, for verily their excellence over
that of all My creation - except for the prophets and messengers - is
like that of the sun over the stars, and like that of the Hereafter over
this world, and like My excellence over all things.”*(Bihar al-anwar,
ii, 25)*

86. Verily God revealed to Jesus: “Indeed, you must be receptive to
exhortation! Or you will be ashamed before Me to exhort the
people.”*(Irshad al-qulub)*

87. God the Supreme said in the seventeenth chapter of the Gospel: “Woe
unto those who have heard the knowledge but have not sought it. How they
will be gathered with the ignorant into the fire! And learn the
knowledge and teach it, for even if knowledge does not bring you
felicity, it will not bring you wretchedness, and even if it does not
raise you, it will not lower you, and even if it does not enrich you, it
will not impoverish you, and even if it does not benefit you, it will
not harm you.

And do not say, 'We fear lest we should know but not act', but say, 'We
hope to know and to act.' And knowledge intercedes on behalf of one who
has it, and it is for God not to disgrace him. Indeed, on the
Resurrection day God will say: 'O assembly of the learned ('u1ama')!
What is your opinion of our Lord?' Then they will say: 'It is our
opinion that He will have mercy upon us and forgive us.' Then the
Almighty will say: 'Indeed, I have done so. Indeed, I have entrusted you
with My wisdom not because I wanted evil for you, but because I wanted
good for you. So enter among My good servants into My garden (paradise)
by My mercy.' “*(Bihar al-anwar, i, 186)*

The Remembrance of God
88. Imam Rida, Peace be upon him, said: “Engraved on the ring of Jesus,
Peace be upon him, were two sentences from the Gospel: 'Blessed is the

servant who remembers God for His sake, and woe unto the servant who
forgets God for his own sake.' “*(Bihar al-anwar, xiv, 247)*

89. God, the Great and Almighty, said to Jesus ('a): “O Jesus! Remember
Me within yourself and I will remember you within Myself, and remember
Me publicly and I will remember you publicly in a public better than
that of men. O Jesus! Soften your heart for Me and remember Me much in
solitude, and know that My pleasure is in your fawning over Me, in an
animated and not in an impassive manner.”*(Al-Kafi, ii, 502)*

Humility and the Etiquette of Prayer
90. Among things that were revealed by God to Jesus is: “Do not call
upon Me except by praying humbly to Me and with all your heart. Then
verily when you call upon Me thus I will answer you.”*(Bihar al-anwar,
xiv, 290)*

91. God revealed to Jesus ('a): O Jesus! “Give Me the tears of your
eyes, and the humility of your heart, and stand beside the tombs of the
dead, and call to them aloud that you may be advised by them, and say:
'I will join you with those who join you.'*(Bihar al-anwar, lxxxii,
178)*

92. God the Supreme revealed to Jesus: “When I give you a blessing,
receive it with humility, [and] I will complete it for you.”*(Bihar
al-anwar, xiv, 328)*

93. [Imam] Ja'far reported that his father ('a) said: “Najashi the king
of Habashah [Ethiopia] sent for Ja'far the son of Abu Talib and his
companions. When they arrived before him, he was sitting in the dust in
his house with worn garments.... Ja'far ibn Abu Talib said to him: 'O
pious king! What is the matter, that I see you sitting in dust in worn
garments?' He said: 'O Ja'far! We find in that which was revealed to
Jesus ('a): “Verily, it is God's due from His servants that they show
humility when they are shown favor.”

So, when God showed His favor by His prophet, Muhammad (s), I showed
this humility to God.' “ He [Imam Ja'far] said: “When that news reached
the prophet (s), he said to his companions: 'Verily, giving alms brings
abundance, so give alms and God will have mercy on you, and humility
elevates one's station, so be humble and God will elevate you, and
forgiveness increases dignity, so forgive and God will grant you
dignity.*(Bihar al-anwar, xviii, 417)*

An Advice to Rulers
94. A Christian primate (Jathiliq) visited Mus'ab ibn Zubayr [who was a
governor during his brother's caliphate] and spoke words that angered
him. He [Mus'ab] raised a cane against him, then left him until his
anger subsided. He [the primate] said: “If the emir permits me, I would
tell him something revealed by God to Christ ('a)”.

He (Mus'ab) turned to him, and he (the primate) said: “Verily, God
revealed to Christ, 'It is not fitting for a sultan to become angry, for
he commands and is obeyed, and it is not fitting for him to be hasty,
for nothing eludes him, and it is not fitting for him to be unjust, for
injustice is repulsed by him.' “ Then Mus'ab became embarrassed and was
pleased with him.*(Adab al-nafs, ii, 69)*

On Lying and Hypocrisy
95 It is reported from the Gospel: “Beware of liars who come to you in
sheep's clothing while in reality they are ravenous wolves. You shall
know them by their fruits. It is not possible for a good tree to bear
vicious fruit, nor for a vicious tree to bear good fruit.”*('Uddat
al-da'i, l52).* 11

96. God said to Jesus, Peace be upon him: 'O Jesus! Yours must be a
single tongue in secret and in public, and likewise your heart. Verily,
I warn you of yourself, and I suffice as the All-aware.12 It is not
proper that there be two tongues in a single mouth, nor two swords in a
single scabbard, nor two hearts in a single breast, and likewise two
minds.”*(Al-Kafi. ii, 343)*


