


References
1. Ibn al 'Arabi, The Bezels of Wisdom (Fusus al-hikam). tr. R. W. J.
Austin (Lahore: Suhail, 1988), p.177.

2. Frithjof Shuon, Islam and the Perennial Philosophy (Lahore: Suhail,
1985).

3. Dr. Javad Nurbakhsh, Jesus in the Eyes of the Sufis (London:
Khaniqahi-Nimatullahi Publications, 1983).

4. We are reminded by the Glorious Qur'an:

“O Jesus, I will take you away and lift you up to me...” (3:54)

5. Cf Matt. 23:25.

6. Cf Matt 6.25-34:

[^25]: Therefore I tell you, do not worry about your life, what you
will eat or drink; or about your body, what you will wear. Is not life
more important than food, and the body more important than clothes?

[^26]: look at the birds of the air; they do not sow or reap or
Store away in barns, and yet your heavenly Father feed~ them. Are you
not much more valuable than they?

[^27]: Who of you by worrying can add a single hour to his life?

[^28]: And why do you worry about clothes? See how the lilies of the
field grow. They do not labor or spin.

[^29]: Yet I tell you that not even Solomon in all his splendor was
dressed like one of

[^30]: If that is how God clothes the grass of the field, which is
here today and tomorrow is thrown into the fire, will he not much more
clothe you, O you of little faith?

[^31]: So do not worry, saying, 'what shall we eat?' or 'What shall
we drink?' or 'What shall we wear?'

[^32]: For the pagans run after all these things, and your heavenly
Father knows that you need them.

But seek first his kingdom and his righteousness, and all these
things ““ill be given to you as well. Therefore do not worry about
tomorrow, for tomorrow will worry about itself. Each day has enough
trouble of its own. (NIV)

7. This is perhaps one of the most widely misunderstood of the sayings
of Jesus ('a). For it does not seem to he intended in the general
ascribed to it, for that would amount to encouraging aggression,
oppression and wrong doing. Turning the other cheek can however be an
effective way of putting to shame the other side.

An episode related by Muhammad Husayn Azad about Imam Bakhsh Nasikh,
one of the masters of Urdu poetry, suggests how it can be used as an
effective deterrent. Once someone had sent as a present some spoons made
of crystal glass for the poet. These were considered a novelty in those
days, and were quite beautiful. One day a young man belonging to some
noble family came to visit Nasikh.

Seeing the spoons he asked him about where he had got them and how
much they had cost. Then he picked up one of them and held it
admiringly. Thereafter as they conversed, to keep his idle hands busy he
began to tap the spoon on the ground. The fragile thing that it was
broke into two pieces. immediately Nasikh picked up another spoon and
placed it in front of the youth with the remark, “Now play with this
one!” (Mawlana Muhammad Husayn Azad, Ab-e hayat(Calcutta: 'Uthmaniyyah
Book Depot, 1967), p.434 )

8. The corresponding verses of the Bible are Matt 7:9-11, which in the
New international Version (NIV) are translated as follows:

9 Which of you, if his son asks for bread, will give him a stone?

10 Or if he asks for a fish, will give him a snake?

If you, then, though you are evil, know how to give good gifts to
your children, How much more will your Father in heaven give good gifts
to those who ask him!

9. The corresponding verses of the Bible are Matt. 5:27-30, translated
in the King James Version (KJV) as:

27 Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, Thou shall
not commit adultery:

28 But I say unto you, That whosoever looketh on a woman to lust
after her hath committed adultery with her already in his heart.

29 And if thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from
thee: for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should
perish, and not that thy whole body should be cast into hell.

30 And if thy right hand offend thee, cut it off, and cast it from
thee: for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should
perish, and not that thy whole body should be cast into hell.

10. Cf. Matt 8:23-27 (KJV):

23 And when he was entered into a ship, his disciples followed him.

24 And, behold, there arose a great tempest in the sea, inasmuch
that the ship was covered with the waves: but he was asleep.

25 And his disciples came to him, and awoke him, saying, Lord, save
us: we perish.

26 And he saith unto them, Why are ye fearful', O ye of little
faith? Then he arose, and rebuked the winds and the sea; and there was a
great calm.

But the men marveled, saying, What manner of man is this, that even
the winds and the sea obey him!

[^11]: Cf. Matt 7:15-16, 18 (KJV):

15 Beware of false prophets, which come to you in sheep's clothing,
but inwardly they are ravening wolves.

16 Ye shall know them by their fruits.

A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt
tree bring forth good fruit.

12. Cf. Qur'an 17:17; 25:58.


