Supplement 4
============

This is a claim. I suspect that most of my readers will agree with it,
and that we do not have to look very far to find arguments to back it
up. The claim is that the strength of the hold on the human imagination
exerted by religion as evidenced by phenomena as diverse as the Islamic
Revolution in Iran and allusions to religious themes in contemporary
American fiction depends on the fact that religions allege that they
contain truths that are absolute, truths that go beyond the
particularities of their expressions in various cultural contexts.

The questions of whether or not this allegation is correct, and whether
it is even rational to believe it, are central to contemporary
discussions of the philosophy of religion. For this reason alone, the
skepticism of the postmodernist is important and requires a response.

But aside from how this response is formulated, there is this other
question of whether postmodernism can provide a philosophical
perspective from which theology is more profoundly understood or whether
it undermines theology by denying that it has any real connection with
Ultimate Reality The Christian postmodernists and many, if not the
majority, of contemporary Christian theologians contend that the
question of the truth of religious doctrine can be dismissed without
damage to religion, at least without damage to Protestant Christianity,
because the focus of the evangelical's religion is salvation rather than
gnosis.

This contention is dubious for several reasons. First, because the vast
majority of believers, past and present, of the world's religions have
understood their religions as making important claims about reality. Any
denial of the importance of religious truth is a distortion of religious
thought.

Second, in Islam and Christianity, the Ultimate Reality is known as God,
and the practical, symbolic, and social dimensions of religious life are
directed toward obedience and worship of God as the means to salvation.
If claims that God exists are dismissed as naive, then the doubts
generated about the reality of the object of worship threaten to make
the meaningfulness of worship doubtful. Without God, worship is
pointless, and without meaningful worship, there is no salvation.

Third, the aura of the sacred and feelings of holiness generated by
religion seem to involve the idea that the sacred provides us with a
vehicle by means of which the mundane is to be transcended, the merely
perspectival is to be escaped. In revealed religion, particular
historical events are designated as revelation, and with this
designation Christians and Muslims cease to see Jesus, Peace be with
him, as a merely historical personality, and Muslims cease to see the
Qur'an al-Karim as a mere artifact of early medieval Arabian culture,
but as the Word of God.

This transformation of awareness from the mundane to the sacred is
accomplished by means of a recognition of an ontological status for the
Source of revelation, so that without the metaphysical dimension of
religion, the rest of it, including the salvific potency of its symbols,
the feelings of obligation to respect its commandments, the attachment
to participation in its rituals, all would weaken and wither.[^29]

The above discussion of postmodernism prepares the way for a return to
our original question about the relation of philosophy to theology.
Despite the fact that religious authorities might feel threatened from
time to time by questions that arise out of unfamiliar philosophical
discussions, many of whose participants are indeed hostile toward
religious authority, if not toward religion itself, ultimately the
theologian cannot escape an involvement with philosophy.

Perhaps the most persuasive reason we can offer to the theologian is
that the philosophical criticisms of religious ideas that plague the
minds of the young require a philosophical response if the young are to
be guided. Even if no amount of merely philosophical expertise will be
sufficient to remove doubt, some philosophical wisdom is necessary in
order to engage the sincere seeker in the spiritual work of rising above
the widespread Satanic suspicions that religion is little more than a
pack of lies.

The presence of philosophical doubts in the minds of the young was also
the reason given by Allamah Tabataba i to Ayatullah Burujerdi for
publicly teaching philosophy inQum. philosophy presents itself to
theology as a servant without whose help the mess philosophy herself has
made cannot be cleaned up!

But there are other reasons for theology to graciously accept the
services offered by philosophy. Allah has graced the human mind with a
thirst for wisdom, and the wisdom sought includes knowledge of the
things of which religion speaks, as well as skill in practical
evaluations and the sort of precision in which logicians, mathematicians
and physicists take pride, and other things, such as history, as well.

The philosophical quest is one which propels the seeker to some degree
of understanding of all these areas and an attempt to fit them together.
From time to time philosophy might devote too much attention to a single
dimension of understanding, resulting in waves of logicism or empiricism
or historicism, but the structure of the human spirit ultimately cannot
be satisfied with a narrow slot from which to view reality.

I am told that Sohravardi Maqtul said that a person who is not able to
leave his body at will is not a real philosopher. I am not sure what
this means, but it suggests to me the philosophical need to escape the
confines of a physical perspective, the need to succumb to what some
have derided as "*the transcendental temptation* ."[^30]

Theology, on the other hand, is much more limited than philosophy. The
business of theology is not to offer a comprehensive theory of reality,
but merely to show that there is a Supreme Reality and how this is
related to lesser things. Without some attention to philosophy, the
business of theology is not likely to be very profitable, because we do
not get a very clear picture of God's relation to the world unless we
pay some attention to what the world is supposed to look like.

This does not mean that theology has to give an absolute stamp of
approval to some particular metaphysical speculation, but theologians
should not shy away from metaphysical issues either. Theology is well
served by philosophy if it interacts with philosophical ideas without
developing a dependency for a single philosophical way of doing things.

Philosophy, too, perhaps finds its true vocation in service to theology.
For if philosophy is to fulfill its goal of providing an intelligible
comprehensive synthesis, it must make room for theological truth and
knowledge of that truth, that is, by providing for the needs of
theology. This becomes the worship of philosophy, to be at the service
of theology; and as in all things human, the highest degree of
perfection is to be approached through worship of Allah, recognizing
one's own faqr before al-Ghani.

Notes
-----

[^1]. Plantinga's articles on this topic have not yet been collected in
the form of a book, but two anthologies in which there are articles by
him and discussions of his work are especially worth mentioning: Robert
Audi and William J. Wainwright, eds., Rationality, Religious Belief, and
Moral Commitment (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1986), and Alvin
Plantinga and Nicholas Wolterstorff', eds., Faith and Rationality:
Reason and Belief in God (Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press,
1983). Also worth mentioning is a book devoted to criticisms of
Plantinga's ideas and his responses: James E. Tomberlin and Peter Van
Inwagen, Alvin Plantinga, Profiles, Volume 5 (Dordrecht: D.
Reidel,1985).

[^2]. Plantinga's claim has been disputed by John Beversluis, who argues
that Calvin and the Reformed Church object to natural theology for
reason incompatible with the epistemological position advocated by
Plantinga. See John Beversluis, "Reforming the \`Reformed' Objection to
Natural Theology," Faith and philosophy, 12:2, April 1995, 189-[^206]:

[^3]. See Rational Faith: Catholic Responses to Reformed Epistemology,
edited by Linda Zagzebski (Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press,
1993).

[^4]. His major work on this topic is Perceiving God: The Epistemology
of Religious Experience (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1991).

[^5]. See Michael C. Banner, The Justification of Science and the
Rationality of Religious Belief (Oxford: Oxford University Press; 1992)
and Nancey Murphy, Theology in the Age of Scientific Reasoning (Ithaca:
Cornell University Press, 1990).

[^6]. Gary Gutting, Religious Belief and Religious Skepticism (Notre
Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 1982).

[^7]. Richard Swinburne, The Existence of God (London: Oxford University
Press, 1979).

[^8]. John Hick, An Interpretation of Religion (New Haven: Yale
University Press, 1989).

[^9]. Wayne Proudfoot, Religious Experience (Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1985).

[^10]. Steven Katz, ed., Mysticism and Philosophical Analysis (New York:
Oxford University Press, 1978).

[^11]. Nelson Pike, MysticUnion: An Essay on the Phenomenology of
Mysticism (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1992).

[^12]. Robert Cummings Neville, A TheologyPrimer (Albany: SUNY, 1991).

[^13]. See Thomas V Morris, The Logic of God Incarnate (Ithaca: Cornell
University Press, 1986).

[^14]. See Peter Geach, The Virtues (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1977), and Peter van Inwagen, "And Yet They Are Not Three Gods
But One God," in Thomas V Morris, ed., philosophy and the Christian
Faith (Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 1988), pp.
241-[^278]:

[^15]. Robert Adams, \`A Modified Divine Command Theory of Ethical
Wrongness" in Louis Pojman, ed., philosophy of Religion (Belmont:
Wadsworth Publishing Company, 1987), and "Divine Command Metaethics
Modified Again" The Journal of Religious Ethics 1:7, 91-[^97]:

[^16]. J. L. Mackie, The Miracle of Theism (New York: Oxford University
Press, 1982).

[^17]. MacIntyre's most important books are After Virtue, 2nd ed. (Notre
Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 1984), Whose Justice? Which
Rationality? (Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 1988), and
Three Rival Versions of Moral Enquiry: Encyclopedia, Geneology and
Tradition (Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 1990).
Translations of the first two of these works into Farsi are being
prepared, and a Farsi summary of After Virtue may be found in the
journal Ma'rifat, Nos. 9-18, and continuing.

[^18]. See, for example, Eleonore Stump and Norman Kretzmann, "Eternity"
in Thomas V Morris, ed., The Concept ofGod (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1987).

[^19]. See the articles in Linwood Urban and Douglas N. Walton, eds.,
The Power of God (New York: Oxford University Press, 1978).

[^20]. See William P Alston's, "Referring to God," in his Divine Nature
and Human Language: Essays in Philosophical Theology (Ithaca: Comell
University Press, 1989).

[^21]. See D. Z. Phillips, Religion Without Explanation (Oxford: Basil
Blackwell, 1976) and Norman -Malcolm, Wittgenstein: A Religious Point of
View? (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1994).

[^22]. See Gordon Kaufinan, "Evidentialism: A Theologian's Response,"
Faith and philosophy, 6:1 (January 1989), 35-46, and the response by
Eleonore Stump and Norman Kretzmann, "Theologically Unfashionable
philosophy," Faith and philosophy, 7:3 (July 1990), 329-339, and the
defense of Kaufinan's position by James A. Keller, "On the Issues
Dividing Contemporary Christian Philosophers and Theologians," Faith and
philosophy, 10:1 (January 1993), 68-78 and James A. Keller, "Should
Christian Theologians become Christian Philosophers?" Faith and
philosophy, 12:2 (April 1995), 260-[^268]:

[^23]. Jean-Francois Lyotard, tr. G. Bennington and B. Massumi, The
Postmodern Condition (Minneapolis: Minnesota University Press, 1984).

[^24]. His major work is Of Grammatology, tr. G. Spivak (Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1974), but especially relevant to
contemporary Christian theology is Derrida and Negative Theology, ed.
Harold Coward and Toby Foshay (Albany: SUNY Press, 1992).

[^25]. Georges Bataille, Theory of Religion, tr. R. Hurley (New York:
Zone Books, 1989).

[^26]. Michel Foucault, The Archaeology of Knowledge, ti. A. M.
Sheridan-Snuth (New York: Harper & Row, 1972), also see the biography,
James Miller, The Passion of Michel Foucault (New York: Simon &
Schuster, 1993) in which the relation between Foucault's writings and
his sado-masochistic homosexuality is explored.

[^27]. For a collection of essays in which postmodernist thought is seen
as offering resources for Christian theology see Faith and philosophy,
Vol. 10, No. 4 (October 1993). [^28]: Postmodernism is also starting to
attract the attention of students of Islamic thought. See Akbar S.
Ahmed, Postmodernism and Islam: Predicament and Promise (London:
Routledge, 1992) and Ernest Gellner, Postmodernism, Reason and Religion
(London: Routledge,1992).

[^29]. Worthy of note is Huston Smith's defense of the religious world
view over the postmodern proclamation (issued by Richard Rorty) that
"There is no Big Picture:" "Postmodernism and the World's Religions" in
The Truth about Truth, ed., Walter Truett Anderson (Los Angeles: Jeremey
P Tarcher, 1995), an address originally delivered in Kuala Lumpur for a
symposium on "Islam and the Challenge of Modernity," and later revised
without references to Islam as "The Religious Significance of
Postmodernism: A Rejoinder" in Faith and philosophy 12:3 (July 1995),
409-[^422]:

[^30]. See the defense of atheistic skepticism by Paul Kurtz, The
Transcendental Temptation (New York: Prometheus, 1986).
