13
==

The Modest Covering and Woman’s Chasteness
==========================================

##### Thereof; that they should draw their veils over their bosoms and not display their beauty except... [Holy Quran: Nur 24:31]

Veiling, or covering woman's beauty and protecting her from the evil
eyes of the rude, lustfully corrupt and satanic men is a Quranic decree,
a holy law, human duty and a moral affair. Islamic veiling, whose best
form, is the long veil or chador being a reminder of that spring of
chasteness Fatimah Zahra (Pbuh). The veil is not a block to acquiring
knowledge and perfection for a woman. Rather, the veil protects her from
many dangers and traps that animal-like people have placed before the
beautiful ones, the young girls and women. The veil protects her
innocence, chasteness and modesty for her husband, or if she is not
married for her future husband. Whenever the precious, beautiful and
costly jewel - woman- goes into the divine trunk called covering, she is
safe from the thefts of the thieves, the looters and those corrupted by
sin. When the young beautiful ones are not seen and their innocent faces
are not displayed before men, the flames of lust and tendency towards
disobeying; cannot burn a nation and destroy the foundations of a
country's spirituality: burning instincts are not aroused.

If the young men do not see the attractive beauties of the young women
and women in public places, they will not look at them lustfully, chase
girls and attack women. Then there will be no mental sluggishness,
nervous breakdowns, premature adulthood, masturbation, fornication,
gay-like acts, sorrows and worries, lack of concentration, not being in
the mood to study, love affairs, psychotic illnesses, or impotency.
Based upon this, it must be said that the modest covering is a necessary
matter for women and is strongly required. Without any doubt, one who
denies this matter-knowing that it is necessary in Islam is an
unbeliever according to the decrees of God in the Quran; he is not a
Muslim. If a young man believes so, he cannot marry a Muslim girl since
the marriage would be nullified. The marriage between these two would be
worthless and their relationship would be illegal based on Islam and
their children would be illegitimate; their intercourse would be
considered adultery, too. A girl who denies the matter of covering
cannot be the wife of a young Muslim man since the same applies to her
as does to the unbelieving man.

The covering protects a woman's dignity, nobility and grandeur and
protects her beauty and her benefits for her husband. Being modestly
covered, she may continue her education and attain perfection and
virtues. It is satanic to think that women are prevented from
progressing by the veil. It is a wrong idea publicized by the looting
Imperialists and the thieves of women's chastity, and the rogues of
Eastern and Western countries.

All the following are related to the covering of a country's women: the
warmth of the home, the strength of the relationship between a wife and
a husband, the peace of mind of men, the proof of love of men for their
lawful wives. All of these are based upon the home and the family and
the trust of the man in his wife. They also require that men should not
see the beauties of women other than their own wives. If men have easy
access to women in all the scenes of society, there will be no guarantee
that they will maintain their love and attachment to their own wives.
The excitement of men's lustful instincts will cause them to lose
interest in their mutual life and this in itself will destroy the warmth
of the family center. It is impossible to assess the amount of damage
done by unveiling women and the misuse of the veil and the practice of
letting women on the loose as done in the West.

Up until now, the unveiling of women has caused millions of men to
deviate from the straight path, many others to commit sins, the
appearance of the monster called "divorce" in the families, men falling
in love with married women, and illegitimate sexual relationships. The
unveiling has also caused many to leave the angelic expanse of Islam and
religion, just as Judaism and Christianity have wanted. The establishers
of the practice of unveiling have really become frustrated themselves
and recognize that the destructive influences of their action are among
the evil phenomenon of this century.

The family system in Iran is a strong system based on modesty,
chasteness, nobility, politeness, faith, piety and no divorces except in
rare cases. However, the family and the home have experienced different
times since the Reza Khan Pahlavy looted the veil from the heads of many
of Iran's women. This was actually done by the western imperialists who
put that rogue, base illiterate traitor, and dirty country-seller into
power. At the end of his rule, the divorce rates sky rocketed so much so
that the dirty dynasty had between six to seven thousand requests made
to its courts for divorce every month. Thus, the young married men
became womanless, and the married women became divorced. These two
groups freed of their marital obligations joined the society and spread
corruption at an alarming rate throughout it.

The supreme Islamic jurisprudent -the late Ayatullah Shah Abady has been
quoted as saying- without any fear of the government of the time- the
following after the removal of the veil by the government in public and
private places and on the pulpit: "By looting the Quran's veil and
killing the protesters against unveiling in the Gohar Shad Mosque beside
Imam Reza's shrine guarded by angels, Reza Khan made the 124,000
Prophets of God cry". O yes! That insightful mystic in love, who was an
able, enlightened, peerless jurisprudent in

Islamic matters, wisdom and philosophy, considered the unveiling of
women and the misuses of the veil to be an affair that made the Prophets
cry!!!

In the very useful book entitled “Are We Muslims”? Quttab stated :

"Based on the documents I have seen, one of the Popes invited all the
cardinals and the priests in the Vatican and asked them to comment on
how to destroy Islam and eliminate the illuminating light of religion in
a way that does not cost Christianity and the Vatican too much.
Committees were formed and several views were expressed. Among these,
the view that was accepted by all the priests, the cardinals and Pope
himself was that the cheapest plan and the strongest weapon to destroy
Islam was to unveil Muslim girls and women and make them freely
available to young boys and men in the allies, the markets, the parks,
the public places, the offices, the theaters, commercial and social
centers." This plan was carried out by the traitors and was reinforced
by the lustfulness of unfaithful girls and women who added to the flames
burning the religion and the family.

The situation became so bad in Islamic countries and Iran that the
product of the efforts of the Prophets, the Imams, the scholars and the
wise being God's religion, was about to be abolished. And the light of
guidance was about to be extinguished. However, God's hand extended out
through a man from the descendants of the Prophets and the Imams in
Iran. Khomeini, the idol-breaker, appeared on the scene and saved the
religion from the evil ones. He re-established the practice of the
Quran's veil.

It is incumbent upon the Islamic nation to protect the Revolution of
that divine individual as well as the values of that great divine
movement. The people must not let the injured enemy decrease or
extinguish the light of the movement and return the Iranian nation to
its previous state. The nation must assertedly export the culture of the
Revolution and bring the rest of the nations from outside the circle of
Islam back into the orbit. Considering what has just been said, we can
understand the value of that enlightened martyr's words who stated
several times in his speeches: "The veil is a protection, not a
limitation."

O' yes! The veil is a protection from thousands of dangers for a woman,
her husband, her family, the society, and especially the youth and those
who have not married. It protects everyone from corruption and prevents
the warmth of the family center from getting cold. Researchers have
stated that the issue of covering has been presented in fourteen Quranic
verses and some believe that close to twenty-five verses make use of the
meaning of the concept called "veiling".

The Commander of the Faithful (Pbuh) said to Imam Mujtaba and in reality
all people: Truly adhere to the restrictions regarding veiling near
those who are forbidden to see each other, as this will safeguard you-
and all women you are not allowed to see from thinking about or falling
into sin. And if you can, try not to let your women know any man other
than you yourself. [Bihar al-Anwar, v.77, p.214]

A narrator has stated that one rainy day he was sitting in Baq'ih
Cemetery with the Prophet (Pbuh). A woman riding a donkey passed by us,
when its foot got caught in hole and the woman fell off the animal. The
Prophet (Pbuh) turned his face and I told him she was wearing pants. The
Prophet (Pbuh) asked God for forgiveness of such women three times and
said: "O 'people! Put on such clothes as they are the best covering for
the body and women should wear such clothes when they leave the house."
[Mizan al-Hikmat ,v.2, p.259]

The short veil, the scarf, the long cloak are the various titles which
are used in the Quranic verses and Prophetic traditions for a woman's
modest covering. A woman must consider herself a slave of God, and must
be grateful to God. Being grateful means to consider His grandeur, the
Hereafter and the Trial. She must pay strict attention to the fact
entitled the Resurrection Day and the Last Judgment. She must
wholeheartedly obey the decrees of her God in the Quran, on the tongues
of the Prophets and Imams, so that she may protect herself, her family
and society from the harmful effects of not veiling properly or at all.

##### And for such as had entertained the fear of standing before their Lord's (tribunal) and had restrained (their) soul from lower desires, their abode will be the Garden. [Holy Quran: Nazi'at:40-41]

Sorrowfully, it must be said that some girls and women living today in
various parts of the world follow the school of lust and sinning. They
have freed their lusts and sexual desires and spread corruption in every
corner of the world which is unprecedented in history. And it must also
be sorrowfully stated that some females in Islamic countries who belong
to the nation of the Prophet (Pbuh) are imitating those deviant
Westerners. The Commander of the Faithful (Pbuh) said the following
regarding such women: "Near the end of time when we are approaching the
Hereafter, there will be women with such characteristics: Lacking any
modest covering and nearly naked; showing off their private beauties
outside the house in the streets and the markets; irreligious;
malicious; inclined to lust; accelerating towards pleasures; considering
divinely forbidden acts as legitimate: such women with these
characteristics will abide in Hell forever. [Vasa'il, v.14, p.19]

#### A Surprising Fact

In one of the issues of the newspaper KAYHAN having a high circulation,
I read (I cannot remember which issue): "There was a young woman who was
an example of those women noted in the afore-mentioned tradition of the
Commander of the Faithful (Pbuh). She fell in love with a youth even
though she had a three year-old daughter, because she was free as the
Western women's style to come and go as she liked and because her
husband's friends visited the house freely. She did not cover herself
Islamically and exposed her body to them. She would attend frequent
parties where men and women were mixed.

The young, lustful, irreligious man was excited sexually even more by
the young married woman and told her the child was an obstacle in their
way and must be eliminated. They argued over this matter for nearly four
months, and finally lust

and the inclination to make love with others overcame the mother who was
created to be a center of love and affection. She took her innocent,
beautiful blonde girl to the bath and choked her to eliminate the
obstacle to her lust and to let the married woman and the strange man
reach a few moments of carnal desire.

She became corrupted forever and left her poor husband with a
devastating state of life." If the husband of this woman had shown some
manliness and prevented his young beautiful wife from freely being seen
by others and being attractive to men around, then a sinless child would
have been left for the unfortunate father and a married woman would not
have spoiled her chasteness forever. A youth was thus made to experience
a terrible misfortune and the warm, family center of another youth who
had just married was completely wrecked. O 'yes! The modest covering is
a protection not a limitation.

#### The View of Some Eminent Westerners in Regards to the Situation of Western Society

Disraeli , one of the Prime Ministers of Britain, a country leading in
corruption and its spread, wrote in an article:

"I am at the verge of committing insane acts, but always try to avoid
one being a love affair with a woman in the street and say this is my
ideal woman!" Under the guise of freedom, the unwise took the Creation's
valuable and chaste jewel out of the guard for chastity being the veil
and let her totally free in any program deemed necessary by lust. Then
they discarded her with the excuse of escaping from a love affair, since
this valuable jewel has now lost its worth and is with someone else at
each moment. And she is in bed with others at different times constantly
delving into immoral, inhumane acts.

Miss Alzeemary , a Swedish writer and poet, has stated the following
regarding the European society in an important article in the Daily
Express: "The men know nothing about loyalty and trick girls and women".
She must be told that men lost their loyalty, to their wife, home and
the family when you guided the women towards unchastity, bad covering or
no covering of the body at all. And men turned her into an unconditional
slave of man's lust and inclination so that men could easily see her
half-naked while being tempting, whenever they desired. It was then that
the men turned into tricky people.

The side-effects of poor veiling, or no veiling at all and the woman's
freedom to have a relationship with whomever she desires are not few in
number. And the sour results of this issue are unnumerable. When the men
saw these scenes, they left their spouses; in other words, they quit the
responsibility to support their family. They went to the free market to
satisfy themselves. When the young men realized how cheap it was to
satisfy their lusts, they rejected establishing a mutual married life
and pursued their lusts. It was in this way that the family structure in
the West and those Eastern countries which followed it, fell apart and a
situation similar to a jungle was the result.

Miss Alzeemary added in her paper that there are many young beautiful
girls who hope to find a husband, but are forced into sexual relations
with men. Verily they are awaiting a husband but none is to be found,
since young men have access to women in whatever form they desire and
see no need to marry. Even many married men separate from their wives to
be able to satisfy their lusts freely. She adds that she recommends that
young girls have no relations with any men before they get married. Her
request is very important but this is not practical given the current
state of women in the world and the loose behavior of men in the Western
society.

If the world decides to approach an appropriate state it must put the
legitimate, natural and humane Islamic regulations into practice. First
and foremost, they must return the veil and proper covering to women:
They must return chastity and shyness to her. Otherwise, there exists no
cure for all the corruption which destroys the family order.

The oppression against women in the West is unprecedented in man's
history. They have guided women's intent, will and effort towards
appearance in public places for corruption and seduction of men. They
have turned her into sexual goods to be used for gaining wealth and
pleasing their lust.

Hazrat Ali (Pbuh) has said in Nahj ul-Balaghah: The animals strive for
food; the beasts strive for animosity with others; and the women strive
for adoration of life and corruption in the world. It is believing men
and women who submit to God, fear God, are kind and benevolent. [Nahj
ul-Balaghah, Ibn Abi al-Hadid, v.9, Chapter 153, p.160]

#### A Case From Imam Husayn’s Life (Pbuh)

It has been narrated that before going to fight the enemies, Imam Husayn
(Pbuh) told Hazrat Zaynab (Pbuh) to gather all the women's jewelry and
throw it in front of the tents after Imam Husayn got martyred and the
enemies attacked the tents. Then their poor materialist enemies, who
were unaware and attached to this world would get busy gathering them,
and the women would get a chance to find a secure corner safe from the
eyes of the strange men. It has been said that when Yazeed was hitting
Imam Husayn's chopped off head's lips and teeth, one of his maids dreamt
of Hazrat Zahra (Pbuh) being sad and upset, and complaining of what
Yazeed was doing. Then she woke up and got so afraid that she rushed out
yelling into Yazeed's court without a scarf and veil. Yazeed who saw her
in this state covered her up with his own cloak and shouted: “Why did
you appear in front of strange men without the proper head and face
covering?” How strange it is that this atheist, alcoholic, dog and
monkey-keeper Yazeed could not bear to see his maid without any modest
covering and covered her with his own cloak and sent her out of the
meeting where there were strange men; but there are men who are so
careless about their women and let them appear everywhere in public with
their hair and face made up and without any cover. The Prophet (Pbuh)
said regarding the sense of honor A sense of honor is

due to man's belief in God and the Hereafter. [Mizan al-Hikmat , v.7,
pp.357-358]

Verily God is religiously zealous, and loves any one with a sense of
honor. It is due to His sense of honor that He has forbidden the
exposure of private parts. [Ibid]

#### Veil and Dirty Looks in the Vierw of the Quran

Lack of veiling or poor veiling are extremely bad and lead to a lot of
corruption. It is God's intent to forbid lack of veiling and poor
veiling: Blessed are those who follow God and protect their women by
enforcing veiling. As men and women have to engage in various social,
educational, etc. activities and have to appear in public places, the
Quran has issued a decree that is obligatory for both to follow to
maintain their mental, psychological and spiritual health.

##### And for women: O Prophet! Tell thy wives and daughters, and the believing women, that they should cast their outer garments over their persons (when abroad): that is most convenient, that they should be known (as such) and not molested. And God is Oft-Forgiving, most Merciful. [Holy Quran: Ahzab 33:59]

And for men and women:

##### Say to the believing men that they should lower their gaze and guard their modesty: that will make for greater purity for them: and God is well acquainted with all that they do. [Holy Quran: Nur 24:30] And say to the believing women that they should lower their gaze and guard their modesty; that they should not display their beauty and ornaments except what (must ordinarily) appear thereof.[Holy Quran: Nur 24:31]

Imam Sadiq (Pbuh) said: Jesus told his companions "Avoid dirty looks,
since they will plant the desire to do forbidden acts in the heart, and
it will cause sedition for the one who looks. Blessed be the one who has
placed his eyes in his heart and uses his physical eyes only for what is
necessary to see. [Bihar al-Anwar , v.78, p.284]

The Commander of the Faithful (Pbuh) said: There is no part of the body
less grateful than the eyes. If you just deprive it of what pleases it,
it will make you forget God, the Almighty. [Bihar al-Anwar, v.104, p.36]

The Prophet (Pbuh) said: In fornication, each part of the body is partly
responsible. That of the eye is forbidden from gazing at a strange
woman. [Bihar al-Anwar , v.104, p.36]

When, as stated in the Quran, Shoeib's daughter told her father about
Moses : O' my father. Please hire him since he is truly the most
powerful and honest man you can hire. He told her: O' my daughter. Yes,
he is indeed a strong man. You recognized his strength from his putting
the rock aside. But how do you recognize his honesty? She said: O'
father. I was coming home walking ahead of

him. He told me that he would walk ahead and I should warn him when he
goes the wrong way. He said he is not from among the people who look at
women from behind. [Bihar al-Anwar , v.13, p.32]

The Prophet (Pbuh) said: Whoever keeps looking at forbidden scenes, God
will fill his eyes with fire in the Hereafter, unless he repents and
stops his evil deeds. [Mizan al-Hikmat , v.10, p.77]

The Prophet (Pbuh) narrates God: A forbidden look is similar to a
poisonous dart from Satan. Whoever fears me and avoids looking at
strange women (who are forbidden to look at), I shall reward him with a
faith with its sweetness to be felt in his heart. [Mizan al-Hikmat ,
v.10, p.78]

#### Who Can See Women as Stated by the Quran

Those relatives who are close enough to see a women without a veil are
introduced in a Quranic verse, being the Book of Guidance; the source of
prosperity; the developer of one's personality; and the origin of good
of this world and the Hereafter for people. Thus, it is made clear for
any woman whom she is free not to cover herself in front of against, and
in front of whom she must cover her beauties and ornaments.

And say to the believing women that they should lower their gaze and
guard their modesty; that they should not display their beauty and
ornaments except what (must ordinarily) appear thereof; that they should
draw their veils over their bosoms and not display their beauty except
to their husbands, their fathers, their husbands' fathers, their sons,
their husbands' sons, their brothers or their brother's sons, or their
sisters' sons, or their women, or the slaves whom their right hands
possess, or male servants free of physical needs, or small children who
have no sense of the shame of sex; and that they should not strike their
feet in order to draw attention to their hidden ornaments. And O ye
believers! Turn ye all together towards God, that ye may attain bliss.
[Holy Quran: Nur 24:31]

Muslim believing women- daughters of the nation of Muhammad (Pbuh)-
please obey the wise decrees of God for the good of this world and the
Hereafter. Noble young men guard your women against the attacks of the
lustful with Islamic covering and the Quranic veil. Let your wife be
just your wife, and not show her face, body, ornaments and beauties to
please others, since this is against morality, ethics, nobility and
conscience.
