14
==

Security in Life
================

##### Whatever good, (O man!) happens to thee, is from God; But whatever evil happens to thee, is from thy (own) soul. [Holy Quran: Nisaa 4:79]

#### The Good and the Bad

Man is a creature consisting of the intellect, the heart, the soul and
the body. Good and bad aspects exist for each part of man's being; all
the good ones originate in God and all the bad ones originate in man
himself. Nothing but benefits, goodness, mercy and blessings come from
the Sacred Existence, God, Who is mentioned in the Glorious Quran as
having the following attributes: the All-Benevolent; the All-Merciful;
the Lord; the All-Loving; the All-Forgiving; the Generous; the
All-Subtle; the Compassionate; the Creator; the Shaper; the Holy and the
All-Mighty.

Nothing but evil and damage are the products of ignorance, rancor, envy,
spite, short-temperedness, greed and laziness. An individual must strive
to attain enough wisdom, knowledge and insight so as to make a living;
to thoroughly illuminate one's worldy life and spiritual life; to manage
the affairs of his wife and children; and to acquire the correct outlook
on Existence and the world, as much as his personal and social duties
requires.

Learning about the basic matters such as belief in God and the Day of
Judgment, knowledge about the Prophethood and the leadership of the
Imams, is a necessary affair and one's personal duty. One is duty-bound
to learn the matters related to jurisprudence and the worldly sciences
as much as he needs to. God has bestowed upon man the beneficial
elements of science and knowledge, wisdom and insight as powerful goods
and benefits along with the necessary success in growth, perfection of
the intellect and the power to understand. Whenever the intellect,
itself being one of God's blessings, accompanies other blessings like
success and insight, then a sea of light appears in the individual's
spiritual domain. This illumination and good will guarantee a part of
the security of man's spiritual domain. Naturally, this security will be
passed on from a man to his wife and children, and they too will benefit
from peace with him. As a result, life will to some extent be
illuminated by the light of peace and quiet.

In the first stage, it is essential for the head of the household, who
is responsible for managing life's affairs to have enough knowledge of
religion as required by his personal duty and, as much as is necessary
of religious jurisprudence knowledge: this means to be informed of the
religiously lawful and forbidden actions and things. He must have as
much as necessary of worldly knowledge in order to run life. In the next
stage and under the support of the man of the house who provides the
necessities of the family, the wife and the children can live as a small
nation in the small country of the home. They can live together with
knowledge, wisdom, insight and awareness, and be secure from the evils
of ignorance, illiteracy, jealousy and foolishness. Verily knowledge
provides security and ignorance and illiteracy will result in loss.

#### Ignorance and Illiteracy

In a very important statement made by members of the Prophet's family,
ignorance is considered to be a kind of spiritual death and to be more
detrimental to one's life than a harmful meal. Ignorance is an illness,
some sort of suffering, a source of deviation bringing on ever-lasting
misfortune. It ruins one's future life, is a mine of evil and a
dangerous enemy. Ignorance is the cause of unbelief and deviation, and
prevents sermons and advice from being accepted. It also is the cause of
excesses in life. The Commander of the Faithful, Imam Ali (Pbuh) said:
Ignorance is death; ignorance is destruction; ignorance is an incurable
disease; ignorance is a cause of man's slippage; ignorance ruins the
Hereafter; ignorance is the source of all evils; and ignorance is the
main stock of evil. [Mizan al-Hikmat , v.2, p.154]

The Prophet (Pbuh) was asked about the signs of the ignorant. He
answered as follows: An ignorant will trouble you if you socialize with
him. He will blame you if you stay away from him; he will mention it if
he grants you something; he will be ungrateful if you grants him
something; and if you trust him with your secrets, he will misuse your
trust. [Tuhaf ul-Uqool , p.28]

Consider the following matter for yourself. If the head of the household
is ignorant, does not consider spiritual and doctrinal matters to be
important and has no worldly plans in mind, then he will be a great
source of stress, insecurity, trouble, suffering and torment in and
outside of the home. Wealth and property, the home and life, the wife
and children, are faced with danger and damage, and loss and insecurity
in the presence of an ignorant individual. Islam stresses that one must
acquire wisdom and insight in worldly and spiritual affairs as much as
necessary, so that security is created in the individual's spiritual and
worldly life. Islam wants an individual's innocent wife and children to
live in peace with him, and not suffer any physical blows, loss and
damages at his hands. It does not want his family's worldly and future
lives to suffer any loss and the distressful monsters of war to be at
their throats.

In Islamic literary traditions, it is written that Jesus (Pbuh) was
wholeheartedly on the run. A friend of his asked him why this was so.
Jesusf (Pbuh) replied he was fleeing from the ignorant. O' yes, one must
be wholeheartedly on the run

from ignorance and the ignorant, and follow the Prophets' way so as to
secure one's prosperity in this world and the Hereafter. Even if the
ignorant has the elixir of life, he is poor, but the informed and the
wise is rich beside poverty.

#### Knowledge and Wisdom

According to the decree of the Glorious Quran, the wise and the foolish
are in no way equal: Say:

Are those equal, those who know and those who do not know?[Holy Quran:
Zumar 39:9]

And as the Prophet of Islam (Pbuh) has said: A day in which I acquire no
knowledge or science which would help me approach God is not a blessed
day for me. [Mizan al-Hikmat , v.6, p.449]

He also said: A heart without any wisdom is like a ruin. So learn, teach
and understand and do not pass away as an ignorant. Verily God will not
accept the excuse of the ignorant in the Hereafter. [Ibid]

The Commander of the Faithful, Imam Ali (Pbuh) described knowledge and
wisdom, and their attributes in the magnificent book entitled “Ghurar
al-Hikam” as follows: Knowledge brings forth success and is a dam
against catastrophes and calamities. Wisdom is the highest degree of
self-sufficiency. Knowledge is the light of the intellect; a good
reason; the best guidance; obvious beauty; the best companion; the most
worthy measure; the believer's lost one; the guide to patience; the most
beneficial treasure and the most excellent truth. In one sentence, the
Prophet (Pbuh), expressed all the realities in this world and the
Hereafter resulting from knowledge and wisdom: Knowledge, insight and
wisdom are the source of all goodness. [Bihar al-Anwar , v.77, p.175]

Hazrat Ali (Pbuh) recognizes that there are seven basic differences
between material wealth and knowledge. - Knowledge and insight are the
legacy of the Prophets. Wealth and property are the legacy of the
Pharaohs. Knowledge will not decrease once taught, but wealth once spent
will. Wealth requires a guard, while knowledge guards an individual.
Knowledge accompanies an individual all the way to his future life,
while wealth remains in this world. Acquiring wealth is feasible for
everyone, but knowledge, wisdom and insight belong to the believers.
Concerning the affairs of religion, all people are in need of a wise man
but do not need a wealthy one. Knowledge will help one pass over the
bridge to the Hereafter, but wealth will prevent one from rendering
one’s accounts. [Bihar al-Anwar , v.77, p.185]

An empty ship will face many dangers such as terribly bad weather,
strong winds, wreckage or getting lost while sailing at sea, while a
full ship will move on safe and secure to approach its destination. This
is similar to an ignorant man versus a wise, knowledgeable one. How does
the person behave whose spiritual life is enlightened by the light of
monotheism; whose heart is sure of the truth and whose soul is pledged
to the Resurrection Day; and who knows that the day is the Day when:

##### Then shall anyone who has done an atom's weight of good, see it! And anyone who has done an atom's weight of evil, shall see it. [Holy Quran: Zilzal 99: 7-8]

How does the person behave who knows himself to be only a traveler in
this world and who knows the future life to be the everlasting home for
life in the Hereafter? The one who considers all blessings to be
entrusted to him by God; the one who considers himself responsible for
every blessing; the one who knows that God gave him a wife, children, a
house, a factory, wealth and property, etc. In short, how does a person
behave whose relationship with everything is determined by wisdom? This
sort of person's behavior is actually wisdom itself; his actions are
just like enlightenment; his movements are pure truth; and his
interactions with everyone and everything- especially his wife and
children- are based upon peace, straight forwardness, compassion, mercy,
genuineness and generosity. A Lot of security and tranquillity are
expected from such a person at home, with the family and outside the
home. Everyone who comes into contact with him lives in security, at
ease and in peace and quiet along with having trust in him. Islam wants
the man of the house, the spouse of a lady and the father of children to
be exactly like the man described above.

#### The Heart is the Source of Truth

In Islamic works there are various, surprising explanations about the
heart:

The territory of God[Bihar al-Anwar , v.70, p.25]

A spring [Mizan al-Hikmat , v.8, p.212]

An Imam (leader) [Bihar al-Anwar , v.70, p.53]

A monarch [Mizan al-Hikmat , v.8, pp.216-218]

A container.[Ibid]

Other attributes have been ascribed to the heart (soul) such as: health,
illness, innocence, mischief-making, soft-heartedness, harshness,
enlightenment, blindness, destruction, prosperity, misfortune, life,
death, courage, termination, calmness, deviation and hard-heartedness.
These interpretations of the heart are mentioned in the Glorious Quran
and other books like Usul al-Kafi , Shafi, Bihar al-Anwar , Vasa'il
al-Shiia, Mustadrak al-Vasa'il, Tuhaf ul-Uqool, Ruzat al-Vaizin and
Muhjat ul-Biyza , with various words given a meaning. Really, the heart
is a container and what an amazing one it is!

If room in it is made for faith in God and the Resurrection Day,
innocence, enlightenment, life, fear of punishment, fear of God,
sincerity, and in short-sympathy, compassion, loving-kindness and love-
then the owners of this heart will enjoy peace, security, health and
tranquillity. Everyone who comes into contact with such a person will be
secure, healthy and at ease. If this container, however, is a place for
greediness, stinginess, avarice, envy, spite, hypocrisy, unbelief,
polytheism, hard-heartedness, suspicion and the like, the

owner of a such heart is a dangerous, harmful, corrupt, base and
oppressive creature: no one will be safe at his hands.

The following must be mentioned to the youth who have still not gotten
married. If you recognize that your heart has been polluted by these
hideous qualities, then try and reform it and then get married. This is
so because the woman who marries you, who comes to your house with
thousands of desires and has abandoned her home, neighborhood or city,
and loving bosoms of her parents, and after a time gets pregnant by you,
will then feel secure and have some peace and quiet. She can then
properly perform her marital and domestic duties and raise your
children. An insecure home and a person who destroys security is Hell
and the punishment of Hell. Woe unto the man whose wife and children are
not safe with him, and continually live in bitterness and trouble.

And woe unto the woman whose husband and children are bothered by her
and live in suffering. Woe unto her who without fear of God, changes the
peaceful home environment into one of terror and stress. And woe unto
those children whose mother and father are not at ease due to their
offspring’s trouble-making. Amir al-Mumeneen (The Commander of the
Faithful) (Pbuh) believes that if a person's heart is not linked up to
God and his heart is not full of faith, the love and kindness of God,
then amazing catastrophes will befall him. If he becomes attached to the
baseness of greediness and is polluted by the excitement of it, then
avarice will attack and destroy him. And if he becomes cold-hearted,
sorrow will kill him. In the case he is subject to someone's anger, he
gets angry and the fire of anger will blaze. If he gets too involved in
happiness, he will lose control of himself. If he becomes fearful, his
life will be wasted in abstention. If he finds security, his existence
will be devastated by pride. If he is struck with a misfortune, he will
go crazy and disgraced. If he attains some wealth, wealth and riches
will make him rebel. If poverty attacks him, calamities and troubles
will entertain him. If hunger presses down upon him, weakness will make
him bedridden. If extravagance in anything attacks him, gluttony will
prevent him from breathing.

Whatever is given to such a man in small amounts is harmful to him, and
whatever is given in excess causes corruption in him. These astonishing
words of the Prophet, Muhammad (Pbuh) concern the health and the illness
of the heart: There is a piece of meat in our body which when healthy
guarantees that the rest of our body is healthy and when sick, the rest
of our body gets sick. This is nothing else but the heart! [Mizan
al-Hikmat , v.8, pp.216-218]

The Prophet (Pbuh) also said: There are containers on the Earth for God
the Almighty. Know that those containers are hearts. The most beloved of
those hearts is the kindest, most pure and the strongest: The kindest
towards the believing brethren, the most pure from sins, and the
strongest in attachment to the Lord. The Commander of the Faithful, Imam
Ali (Pbuh), stated a very important tradition concerning the health of
the heart: Your heart will not be healthy for you unless you prefer for
the believers whatever you prefer for yourself. What an amazing way has
been suggested for the heart to be healthy!

What an enlightened and wise saying has been quoted from one of the
Saints and Lovers of God!

O 'yes, if a person wants for others what he wants for himself, the
heart will gradually be freed of all vices and corruption, and changed
into a healthy heart. At this moment, the expanse of the heart will be
overfilled with faith, love, compassion, mercy, nobility and sincerity.
All those coming into contact with such a person, especially the wife
and the children, will benefit from goodness in this life and the
Hereafter. If a youth has still not married and if he finds some
imperfections in his heart, he should try to reform it. If he does not
do so, his future wife and children will be oppressed. If married men
find some dark defects in their hearts, they must strive to correct
these problems. If they do not do so, their wives and offspring will not
be safe at their hands.

Everyone must know the following fact: A great punishment awaits those
men whose wife and children are endangered with being corrupted by their
husband’s ill-temperedness and bad actions. If the intellect is fed with
knowledge and one's behavior is endowed with divinity, then the soul is
enlightened and all of one's actions become heavenly. An individual is
changed into a source of goodness and a spring of virtues who insures
the security of others. Concerning this matter, pay close attention to
the following Quranic verse from the Book of God:

##### It is those who believe and confuse not their beliefs with wrong- that are (truly) in security, for they are on (right) guidance. [Holy Quran: An'am 6:82]

O 'yes, just as has been mentioned at the beginning of this discussion,
all goodness comes from God and all evil from man himself. One can
acquire all the virtues and wipe out all the evil from his being by
turning to God, following the Prophets, the Quran, the Imams and by
utilizing one’s worldly and spiritual power. Once an individual has
acquired virtues, it is his duty to relay them, as much as is within his
power to others, especially his wife and children. If one is indifferent
in this area it is considered a great sin causing God's punishment. Our
Imams (leaders) have stated that we must be a model for others in our
words and actions, so that whenever anyone sees goodness and the soul's
beauty in someone else, he desires to acquire such virtues. The man of
the house must be a proof of God for his family and the symbol of
goodness at home. He must be a model of spiritual, moral and practical
goodness at home. The man of the house will not be such unless his
intellect, heart, soul and body -as much as is within his power- are fed
with knowledge, morality, pleasantness, innocence, piety, honesty, and
good acts. This is so because his house and his household must be a
branch of the Household of the Prophet (Pbuh) and a manifestation of the
Saints of God. At this point, it is felt necessary to participate in
useful, religious meetings and to go to the mosques and to have
discussions with clergymen and jurisprudents about religion and the
spiritual world. If one avoids these actions, it is the source of
increasing one's ignorance, the appearance of mental illness and
deviation in the soul and practical affairs. There shall be no excuse
for anyone in front of God, in this world, the Purgatory or the
Hereafter given the

manifestation of revelations in the Quran, the effects of the
Prophethood of the Prophets and the leadership of the Imams in valuable
authentic books; all these mosques and religious ceremonies; the
availability of clergymen to help one walk on God's path, reach
perfection and acquire the good of this world and the Hereafter.

#### Torture in the Expanse of the Hereafter

The fire of Hell is burning because of ignorance, corruption of the
heart and deviation. It is not God the Compassionate who has willed
punishment to be necessary for anyone he decides to punish. It is sin,
evilness and moral vice that appear in the form of punishment and fire,
and imprison the beings of the sinners. If there were no sinning, denial
of God and unbelief, and disobeyance of God, there would also be no
punishment in Purgatory and on the Day of Judgment. It is stated in the
Supplication of Kumayl: I know for sure that if it was not for Your
decree to punish the rejecters and opponents everlasting in Hell, You
would have cooled down all the Fire, and made it healthy, and there was
no room for punishment for anyone. But You have sworn that You shall
fill Hell with the pagans, and those who are ungrateful.

Therefore, there are some people who pollute themselves with sin and
thereby create their own punishment. It is God the Merciful and
Forgiving who has created everything needed to adorn His servants with
goodness resulting in security in this world and the next. Men and women
try to bring about an acceptable amount of security in their lives for
themselves, their children, relatives and others, with the help of
faith, morality, good deeds, sincerity, fidelity, honesty and patience.
Thus, these people will enjoy peace and security on the Day of Judgment
due to the security they created in this world. According to the Prophet
(Pbuh): This world is the field of cultivation for the Hereafter. And
according to Imam Baqir (Pbuh) : Truly this world is a good home for the
pious ones. The pious ones make supplies for the Hereafter out of all
the activities of this world. Out of their own world, they establish
their own Hereafter. They are happier in their own world and the
Hereafter. Abdullah ibn Ya'fur who ranks among the eminent Islamic
personalities stated: "I said to Imam Sadiq (Pbuh) that I was in love
with this world. He asked what I did in the world. I said I used it to
marry, go on pilgrimage to Mecca , earn the living expenses for my wife
and children, attend to the needs of my needy brothers in their affairs
and pay charity. Imam Sadiq (Pbuh) said: These affairs are not of this
world but of the Hereafter. You can see that the faithful and pious run
business, farms and have income. They marry, manage the home and life in
the best manner, help others, go on pilgrimages and pay alms.

In short, they spend their time in this world in a healthy way with
security, faith and a good temper, and then benefit in a better way from
the Hereafter. I wish that all the homes would be filled with security
and healthiness. I wish that faith, morality and good deeds would govern
over all homes and that all men and women were adorned with goodness and
lacked any vices, so that no one would

have any problems. I wish that all would live together in a healthy way
and in peace, and enjoy God's blessings. The sixth Imam (Pbuh)
introduces the real believers in an important tradition, a part of which
goes: All the people are in comfort because of the believers, and the
believer is put to some trouble due to creating this security and
comfort. [Bihar Al-Anwar, V.78, P.37]

#### Good Mothers and Fathers

A wife and husband who are adorned with goodness and cleansed of vices
are a source of peace and security for each other. They are a source of
development, perfection and peace and quiet for their children. They are
never indifferent to their offsprings’ needs: the parents kindly and
politely answer the request of their children for kindness, material
expenses, education, visiting, recreation and marriage. If they cannot
answer positively to some of their children requests, the parents
persuade the children with good manners and patience. And the dignified
children accept their parent's answers and explanations. Enlightened and
good children refuse to do evil if their parents sometimes invite them
to do so due to not paying attention to the children. They refuse their
parents request respectfully and politely and do not deviate from the
right way. At the time of the Prophet (Pbuh) there was a mother who did
not like her children becoming Muslim and even she refused to eat any
food. But when she heard that God approved of her child becoming a
Muslim and did not value her disapproval, she broke her fast and
remained silent before her children.

O’ parents, the Prophet (Pbuh) pays strict attention to your aborted
fetus; so much so that he stated when the fetus is told to enter heaven;
it will answer in the negative saying: I will not enter until my parents
enter heaven before me. [Vasa'il Al-Shiia , V.20, P.14, Al-i-Bayt Press]

Why don't you take especial care of your honorable offspring who are
God's blessing and goodness. Taking care of offspring and paying good
attention to them and their human needs is an affair that is very
beneficial here and in the Hereafter.
