16
==

The Material Issues of the House and the Family
===============================================

##### O ye people! Eat of what is on earth, lawful and good; and do not follow the footsteps of the Evil One, for he is to you an avowed enemy. [Holy Quran: Baqara 2:168]

#### The Virtues and Vices of Wealth

A man's need for property and wealth to manage his life's affairs, and
especially with the burdensome responsibility of managing a family, is a
completely natural need. Wealth and property, business and commerce are
not in any way connected with virtue or vice when they are not related
to man. For example, iron is a type of property and may be molded into
many shapes. Many tools are made from it, but until man gains control
over it, it is simply a material having no benefits and no evilness.
Iron is beneficial when managed by a polite, dignified and noble
believer. When iron falls into the hands of a rude, forgetful, lustful
rogue, it becomes an evil material.

When Ibn Muljam had a sword, he could kill the Imam of the Lovers- Imam
Ali (Pbuh) in the mosque. Thus, he became the worst of all people and
this can be traced back to his bad spirit: And this damage is
irreplaceable. When Imam Ali (Pbuh) had a sword he established and
spread guidance: the reward of one time of stabbing as the Prophet
Muhammad (Pbuh) says is superior to the all of the worship of the genie
and Adam. One stroke of the sword on the day of the Battle of Khandag is
superior to all the worship of the Quran and the Prophet's Household.

For those adorned with divine etiquette and the Lovers of God, money and
commercial goods act as a take-off platform towards Heaven and a means
for acquiring His Mercy and Blessings and attaining an eternal and great
reward. Truly, wealth is the commerce for heavenly trade for believers
who are noble, kind, generous, compassionate and have divine ethics. For
such people, wealth serves as a vehicle driving them towards God's
eternal blessings. And it is a means to obtain the good of this world
and the Hereafter. That is why God has called the property of one who
has died "his good leftovers" in the blessed chapter of the Quran
entitled Baqara. God considers the wealth and property of a

believer to be a manifestation of the belief of that believer, his
nobility, generosity, mercy and passion. One-third must be spent in a
good way according to his will and the remaining two-thirds are to be
distributed amongst his inheritors according to the Quranic verses. Imam
Sadiq (Pbuh) has said the following in interpretation of a verse in the
Quranic chapter Baqara. "Our Lord! Give us good in this world and good
in the Hereafter..." (verse 201) The good in the Hereafter is God's
Pleasure and Heaven, and the good in this life is a good temper and
bountiful daily bread. [Bihar al-Anwar , v.71, p.383]

Thus, we can conclude that the believers wealth and property are similar
to a factory in which God's Pleasure and a musk-scented Heaven are
produced. Believers earn their income through legitimate business
transactions, abiding by the law and avoiding unlawful transactions. In
short, they earn money through continuous lawful transactions and by
obeying God. They spend their income for the expenses of their
household, paying the alms-tax and the one-fifth levy. They spend the
rest to help the deprived, the oppressed, the weak and to aid relatives
and friends. Spending legitimately earned income in these ways is
natural and lawful and is in fact considered to be worship and
obedience: Or as the Holy Quran has said - It is the good of this world
and the Hereafter.

It is for this reason that wealth and property has been interpreted to
be good and blessed in God's Book. Earning and spending it is considered
to be worship for the believers and a cause of great reward and infinite
divine gifts. It is interesting to hear the viewpoint of the Commander
of the Faithful (Imam Ali) about wealth in the hands of irreligious,
lustful people: Property is the material of lust, is subject to
catastrophes, strengthens aspirations and entertains the inheritors.
Wealth will raise the status of the owner in this world and lower it in
the Hereafter. [Mizan al-Hikmat , v.9, pp.277-78]

The Prophet (Pbuh) said: Gold and silver destroyed those before you and
will destroy you, too. [Ibid]

He also said: For each nation there is a calf and for this nation the
calf is silver and gold. [Ibid] (the calf refers to the golden calf idol
made by the Israelites). Truly, wealth enslaves those of weak faith with
illegitimate lusts and excitement of their aspirations. They become base
in this world and in the Hereafter, and as the Prophet of Islam (Pbuh)
has commented: people began to worship the calf in the form of the
worship of wealth.

#### The Forbidden and the Unforbidden

Undoubtedly, whatever a person earns from working and from his business
affairs is lawful. Concerning lawful earnings, God has issued many
orders and the Prophet's Household has completely described the
religiously legal ways to earn money. Any money gained in illegal ways
such as bribery, usurpation, theft, deceit, looting and usury is
illegal. Whoever tries to make lawful money is worshipping God and God
will reward him. Whoever tries to illegally make money is sinning and
God will punish and curse him. If one makes money

illegally and does not listen to anybody's advice saying God has desired
so, then he has insulted God, speaks satanically and has lied.

There are many Quranic verses stating God has provided lawful daily
bread for everyone. The Quran invites everyone to make a lawful daily
living and has given no illegal earnings to anyone, since thinking in
the wrong way causes one to make illegal money. Saying that God allows
forbidden actions is an insult and a great sin which will cause one to
be punished on the Day of Judgment.

Man's intellect dictates that it is illogical to say God gives illegal
provisions to man, but rather He has placed emphasis on benefiting from
lawful and completely legally earned money. It is paradoxical for God to
give illegal earnings to man and there are no paradoxes concerning God.
Stupid people foolishly and ignorantly insult God. Imam Baqir (Pbuh) has
stated: God has ordered all men to make a lawful living. This money will
cause man to be healthy. It is not God's fault that some make an illegal
living: The forbidden way to earn a living is not the Right Way. Satan
is the designer of the forbidden ways to make money. If one illegally
makes money, his lawful daily bread will be lessened to the same extent.
If we consider lawful and legal means of earning money, God respects us
a lot. [Bihar al-Anwar , v.5, p.147]

#### Don't Deprive Yourself of the Lawful Things

Imam Ali (Pbuh) entered the mosque and told a man to keep an eye on his
camel. The man stole the camel's bit in Imam Ali's (Pbuh) absence. When
Imam Ali (Pbuh) came out of the mosque to pay the man two Durham's
(coins), he saw his camel without the bit. He gave the money to his
servant and asked him to go and buy a bit. The servant went and bought
the same bit from the thief without knowing who he was and took it to
the Imam (Pbuh). When he saw the bit the Imam said that a servant
deprives himself of lawful daily bread due to his impatience, but he
does not get more than is determined for him by God. [Mizan al-Hikmat ,
v.4, p.123]

#### Provide Your Family's Needs Through Lawful Means

There is a sequence of outward and inward effects for using lawful or
unlawfully obtained property, and no one can avoid them. Lawful goods
result in the pleasure of God, spirituality, energy to worship,
pacification of the heart and the curing of illnesses. However, the
opposite holds true for the unlawful goods. The necessity of providing
for the family by the man of the house is one of the most important
issues in Islamic jurisprudence and is extensively discussed in the Holy
Quran and traditions of the Prophet's Household. As much as possible, a
man is religiously bound to provide housing, food, clothing and
transportation for his wife and children.

In addition to this, the man is required to obtain his family's expenses
through lawful means. The man of the house should whole-heartedly thank
God for these two requirements. By attending to the needs of the family,
moral realities will

blossom. By working to obtain lawful income which is similar to a Holy
War (Jihad) in God's way, man can get a lot of divine rewards. The
heavenly and positive effects of using lawfully obtained goods will
appear in the family, and this will substantially aid mental and
spiritual peace and security for the family.

#### The Prophet of Islam and Lawfully Obtained Food

Consider the following tradition. A man came to the Prophet (Pbuh) with
a bowl of milk and asked him to break his fast with the milk. The
Prophet (Pbuh) asked him who had sent the milk. The man said it was a
gift from a woman and the Prophet (Pbuh) told him to return with the
milk and ask her where she had got it from. So the man went to the
woman’s house to ask her. The woman said she had obtained it from her
own sheep. The man returned to the Prophet (Pbuh ) to tell him. He was
told to return and ask her where she had got the sheep from. He returned
to ask her and she replied she had bought the sheep by working hard. The
man returned to the Prophet (Pbuh ) and explained. Then the Prophet
(Pbuh ) said he would break his fast with the milk. The following day
the owner of the milk came to him and asked the reason for returning the
milk several times. He said God the Almighty had ordered the Prophets to
partake of only lawfully obtained food. This must be a lesson for all
Muslim people to pay enough attention to the issue of what is lawful and
unlawful, so that they do not pick up a burden which is either too
difficult or impossible to bear. The Prophet (Pbuh) said: Seeking the
lawful is obligatory for each Muslim man and woman [Bihar al-Anwar ,
v.103, p.719; Mizan-al-Hikmat, v.4, p.119]

Seeking the lawful is obligatory for each Muslim. [Ibid]

Seeking the lawful is a form of Jihad (Holy War). [Ibid]

The gates of Heaven are open to anyone who obtains lawful food through
hard work, and he can enter Heaven from any gate he wishes.[Ibid]

There are ten parts to worship. One is seeking the lawful.[Ibid]

Imam Reza (Pbuh) said: The reward of one who seeks his daily bread from
God's Grace to provide for his family's needs is greater than that of
the one who fights in God's way. [Bihar al-Anwar , v.78, p.339]

Imam Baqir (Pbuh) said: Whoever seeks worldly goods to protect his
family, and to be kind to his neighbors will meet God in Heaven with his
face shining like a full moon. [Vasa'il al-Shiaa ,v.12, p.11]

The sixth Imam (Pbuh) said: There is no good in one who is not
interested in saving money to protect his honor and pay back his debts.
[Bihar al-Anwar , v.103, p.7]

The Prophet (Pbuh ) said: The one who falls asleep at night being tired
from hard work because of seeking the lawful, is forgiven his sins by
God. [Bihar al-Anwar , v.103, p.2]

God likes to see His servant working hard to seek the lawful. [Mizan
al-Hikmat , v.4, p.119]

In the traditions it is stated the increase or decrease in one's daily
bread is simply a test for God's servants to obtain a holy rank from
God. The woman who is patient in the face of shortage of her daily
bread, does not commit any sins to obtain more, and is grateful for the
increase of her daily bread has successfully passed the test.
[Nahj-ul-Balaghah, Sermon 91].

A believer does not become base in the face of shortage of his daily
bread, and does not get drunk when his daily bread increases. He is
content with the low amount of his daily bread; and when his daily bread
increases, he eats, feeds others and rushes to pay the necessary dues.

#### How to Increase One's Daily Bread

There are some ways in the Holy Quran and the Prophetic traditions to
increase one's daily bread, which will also improve people's morality
and affection in the family and the society. The Commander of the
Faithful (Pbuh) said: Good temper is the treasure of daily bread. [Bihar
al-Anwar , v.77, p.389]

To be too strict spoils your temper, and to go easy on others increases
your daily bread. [Mizan AI-Hikmah, v.4, p.117]

Co-operation and helping your Muslim brothers increases your daily
bread. [Bihar al-Anwar , v.74, p.395]

Being trustworthy increases one's daily bread. [Bihar al-Anwar , v.75,
p.172]

Imam Sadiq (Pbuh) said: One who treats his wife and children kindly will
get an increase in his daily bread. [Bihar al-Anwar , v.69, p.407]

Good deeds increase one's daily bread. [Bihar al-Anwar , v.74, p.81]

Good temper increase one's daily bread. [Bihar al-Anwar , v.71, p.396]

Imam Ali (Pbuh) said: Attract your daily bread to yourself through
charity to others. [Bihar al-Anwar, v.78, p.60]

Imam Baqir(Pbuh) said: Pray for your brothers and this act will bring in
your daily bread. [Bihar al-Anwar, v.76, p.60]

The Fifth Imam (Pbuh) said: Giving alms will increase your daily bread.
[Bihar al-Anwar , v.66, p.15]

The Commander of the Faithful (Pbuh) said: The daily bread of one with
good intentions will be increased. [Bihar al-Anwar , v.103, p.21]

#### Unlawful Property

The Prophet (Pbuh ) said: God said, If one does not care how and where
he gets his money from, I do not care by which gate I will let him enter
into Hell in the Hereafter. [Bihar al-Anwar , v.103, p.11]

God will make the one who earns unlawful money poor. Whatever one earns
unlawfully becomes provisions for the Hell Fire. Wealth from which
religious dues are not paid is considered to be property containing
unlawful property. Its use is not allowable and giving it to the family
or others is another wrong act. The Commander of the Faithful (Pbuh)
said: The worst property is that from which God's dues have not been
paid. [Mizan al-Hikmat , v.9, p.308]

Imam Baqir (Pbuh) said: There are people who shall leave their graves
with their hands tied to their necks, lacking any power to get
anything - even as much as an ant can. They are seriously blamed by the
angels saying: These are people upon whom God bestowed wealth but they
did not pay God's dues. [Bihar al-Anwar , v.7, p.197]

Imam Hassan Mujtaba (Pbuh) said: One of the signs of generosity is to
legally earn your property. [Bihar al-Anwar , v.103, p.6]

O' dear brothers who are responsible for the financial expenses of your
family and their spiritual training, and also you who shall marry later:
your wife and children only deserve their rightful dues. However, they
are not responsible for your job or business, and will not accept the
responsibility for unlawful property which you brought home and they
knew nothing about. The punishment in Hell for unlawful property is for
the one who earns it. There are two punishments: one for earning
unlawful property and the other is for giving it to others. Then be
content with lawful property given by God, and be careful about how you
earn your income. Avoid obtaining unlawful property and pay the lawful
dues, so that you can prosper in this world and in the Hereafter.

#### One Who Repents is Loved by God

During a visit to Mashhad , I met a man one night at the time of the
call to prayers. It seemed he had known me for many years. He asked me
to accompany him to his residence, so after a few minutes of talking I
accepted his invitation even though that was the first time I had met
him. Then I found out that he was one of the people who had attended my
lectures during the mourning ceremonies in the months of Muharram and
Saffar. He knew me but I did not know him. I asked who he was from one
who had accompanied him when he left us for a few minutes. I recognized
him when the man told me his name. When he was younger, he was a man who
was strong and brutish, so much so that the strongest men of Tehran were
afraid of him. His activities included taking bribes from the casinos
and banks, smuggling and distributing wine. No one in Tehran could
confront him. He had earned a lot of wealth unlawfully.

God guided him and his conscience bothered him. His pure nature and his
intellect brought him down from his previous position. He then converted
all his property into cash and put it all in a suitcase. Immediately he
went to Qum to meet the Grand Ayatullah Boroojerdy. The noble Shiite
authority kindly accepted him when he was informed about that man’s
past. The man told the Ayatullah that what was in the suitcase was all
absolutely unlawfully earned. He said he could not bear the reckoning on
the Day of Judgment and asked the Ayatullah to relieve him of this heavy
burden. The Ayatullah told him that if he really wanted to repent he
should take off his outer garments and return to Tehran wearing just his
pajamas. The man took off his clothes, and the Shiite authority was
really impressed.

Boroojerdy found his repentance to be a serious one, returned his
clothes, paid him five thousand Tumans from his personal property, and
gave him the good news of a brilliant future. The repenter returned to
Tehran with that lawfully earned money. He quit all his past deeds and
started to work with his new capital. He settled down, really changed,
and guided his wife and children towards the Right Path. He then founded
one of the most fruitful religious meetings in Tehran .

At the end of his life in 1992A.D., he talked to Imam Husayn (Pbuh)
while he was crying one Friday night a few minutes before he died. He
said: I spent most of my life in your service, and now I hope I can gain
your favor. His wife and children said that suddenly he stared at the
corner of the room, respectfully greeted Imam Husayn (Pbuh) and passed
away with a smile on his face.

Thus everyone can repent. Repentance will purify one's soul, illuminate
one's heart, improve one's temper, cleanse one's wealth and all aspects
of life of impurity. Why not benefit by repenting and spend the rest of
your life moving from darkness into light? Let's repent since God loves
those who repent and it is not worth the whole world to stay sinful.

##### For God loves those who turn to him constantly...[Holy Quran: Baqara 2:222]

The Prophet (Pbuh ) said: There is nothing dearer to God than a
believing man or woman who repents. [Mizan al-Hikmat , v.1, pp.540-541]

I swear to God, God is more pleased with one who repents than a man who
is pleased when he gets his food. [Ibid]

God is more pleased with the repentance of his servants, than an
infertile man who becomes a father, or one who has lost something and
finds it, and one whose thirst is quenched by water. [Ibid]

One who repents is just like one who has never committed any sin. [Ibid]

Repenting will purify the soul and wash away the sins. [Ibid]

Repentance actually has consequences which the Prophet of Islam (Pbuh )
has pointed out. One can be sure of the acceptance of his repentance if
these consequences are manifested. If not one must repent again. If the
consequences

of repentance do not show up, then the repentance is not accepted. The
consequences of repentance include gaining the satisfaction of those
involved; performing undone prayers; humbleness with people; protecting
the soul against lust; and losing weight through fasting. [Bihar
al-Anwar , v.6, pp.35-36]

The Commander of the Faithful (Pbuh) said: Repentance holds the
uppermost place in Heaven, and consists of six parts:

1- Regretting the past

2- Determination to stop sinning in the future

3- Returning people's rights to them

4- Performing undone duties

5- Losing all the weight gained during the period of sinning

6- Exposing the body to the trouble of worship, and asking for God's
forgiveness [Ibid]
