17
==

The Principles of Spirituality in the Family
============================================

##### Help ye one another in righteousness and piety, but help ye not one another in sin and rancour: Fear God: [Holy Quran: Maida 5:3]

#### Spiritual Blessings

Many blessings have been bestowed upon man by God to live a pure life,
and only God knows the value of these blessings. Some of these blessings
left for us are the intellect, the Quran, Prophethood, Imamat, religious
scholars and the literature on practical, moral and religious issues. We
will briefly discuss the meaning of each of these blessings for the
readers' information.

#### Intellect

Intellect means the power to understand, to theoretically distinguish
between right and wrong and practically understand the difference
between good and evil, and profit and loss. This unique blessing is
equipped with the outer senses by which it can recognize the appearance
of things. It is also equipped with spiritual senses by which it
recognizes spiritual affairs such as will, love, hatred, hope and fear.
And it uses each accordingly. In theoretical issues the intellect makes
practical decisions. The illuminating activities of the intellect
continue as long as it is the outstanding force in man; other forces
being subject to it. However, should another force within man overpower
the intellect, it becomes weak and man will deviate from the right path
going to either extreme. This deviation towards either extreme in our
life is the result of lust, anger, or greed overpowering the intellect.
Letting loose the instincts and following lust, meeting with the sinful
ones and disregarding realities are all factors which weaken and disable
the heavenly force and angelic light of the intellect. Once the
intellect is disabled, it is either too difficult or impossible to
distinguish between right and wrong, and recognize spiritual realities.
Then man deserves to be at a loss in this world and suffer retribution
in the Hereafter, even if he mischievously gains a lot of financial
property, or remains secure from apparent losses. [Adopted from an
article in Al-Mizan, v.2, pp.447-450]

The directors of Hell say to those there: Didn't a Prophet come to you
to inform you about your present situation? The inhabitants of Hell will
say: Yes, but we denied him and God's laws. Then they will tell the
directors of Hell: If we had listened to the call of God in the world
and the invitation of the Prophet (Pbuh) and had thought about what we
were doing in all daily affairs, then today we would not be the
inhabitants of Hell: It is impossible to reason if there is no other
power holding first place in one's being. If lust and satisfaction of
one's lust does all the talking in you, the intellect will not be
empowered to guide man. It was asked of Hazrat Sadiq: What is the
intellect? He answered: It is something with which God is worshipped and
heaven attained! [Bihar al-Anwar , v.1, p.131]

It was asked what did Muaviyah have? He said he had cunningness,
wickedness and something which resembled the intellect but was not the
intellect. What great blessings are bestowed upon the true servant of
God and make him a buyer of Heaven? Amir al-Mumineen Ali (Pbuh) said:
The will and high ambition of the intellect manifests itself in man
through the abandoning of sins and reforming the apparent and hidden
mistakes. [Mizan al-Hikmat , v.6, p.419]

The enlightenment of these blessings is so great that Ali (Pbuh) said:
Had God, the Almighty not forbade us from doing the unlawful acts, the
intellect would forbid us from doing them. [Ibid]

Imam Ali 's (Pbuh) opinion is that this spiritual faculty, the
intellect, possesses great powers of understanding. In the noble book
entitled Ghorar al-Hikam the Commander of the Faithful has been quoted
as saying the following about the intellect: The intelligent person is
one who can overcome his lust; not trade in the Hereafter for this
world; rebel sagainst his carnal desires; obeys the Lord; and is in full
command of himself at times of anger. The ethics of the intelligent ones
is to have little lust and little ignorance. [Ghorar al-Hikam , Chapter
on the intellect]

The Prophet (Pbuh) said: All good is attained via the intellect and one
who lacks intelligence lacks religion. [Bihar al-Anwar , v.77, p.158]

In many important traditions we can read that man's prosperity or
punishment in the Hereafter depends upon his/her intelligence as it is
the intellect which is the measure for responsibility and duties. It is
incumbent upon man to use his intellect in order to face reality and
recognize the difference between good and evil, and truth and falsehood.
It is an unforgivable sin to not use the intellect. As the intellect is
the lantern of truth, a divine prophet within and the essential element
to distinguish truth from falsehood, and good from evil, it is incumbent
upon the head of the household to protect the intellect from the inrush
of lust, desires, instincts and corruption. He should use his
intelligence and not let his intellect or that of his family become
enslaved by carnal desires and excessive lust, since the loss of the
intellect's control will pull man down from his rank as a human to the
rank of an animal.

Therefore you should not associate with corrupt people, but rather
associate with the lofty Islamic principles.

The Prophet (Pbuh) said: The disciples asked Jesus whom they should
associate with. Jesus replied: The ones whose encounter shall remind you
of God, whose speech shall add to your knowledge and whose actions shall
attract you to the Hereafter. [Bihar al-Anwar , v.77, p.147]

The fourth Imam said: Association with good-doers attracts man towards
good deeds. [Bihar al-Anwar , v.78, p.141]

The Prophet (Pbuh) said: Association with credible, wise men shall
direct you from five states to five other states:

1) from doubt to certainty; 2) from hypocrisy to sincerity ;3) from
undue excitement to fear ;4) from haughtiness to humbleness ;5) from
wickedness to benevolence [Bihar al-Anwar , v.74, p.189]

The Commander of the Faithful said: The gatherings of the evil-doers are
not safe from catastrophes. [Mizan al-Hikmat , v.2, p.63]

The Prophet (Pbuh) said: Avoid associating with the dead. They asked him
who are the dead? He replied any rich person whose wealth has caused him
to rebel. [Ibid]

Imam Ali (Pbuh) said: Avoid the evil-doers and associate with good
people .[Ibid]

Guard yourselves and the family against lust and association with the
evil-doers if you want your intellect to rule over you. Two of the
widespread evils of today are the corrupt films and videos of the
satellite channels. Watching such programs will corrupt the intellect,
destroy morality, and wipe out humanity.

#### Quran

The Quran is a divine book, being the light of guidance and the cure for
the soul of moral evils; a guide towards better life; a remembrance of
God; and an interpreter of realities and an organizers of the affairs.
It is a source of guidance and a producer of knowledge and wisdom; a
cure for hard-heartedness; the straight path; the criteria to
distinguish truth from falsehood; the statement of high moral issues and
the manifestation of the life of the good and the pure; and God's final
say in this world and the Hereafter. Both men and women are equally
responsible and duty-bound to this unique divine blessing. This duty is
to learn the Quran and acting accordingly in all facets of life.

Indifference to God's book is a great sin. The Quran is God's letter to
his servants : The servants are obliged to respond to this letter by
being adorned by the right belief through their hearts, enacting out
their morals via their souls and turning to good deeds via their bodies.
The Prophet (Pbuh) said: Seek refuge in the Quran when you are attacked
by vices as the darkness of the night attacks you. And repel the attack
by enacting out the orders of the Quran in your life

and do not let your lives be darkened by the rule of wickedness. The
Quran is a mediation whose mediation is accepted at God's threshold and
whose complaint is also accepted. Whoever lets the Quran lead him or her
shall attain Heaven through its blessing. And whoever is indifferent to
God's book is heading towards Hell. The Quran is the reason for and a
guide towards the best path. [Bihar al-Anwar , v.92, p.17]

The Commander of the Faithful said: The Quran is the best remembrance,
and courage and spiritual enlightenment are attained with it. [Mizan
al-Hikmat , v.8, pp.67-69]

Imam Sadiq said: Whose does not recognize the truth from the Holy Quran,
does not avoid sedition. [Ibid]

Ali (Pbuh) said: In fact, the book of God the Glorious, and the Almighty
contains the best stories in the most fluent speech and the most
beneficial admonishment. [Ibid]

In fact, the remedy for the worst ailments being unbelief, hypocrisy,
and deviation is in the Quran. [Nahj ul-Balaghah , Sermon 176]

The Prophet (Pbuh) said: The Quran is wealth and there is no wealth
other than it and there is no poverty after it. [Bihar al-Anwar , v.92,
p.19]

Imam Sadiq said: A believer deserves not to die until he learns the
Quran and teaches it. [Bihar al-Anwar , v.92, p.189]

The Prophet (Pbuh) said: The best of you is one who learns the Quran and
teaches it. Thus, considering these very important traditions, one can
more clearly see the heavy responsibility of the head of the household.
He must learn the Quran, and provide the means for his family members to
learn it. Then they can all act according to it. Their living atmosphere
will be cleansed from impurities and be adorned with good deeds and
characters. And the house and the family will be a sample of Heaven. It
will be a house in which there is no oppression or animosity; one filled
with piety and purity; an atmosphere of security and comfort, truth and
honesty, righteousness and trust. A house whose members are followers of
the Quran will attain mental and intellectual development from the
blessings of the Quran. An intellect which follows the Holy Quran is an
angelic intellect; it is the essential ingredient for Heaven and the
Hereafter, and its profit is the worship of God and the achievement of
the eternal Heaven.

#### Prophethood

The Prophets are guides for men towards the straight path, invitors to
the unity of God, and the expressors of physical and spiritual reality.
They invite us to worship God, and they admonish us not to worship the
ungodly. They show men the way to live a good life, to be adorned with
virtue and to be cleansed from iniquity. The invitation of the Prophets
is inviting us to God. Accepting their invitation will result in the
revival of spiritual life. Regarding the Prophethood of

the honorable Prophet, Ali (Pbuh) has said: He came to guide the
servants of God away from the worship of idols to God's worship, and
away from obeying Satan to obeying God. [Nahj ul-Balaghah, Sermon 147]

The Prophet (Pbuh) was appointed to recite the verses of God for the
development of the people, the cleansing of their souls from impurities,
and for teaching the Quran and wisdom. He uprose to take the people out
of darkness, and to help them enter a region of light. He came into the
arena of life to command us to do good deeds. Admonish us against evil
acts; to allow us to use lawful and clean goods; to forbid evilness; and
to lift off the burden of forced cultures; and to open the satanic
neckbands. Those who believe in him, respect and honor him, help him and
obey His Quran shall prosper. [A Summary of Verses on Prophethood in the
Holy Quran ]

The Prophets came to bring God's final say so that tomorrow on the Day
of Judgment the deviated ones could not say that if they had a Prophet,
they would not have been deviated. God the Kind has made the acts, the
statements and the morality of the Prophets necessary for all the
people. And has made the Prophets a model to follow. Among the behaviors
of the Prophets, we can mention the use of perfume, having a happy face,
cleanliness, liking women, establishing prayer, uprising for the rights
of the believers, kindness and generosity. The Prophets have invited the
people to piety, purity, trustworthiness, honesty, bravery, loyalty,
righteousness, truth, kindness, mercy and good deeds; and have
admonished them against committing any evil acts and having a bad
temper. In the Hereafter they are the criteria for action. The condition
of the people will be measured based upon their condition. If there is
sufficient coordination between them and the Prophets, they will be
saved, else they deserve punishment.

#### Leadership

In order to complete His blessing, and perfect His religion, God
appointed the Commander of the Faithful and the twelve Imams who
followed him to their posts. This was done so that the people would stay
on the Straight Path of their Prophet by following the Quran and the
members of the Prophet’s Household, and never face deviation. Even
though the noble Imams themselves suffered from the ungodly government
and the deviated people, they never stopped expressing what was right,
ordering the people to do good deeds, admonishing them against
iniquities, and praying for what was divinely guided to help man's
spiritual development. They fully delivered God's religion to the people
with their actions, conduct, sayings and martyrdom. On the Day of
Judgment the Imams are also the criteria like the Prophets are. If the
people's lives are in accordance with theirs, then they shall be saved
or else they will be condemned to divine punishment.

#### Religious Scholars

The Prophets and the Imams are Allah’s authority for the people:
Likewise are the jurisprudents, the experts of divine knowledge and
those familiar with the traditions and the Holy Quran. It is incumbent
upon the people to follow such religious scholars after the Prophets and
the Imams. Such obeyance is like following the Imams and the Prophets
and a cause for prosperity. The head of the household should allocate
some time to make his family familiar with the Quran, the Prophethood,
the leadership and the following of the jurisprudents. As this
theoretical and practical supplication should cause good in this world
and the Hereafter. Disregarding the intellect and separation from the
Quran, ignoring the Prophethood, the leadership and the scholars is
harmful. The family must help the father in this regard, should thank
him for this beneficial program and become reasonably acquainted with
divine facts.

If the head of the household is not strong in these areas, then the
family members should encourage him to do so. They should ask him to
provide the necessary means for this. If he disagrees, they should
politely disobey him and, they themselves should try to learn about the
Quran. the Prophet, the Immaculate Imams, and the religious scholars so
that they may prosper. The head of the household should fill the
atmosphere of the house with the recital of the Quran, prayers,
supplications, and God's remembrance. Thus, he can combine this world
and the Hereafter, and will create a blessed ending for all members of
the family.

#### Prayers

It is not obligatory for the head of the household to only say his
prayers. He is also responsible to gently direct the members of his
family by advising and encouraging them.

##### Enjoin prayer on the people, and be constant therein. We ask thee not to provide sustenance: We provide it for thee. But the (fruit of) the Hereafter is for Righteousness. [Holy Quran: Ta-Ha: 20:132]

We read in the Quran that one of the attributes of Abraham was that he
invited his wife and children to prayer.

##### It is We Who will inherit the earth, and all beings thereon: to Us will they all be returned. [Holy Quran: Maryam 19:40]

And we also read in the Quran that Abraham requested God that he himself
and his progeny establish prayer till the Day of Judgment.

##### O my Lord! make me one who establishes regular prayer, and also (raise such) among my offspring [Holy Quran: Abraham 14:40]

In many traditions the Prophet (Pbuh) has called prayer the apple of his
eye. [Bihar al-Anwar , v.77, p.77]

The Sixth Imam stated: There is nothing other than prayer which can be
compared to knowledge. [Bihar al-Anwar , v.69, p.206]

Imam Ali said: I instruct you to say your prayers which is the best act
and the pillar of religion. [Bihar al-Anwar , v.72, p.209]

The Glorious Quran recognizes the prayer to be what keeps man from evil
inwardly and outwardly.

##### For prayer restrains from shameful and unjust deeds; [Holy Quran: Ankabut: 29:45]

Hazrat Baqir said: The first affair of a human which will be judged on
the Day of Judgment is prayer. If his prayers are accepted, the rest of
his actions will be accepted.

Negligence of prayers, or quitting to perform this great worship will
cause us to lose the possibility of the mediation of the Prophet (Pbuh)
on our behalf; It will also be a cause of bankruptcy in the Hereafter;
losing the possibility of benefiting from God's Mercy. and never being
allowed to enter Heaven.[Bihar al-Anwar , v.83, pp.9-19]

They will say:

##### We were not of those who prayed. [Holy Quran, Muddaththir 74:43]

Do not forget about your prayers and that of your family members, so
that on the Day of Judgment you do not have to answer to the complaints
against you made by your family members. They may tell God that if we
were called to say our prayers, we would have accepted. The fact that
our file is void of prayers is at first the fault of our husband and
father, then it is our own fault. Since he was indifferent to us, we
neglected our prayers. O' God, please take our revenge, damn him and let
him suffer double our torture. Children are wonderful imitators. They
mimic the states, actions and behavior of adults. If we pray, they pray.
If we fast, they fast. If we recite the Quran, and are pleasant, kind
and polite, then they follow us in all these respects, and after a while
get used to doing so.

It has been stated in a very important tradition that Jesus passed by a
grave in which the person who buried there was being tortured. The next
year he passed by the same grave. He noticed that the person was no
longer being tortured, so he asked God the reason for this. Then a
revelation came down to Jesus that the man had a good child who had
reconstructed a road and had provided shelter for an orphan. For the
good deeds of his offspring, We forgave him. [Vasa'il, Al-i-Bayt Press ,
v.16. p.338]

Raising good children who are religious and do good deeds is good for
this world and beneficial for the Hereafter. Try to benefit from this
fact.
