19
==

The Rights of Wives and Husbands in Islam
=========================================

##### Those are limits set by God: those who obey God and His Apostle will be admitted to Gardens with rivers flowing beneath, to abide therein (forever) and that will be the Supreme achievement. [Holy Quran: Nisaa 4:13]

#### An Outlook on Family Rights

The rights of wives and husbands are completely described in the
Glorious Quran. When studying them one can recognize these mutual rights
as being one of the miracles of the pure culture of Islam. No other
school of thought has so thoroughly attended to the rights of wives and
their husbands until now, and none can do so from now until the end of
time. These rights include obligatory and recommended rights.
Disrespecting the obligatory rights without the other person's consent
is the cause of divine punishment, and not honoring the recommended
rights will lessen the sweetness of life. A major portion of these
mutual rights are described in Vasa'il al-Shiaa , volumes 20-22, printed
by Al-i-Bayt Press. As much as is required, I shall quote traditions
from this volume, and instruct my dear readers to carefully read over
those volumes.

Firstly, to bless the discussion I shall mention a few Quranic verses
related to the matter and then I shall quote the traditions.

##### I will mislead them, and I will create in them false desires; I will order them to slit the ears of cattle, and to deface the (fair) nature created by God. Whoever, forsaking God, takes Satan for a friend, has of a surety suffered a loss that is manifest. [Holy Quran Nisaa 4:119] And women shall have rights similar to the rights against them, according to what is equitable: [Holy Quran: Baqara: 2:228] And yet they had already covenanted with God not to turn their backs, and a covenant with God must (surely) be answered for. [Holy Quran: Ahzab 33:15]

Isaq, the son of Ammac, said that he had asked Imam Sadiq what right
does a woman have whose fulfillment by her husband implies that he is a
good doer. The Imam replied that he should feed her properly and provide
her with

clothing. And when she does something out of ignorance, he should
forgive her. Then the Imam said my father had a bothersome wife but he
would always forgive her. The sixth Imam quoted the Prophet (Pbuh) as
saying: Gabriel recommended on behalf of wives so much so that I thought
divorcing her is not permissible unless she commits adultery. He also
said good mercy be upon the man who performs all the affairs for himself
and his wife well, since God the Almighty has granted to men the control
of women, and established the husband as her guardian. The Prophet
(Pbuh) said: One who ignores his wife's rights is deprived of God’s
Mercy. He also said: The best of you is one who is the best for his
family and I am a model for you in this regard. He also said: A man's
wife is his slave and the person most loved by God the Almighty is the
one who treats his slaves kindly.

#### The rights of the wife:

###### 1- Providing the means for living.

The Prophet (Pbuh) said one must provide the foodstuffs and clothing of
his wife in the best manner. Imam Sajjad said: Going to the market and
buying one Durham of meat which my wife desires is better than freeing a
slave. The sixth Imam said: The most fortunate man is the one who
manages the affairs of his wife and children.

###### 2- Sexual intercourse.

The eight Imam was asked about a man who had a young wife whom he had
not slept with for nearly a year due to a disaster that had come upon
him. He had no intentions to bother his wife but the disaster caused him
to do so. Was he sinning? The Imam answered: Of course. After four
months passed, he was sinning. Abuzar asked the Prophet: Is a man's
love-making to his wife divinely rewarded even though it brings
pleasure? The Prophet (Pbuh) answered: Yes, of course. Is it not
forbidden to satisfy your sexual desires unlawfully? Abuzar answered
yes. Then the Prophet (Pbuh) said: Certainly its lawful form is divinely
rewarded. It is considered desirable in divine teachings for a man to
sleep with his wife for love-making once every four nights.

###### 3-Improving the Living Conditions

The Prophet (Pbuh) said: When a man goes to shop for his wife, he is
similar to one who takes charity to the house of the needy. When he gets
home, he should first give what he has bought to his daughters. This is
so because one who makes his daughter happy is similar to one who frees
a slave from Ismael's generation. And one who makes his son happy by
giving him something is similar to one who cries for fear of God given
that God shall take such a person into Heaven filled with blessings.

Imam Musa said: Men's wives are their slaves. When God gives blessings
to anyone he should use it to improve the living conditions of his slave
or else that blessing might be taken away from him. The Prophet (Pbuh)
has admonished

against a man being full while his wife is hungry. The sixth Imam said:
A man should try to do the following things even if it is against his
own desires.

(1) Treating the family well

(2) Trying to improve his living conditions without being wasteful

(3) Being concerned about protecting the family's honor.

The fourth Imam said: God is more pleased with the one who brings about
more improvement in his family's living conditions. The Prophet (Pbuh)
said: Whatever a Muslim man buys for his wife has a reward similar to
that of charity.

###### (4) Respecting the wife

The Prophet (Pbuh) said: Anyone who gets married should respect his
wife. He also said: Anyone who hits his wife more than three times (at
once), will be disgraced by God in the Hereafter. The Prophet (Pbuh)
said: Can you expect to hug your wife at night, having beaten her in the
day time? He also said: In fact a woman is a doll; Anyone who marries
one should not commit sin with it. He also said: I wonder about a man
who beats his wife, while he himself deserves to be beaten more. Do not
beat your wives with a stick since there is retaliation for this act.
The Commander of the Faithful said: The women you are responsible for
are a trust for you. Don't be strict with them and leave them up in the
air. Haola asked the Prophet: What rights does a women have over a man?
The Prophet (Pbuh) replied: Gabriel made so many recommendations on
behalf of women that I thought a man cannot say the slightest thing to
her. Gabriel said: O' Muhammad, be afraid of God in regards to women.
They bear the sufferings and hardships of life. Women have rights over
you since they have placed their bodies in your control for pleasure,
they carry your children within their bodies until the time for delivery
and they experience dangerous pains. Be kind to them. Keep them
satisfied so they'll get along well with you. Don't say your wives are
ugly or you don't like them. Don't be greedy about what you have given
as the nuptial gift or take any of it back by force.

###### (5) Grooming oneself and keeping clean

Just as men like to see their wives looking pretty, clean, wearing nice
clothes and using good scent, women have the same desires for their
husbands: cleanliness, grooming, taking baths, brushing teeth, washing
one's hair, combing one's hair, cutting one's nails, using scent,
wearing proper clothing and the rest of the allowed grooming. These acts
will please the woman and increase her chastity. She will not go after
other men and think about getting another husband. Hassan ibn Jahm said:
The 8th Imam dyed his hair and I asked him why. He said that a man's
grooming himself increases the chastity of his wife. Women abandon
chastity because they never saw their husbands grooming themselves. Then
the 8th Imam asked if I would like to see my wife in a disheveled state.
Hazrat Reza quoted on the authority of his grandfather that the women of
the Israelites turned away from chastity for no reason at all, except
that their husbands didn't groom themselves. Then the Hazrat said: Women

expect the same things of men that men expect of them. Some men are
really unfair and don't groom themselves. They don't go to the barbers
often and they smoke cigarettes. Therefore their teeth and mouth are
dirty and bad-smelling. They don't wear the appropriate clothing and
don't care about their looks. Yet they expect their wives to submit
themselves to them. These men are oppressors who deserve to be blamed
and punished.

###### (6) Speaking Decently and Courteously

Swearing, or using a vulgar language will force the person we are facing
to react no matter who they are. When you complain too much your wife
will be upset, and this will ruin your mutual life. The Commander of the
Faithful has ordered men: Be patient with your wife under all
circumstances and treat her with kindness.

###### (7) Be content with your share of control over life

Some men give up all their God-given free will and totally submit
themselves to the will of their wives. Some women take full control of
their husband's will and try to run their lives in any way they wish.
This sort of life usually turns into a Satanic life with a lot of sin,
waste and unlawful desires. The house and the family deviate from the
main and divine principles when life is void of spirituality. Today, a
large percentage of families suffer from this devastating catastrophe.
Instead of life being dependent on the man's decision, it depends on the
woman's. Instead of the man being the husband of the wife, the wife is
her husband's master. God forbid that the man disobeys the woman's wants
even if it is unlawful and ungodly. A fight will be started by the woman
which will not end until the man surrenders or divorces her. Regarding
such men who have lost control over their wives, Imam Ali said: Any man
who gives his control over to his wife is damned. He also said: The man
who totally submits to his wife shall be thrown into the Fire of Hell by
God with his face down. They asked him why and he replied: Because the
wife requests see-through clothing and he accepts it.

Regarding this issue, Imam Ali conducted a public sermon when a man
complained against his wife: O' people! Never obey your wife. Do not
give her any property. Do not grant the control of your life to her. If
such people are left free to do as they wish, they will ruin everybody's
life and disobey their husband's orders. We have discovered that these
people are not pious when in need; quickly submit to lust; think about
collecting gold and silver until very old and are selfish and haughty
when they are weak. If some of what they want is not provided to them,
they ignore all your kindness and favors and will always remember your
bad actions. They will accuse without any hesitation and will never stop
their rebellion and are constantly trotting on Satan's path. [Vasa'il,
v.20, p.180, Al-i-Bayt Press]

#### The Rights of the Husband

A major factor in strengthening the ties of mutual life is dependent
upon the woman respecting her husband's rights. The wife should only
consider God and

the Hereafter and not let anyone else interfere in regards to her
husband's rights. Others may be mistaken or have bad intentions and it
may even be that the cause of such interference in the life of the
newly-wed couple is pure jealously. Women should remember that they are
easily influenced by others. They should consider this element of their
nature, and pay close attention to the possibility of others being
wrong. They should remember God and their situation in the Hereafter and
respect the man's humane, divine and religious rights.

The man likes the woman to be his woman. She should maintain her sex
role as a woman, as this is her nature by creation. She should limit her
beauty, appeal, seduction, and coquettishness to her husband. She should
neither follow others nor should she accept the interference of distant
or close relatives, neighbors or guests. Anyway, she should be the wife
of her husband, and live based on his lawful desires. She should run the
affairs of the home according to her husband's will, and be a good
mother to her children. Some women forget that they are feminine. They
become rough, harsh, bitter and man-like. This shall make man's life
really bitter, and make him sorry about getting married. They may even
get fed up with life. Some of the rights of the husband include: The
woman should submit herself to her husband's sexual desires whenever he
needs her. The woman should obey her husband in all moral and religious
affairs. The woman should seek her husband's permission to leave the
house, except for the required pilgrimage to Mecca .

###### 1- Obedience:

Imam Baqir said: A woman came to the Prophet (Pbuh) and asked him what
rights does the husband have over the wife? He said: She must obey the
husband, and not be rebellious. The Prophet (Pbuh) said: A woman who
performs her five required daily prayers, fasts for the month of
Ramadan, performs the pilgrimage to Mecca , obeys her husband,
recognizes the rights of Imam Ali , being that he must be obeyed, shall
enter Heaven from anyone of the eight gates which she desires to. Pay
close attention to this very important tradition from the noble Prophet
of Islam: Any good woman who worships God, performs the obligatory
religious acts, and obeys her husband will enter Heaven. Any woman who
says her prayers, does not leave the house unnecessarily, and obeys her
husband shall be forgiven all her past and future sins by God. The
Prophet (Pbuh) told a woman named Haola : By the God who entrusted me
with Prophethood, a husband has rights over his wife. She should submit
to his sexual desires. She should not disobey his orders, and not oppose
or quarrel with him. In a very important and strong statement the
Prophet (Pbuh) said: A woman has not fulfilled God's rights as long as
she has not fulfilled her husband's rights. You should not conclude from
the above traditions that the key to a woman's prosperity is solely
obeying her husband. But she should also have faith, worship God, do her
religious duties, and avoid doing what is forbidden. This means that she
may prosper in this world and the Hereafter only if she gathers all
these realties within herself.

###### 2- Sexual submission:

It is obligatory for the wife to sexually submit herself to her husband
at times when there is no religious excuse. It is even recommended that
she declares her readiness to him. The Prophet (Pbuh) said: A woman
should use the best perfume, wear her prettiest clothes, and groom
herself in the best possible form. She should appear in front of her
husband every morning and night displaying her beauties. The husband has
even more rights than this. If a woman carries out the instructions of
the Prophet (Pbuh) exactly, she can keep her husband for herself, and
keep him away from looking at or chasing other women, even in a lawful
manner. This is exactly the situation which causes conflicts. The wife
wants to wear her best clothes, perfume, and make-up for going out to
wedding parties or visit her friends and relatives, but appears in front
of her husband as she is. Even after she returns from the party, she
does not give her husband the slightest chance to see her. This hurts
the husband's feelings and weakens their relationship and may prepare
the grounds for other problems. Many young and middle-aged men have come
to me to complain about their wives' indifference and lack of interest
in sexual submission and not making themselves up for them. They have
expressed their interest in temporary marriage or divorce and
re-marriage and have asked me to solve their problem. My only
recommendation to women at this stage is to wholeheartedly follow the
instructions of the Immaculate Imams and the Noble Prophet. This way
their husband will not become lustful outside the house and they will
not have any marital problems. Or else your life will be ruined and you
will be responsible for it in the Hereafter. In regards to man's
attraction to his wife and her submission to him the Prophet (Pbuh)
said: Do not elongate your prayers to avoid submitting to your husband.

###### 3- Going out of the House:

Unfortunately, many women who have quit being a woman, and consider
themselves to be men do not obey their husbands in regards to seeking
permission to go out of the house. If it was deemed proper for women to
freely go out of the house, then God would not have made it conditional
upon the husband's permission. Some women left the house without their
husband's permission. They caused sedition and corruption. They let out
their hair and showed their face. They disturbed the pure atmosphere of
the society. They acted sexy and coquettish in the streets. They even
sometimes forced the men not to object in an attempt to protect their
honor, so that these women could act as they pleased. They imitated the
Western culture, that of the Jews and the Christians. They made such
catastrophes for Islam and the Muslims that can never be compensated
for. The Prophet (Pbuh) has ordered a woman not to leave the house
without her husband's consent. And if she does so without his
permission, all the heavenly angels and each jinn or man who passes by
her will damn her until she returns home. Imam Sadiq said: One of the
men from the Helpers (Ansar) went on a trip and ordered his wife not to
leave the house until he returned home. Her father got ill while her
husband was away. She sent a messenger to the Prophet (Pbuh) asking him
if she could visit her father. The Prophet (Pbuh) replied that she
should obey her husband and stay at home. Her

father got worse and she sent another message but received the same
reply. Her father passed away and she sent another messenger to go and
pray for her father, but she received the same reply. They buried her
father but the woman stayed at home. The Prophet (Pbuh) sent a messenger
to her and he said that God forgave you and your father for obeying your
husband. The Commander of the Faithful has instructed men as follows:
Protect your women from the eyes of strange men, since this will better
guard their chastity. The bad influences of bringing untrustworthy men
to your house is the same as letting them go out to be seen in public.
Make an effort so that they know no one but you.

###### 4- Don't bother your husband, and don't be vulgar and ill-tempered:

The Prophet (Pbuh) has made an amazing speech regarding this issue. He
delivered this lecture for women. O' women, pay charity in God's way,
even though it be your ornaments, even a date, since many of you swear
and are ungrateful to your husband and will be the fuel for the Fire of
Hell. A woman said are we not mothers. Don't we carry the babies in our
wombs for many months. Don't we breastfeed them. Aren't these girls the
heads of some households, and these sisters sympathetic to their
brothers? The Prophet (Pbuh) said yes. You get pregnant. You deliver
children. You breastfeed them. You are kind. If women did not bother
their husbands and got along with them, then no praying woman would burn
in the Fire of Hell.

The sixth Imam said: These people's prayers are not accepted: A maid's
prayers who runs away are not accepted until she returns to her owners
huose; a woman whose husband is dissatisfied with her from night until
the morning; and a leader who leads the people, but the people do not
want him. Ali, the son of Jafar asked his brother Imam Musa Kazim: What
is the status of a woman's prayers and conditions who angers her husband
with her bad temper and vulgarity? He answered she is sinful until her
husband is pleased with her. The Prophet (Pbuh) told Haola : I swear by
God who appointed me to Prophethood through my honesty and
trustworthiness that when a men gets angry with his wife, God too will
be angry with her. The Prophet (Pbuh) has asked women not to expect of
their husbands more than they can provide for them and not to degrade
their status before anyone whether it be a relative or a stranger. The
sixth Imam said: A woman who bothers her husband, and makes him
sorrowful is damned. A woman who obeys her husband under any
circumstances and respects him and does not bother him is prosperous.

###### 5- Working at home:

The Prophet (Pbuh) told Haola : God shall prepare various delicious
meals in Heaven for women who prepare delicious meals for their
husbands. He will tell them to eat and drink as a reward for their
efforts in this world. The Prophet (Pbuh) said: God shall look favorably
at any woman who changes the decorations in the house to make the house
look better. Whoever is favorably looked at by God will be saved from
punishment. Imam Baqir said: Zahra (Pbuh) took care of the work inside
the house such as preparing the dough and

cooking the bread, and the Commander of the Faithful took care of the
work outside the house such as shopping and collecting wood.

###### 6- Respect your husband and treat him well:

The seventh Imam said: A woman's Jihad is to take good care of her
husband. A woman Jihad is being grateful to her husband; being kind with
him; bearing with him when he is poor; seeing him off when he leaves,
and welcoming him when he comes home; totally submitting to her husband
at allowed times; putting on good clothes and make up for him; properly
running the affairs of the house; avoiding wastefulness and not asking
him for more than he can buy. Such acts which are defined by the Prophet
(Pbuh) and the Imams as a wife's duty towards her husband are her Jihad
(Holy War) Imam Baqir said: Nothing can intercede on behalf of a woman
in God's presence than her husband's consent. The sixth Imam said: Some
people went to see the Prophet (Pbuh) and said we saw some folks who
prostrated in front of their leaders. Will you let us do so in front of
you? The Prophet (Pbuh) said: No, but if I were to issue such an order,
I would order women to prostrate in front of their husbands. The Prophet
(Pbuh) told Haola : God will make any woman who obeys her husband, and
is patient with him under all circumstances a companion of the wife of
the Prophet Jacob (Pbuh) in the Hereafter. God will grant any woman a
reward for bearing the bitter words of her husband. For each word, He
will count one day of fasting of a fighter in the way of God as her
reward. The Prophet (Pbuh) said: A husband's right over his wife is that
she should turn up the light of his house, cook the food; welcome him at
the door when he comes home; prepare water and a towel for him to wash
his hands and face; and submit herself to him sexually whenever she does
not have a religious excuse. The Commander of the Faithful stood by the
dead body of his wife Fatimah upon her death and said:

##### O' God. I am pleased with your Prophet's daughter. O' God, please be her companion, and alleviate her fears.

###### 7- Do not make yourselves up except for your husband :

The Prophet (Pbuh) told Haola : Do not let anyone other than your
husband see your ornaments and jewelry. Do not put on any perfume in the
absence of your husband. Do not show off your attractive scarf and
wrists. If you do so, you will ruin our religion and make God angry. The
Prophet (Pbuh) admonished women against wearing attractive clothes
outside the house. He also forbade wearing jewelry that might make
noticeable noise. A very important tradition exists from the Prophet,
and must be seriously considered by the Muslims. Any man, whose wife
puts on make-up and leaves the house to go out and be seen in public
with his consent, is a cuckold, and it is not a sin to call him so. For
each step that she takes, a house full of fire will be prepared for him.
Limit them in this respect, since these limitations are a cause of
happiness and pleasure for you and family.

###### 8- Do not use your husbands property without his consent:

The sixth Imam said: A wife is not free to let a slave free, give
charity or bet without her husband's consent, however, the payment of
the obligatory alms tax,

visiting her relatives and doing good deeds do not need his permission.
The Prophet (Pbuh) said: A woman should not donate any of her husband's
property without his consent. Should she do so, she will be sinful and
the reward of her act will belong to the man. I shall once again say
that the material presented here regarding the rights of husbands and
wives mostly comes from volumes twenty-one through volume twenty-two of
the noble book "Vasa'il" printed by Al-i-Bayt Press, and several
traditions have been cited from volume 103 of Bihar al-Anwar . Those who
wish to study this subject further should refer to these valuable books.
