22
==

The Worth of Raising a Daughter in Islam
========================================

The Prophet (Pbuh) said: A female child is a blessing.[Furu al-Kafi ,
v.6, p.5]

##### God's Will in Granting a Child

The Holy God is the Creator of all He wills, the owner of the heavens
and the Earth, the Wise, the Powerful, the Just, the Merciful and the
Benevolent. His will and decision regarding his servants is pure
kindness and favor. He is the manifestation of love, mercy and nobleness
and proper choosing. Whatever He wants for His servants is appropriate
for this world and the Hereafter. And the servant must submit to God's
Wisdom, Mercy and Will. This type of submission is the highest form of
spiritual worship and stems from morality of the Prophets and the
Saints, and the sign of love and understanding of God’s lovers and
mystics. All of the following cases are God's pure Mercy, Kindness and
His burning Love for His servants: the barren parents, the ones with a
daughter; the ones with a son and the mother who bears twins, one being
a girl and one being a boy.

##### To God belongs the dominion of the heavens and the Earth. He creates what He wills (and Plans). He bestows (children) male or female according to His Will (and Plan), or He bestows both males and females, and He leaves Barren whom He will: [Holy Quran: Shura: 42:49-50]

Based on this noble verse, female offspring are an aspect of the
kingship of God and the manifestation of His will in Creation and the
light of His knowledge and power in regards to man. His knowledge and
power, action and will, rule and ownership deemed a couple to have a
daughter. Getting upset about having a daughter is a great sin, since it
implies being upset with divine Ownership, Creation, Choice, Knowledge
and Ability. This is stupid, illogical and unwise. As Imam Sadiq has
said a baby who dies will be given to Sarah and Abraham in the Purgatory
to be raised, and then be saved for the parents until the Hereafter. In
the book Maskan al-Fowad , Shahid has narrated the sixth Imam as saying
that having patience when a baby dies and not crying a lot has a reward
that is greater than if the baby had not died, but grew up and fought as
a soldier of Imam Mahdi and became a martyr in God’s way.

Imam Husayn took his six-month-old baby to the tent, and gave him to his
sister Zaynab . Then he sat on the ground and asked God to accept his
six-month-old martyred baby as a credit for the Hereafter When a dead
child is so important and valuable for us ,then can you estimate the
worth of a child which we raise, educate and train expending a lot of
our efforts? There is no difference between a boy and a girl, just a
child. It is said in verse twenty-eight of the Chapter Anfal that
children are God's test for man. If man is pleased with his child, then
he has succeeded in this test. If he tries to educate him and teach him
religion; provides the means for his marriage as much as he can;
respects him; honors him and respect his rights, then he shall attain a
great reward. The Holy Quran has said:

##### Wealth and sons are allurements of the life of this world. But the things that endure, good deeds, are best in the sight of thy Lord, as rewards, and best as (the foundation for) hopes. [Holy Quran: Kahf: 18:46]

One who strives to raise his children and gets them acquainted with God,
the Prophets, the leadership of the Imams and the Quran shall leave a
highly valuable thing behind which cannot be matched. This is better for
him in the presence of God and will be good for the Hereafter. Are not
Mary , Khadijah, Asia and Fatimah the best patrimonies that their
fathers left behind. Why should anyone get upset about having a
daughter? Who knows what is in the womb? Does anyone's will but God's
affect the gender of the baby in the womb? This is God's will and we
should surrender to it. It is His Mercy, favor and kindness to grant us
a daughter. we should thank him all our life for this blessed daughter.
Remember that the Prophet (Pbuh) was granted a few sons named Qasem,
Tayib, Tahir and Abraham however, neither one survived. God never
congratulated him for having a son, and no special verse of the Quran
was revealed on these occasions. But when Khadijah became pregnant with
Fatimah, the Chapter Kauthar of the Quran was revealed and he was
informed of receiving a great deal of blessings, and eternal goodness.

#### Highly Important Traditions Regarding Raising a Daughter

It is recommended to pray to God to give you a daughter, if you do not
have one. Prophet Abraham, who had Issac and Ismael prayed to God to
have a daughter. His prayer has been quoted by Imam Sadiq as: He asked
God to give him a daughter so there be at least someone to cry after his
death and remember him. [Vasa'il al-Shiaa ,v.21, p.361; Al-i-Bayt
Press].What is important in this tradition is not the goal, rather it is
the fact that a Prophet prays to have a daughter. It is an honor to be
the father of a girl, as the Noble Prophet of Islam was. It is a real
honor to have a girl and become similar to the Prophet (Pbuh) in this
respect. Imam Sadiq said: The Prophet (Pbuh) was the father of all
girls. [Ibid]

If someone does not have a daughter, but has a sister, he still has some
leeway to receive God’s Mercy. The Sixth Imam said: Whoever has three
daughters or three sisters should go to Heaven. [Ibid]

The Prophet (Pbuh) said: Daughters are a blessing: they are kind,
helpful, good companions, blessed, and like cleanliness.[Vasa'il, v.21,
p.362]

The Sixth Imam said: Whoever is the guardian of either two daughters,
two aunts, or two maternal aunts shall be protected from the fire of
Hell.[Ibid]

A man informed another man who was sitting by the Prophet (Pbuh) that he
had become the father of a girl. The man turned pale. The Prophet (Pbuh)
asked the reason. He said: I left the house when my wife had pains. Now
this man informed me that I have a daughter. The Prophet (Pbuh) said:
The earth shall support her, the sky will be a shadow over her head, and
God will grant her sustenance. She is like a scented bunch of flowers
you can smell. Then he turned to his companions and said: Whoever has
just one daughter has problems of raising her, guarding her, preparing
her dowry and providing for her marriage. Help whoever has two
daughters. Whoever has three daughters seems to be engaged in holy war,
and he is forgiven if he does any acts which he is admonished not to do.
[Ibid]

And please help, lend money and have mercy upon whoever has four
daughters. [Vasa'il, v.21, p.365]

How dear daughters are that the Prophet (Pbuh) has advised his
companions to help those who have daughters and has established such
help as a duty for the Muslim nation!

At the time of Imam Sadiq a man's wife delivered a girl. He came to Imam
Sadiq and looked upset and angry. Imam Sadiq said: What would you say if
God sent you a revelation and asked you if you will let Him choose the
gender of your child? He said: Of course, I would ask God to choose for
me. Then Imam Sadiq said: Well, now God has chosen a daughter for you.
Remember the story of Moses and Khizr. When Khizr killed that child by
God's command he told Moses : "I willed that God give to his parents a
better and more merciful child instead of him."

##### So we desired that their Lord would give them in exchange (a son) better in purity (of conduct) and closer in affection. [Holy Quran: Kahf: 18:81]

Instead of that child that was killed by Khizr ( and Moses objected to
this act). God granted his parents a daughter from whose generation came
seventy Prophets. [Kafi , v.6, p.6; Vasa'il, v.21]

Imam Sadiq said: Daughters are good deeds and boys are God's blessings.
Good deeds will be given a reward, but one will be questioned about
blessings.

[Vasa'il, v.21, pp.365-366]

God told his Prophet on the night of Ascension to Heaven:

Tell the father of girls, do not be impatient with your daughters, since
I shall provide for their sustenance just as I created them. [Ibid]

Imam Sadiq said: One who wished for the death of his daughter will be
admitted to God's presence in the Hereafter as a rebellious person
[Ibid].

The Prophet (Pbuh) said: God the Glorious, and the Almighty is kinder to
girls than He is to boys. On the Day of Judgment God will please one who
pleases his daughters. [Vasa'il, v.20, p.364]

The Prophet (Pbuh) has said the following regarding the value of having
a daughter:

Your best children are your daughters. [Bihar al-Anwar , v.104, p.91]

The Prophet (Pbuh) said: One who is the guardian of three daughters or
sisters shall certainly go to Heaven. They asked him what if one takes
care of just two?

He replied yes. They asked him what if he takes care of just one
daughter or one sister? Again he replied yes.[Vasa'il, v.21, p.368]

The Prophet (Pbuh) said: One who goes to the market and buys something
and brings it home for his wife and children is similar to one who
supports the needy.

It is better to give a priority to daughters in gifts. In fact, whoever
pleases his daughter gets the reward of having freed one of the slaves
from the line of Islamel.[Bihar al-Anwar , v.104, p.69]

What an amazing tradition? No other culture has supported having
daughters this much in human history.

In many tribes and nations, girls and women were in a terrible state. It
was due to the efforts of the Prophet (Pbuh) that a great spiritual
revolution happened in regards to the life of girls and women, and how
they are treated. It is even more amazing that the Prophet (Pbuh) has
said: Do not hit your babies since their crying has a meaning. The first
four months of crying is professing the unity of God, the second four
months of crying is sending salutations to the Prophet (Pbuh) and his
household, and the third four months of crying is praying for the
parents. [Bihar al-Anwar , v.60, p.381] Therefore you should not beat
one who is professing God's unity, or is sending salutations to the
Prophet (Pbuh) and his household, or is praying for his/her parents. You
should be considerate of such a person, and be kind to him/her.

Also consider the following important tradition: Sakuni , who is one of
the companions of Imam Sadiq , said: I went to see Imam Sadiq when I was
really sad. He asked me the reason why and I replied that my wife had
delivered a girl. He said: The earth will support her, God will give her
sustenance, she lives in a different time period than you and she will
eat her own share of daily bread. Then by God I was relieved of the
burden. Then the Imam asked me what name I had chosen for her. When I
said Fatimah, he put his hand over his fore-head giving a sigh of relief
said: Now that you have named her Fatimah , do not beat her, swear at
her nor damn her. [Kafi , v.6, p.48; Makarim al-Akhlagh, p.220; Vasa'il,
v.21, p.482]

The Prophet (Pbuh) said: One who has a daughter should not prefer his
sons over her, or despise or scorn her. Then God will take him to
heaven. [Marriage in Islam , p.136]

He also said: The reward of one who has one daughter is greater than the
reward of one who goes on pilgrimage a thousand times, engages in holy
war a thousand times, makes sacrifices a thousand times or gives a
thousand dinner parties. [Ibid]
