25
==

The Rights of the Children
==========================

Imam Ali said:

##### A child's right over his/her parents is to choose him a good name, to give him the proper upbringing and to teach him the Quran.  
 [Nahj ul-Balaghah, Hikmat, p399]

#### The Path to Prosperity

At first we will mention the following words from the Commander of the
Faithful about prosperity. These divine and wise words have risen out of
his heavenly heart to guide man towards prosperity. In response to one
who asked what prosperity is he said: Prosperity does not depend on
having more wealth, children, but it depends on having more knowledge,
patience and perseverance; and on being proud of your worshipping of
God. Thank God if you have good behavior. Ask God for forgiveness, if
you do bad deeds. There is no property in this world for anyone except
those who have committed sins and repented; and those who have striven
to do good deeds. Deeds which are done with piety are not trivial. How
can such deeds be so small if they are accepted? [Nahj ul-Balaghah ,
Commented on by Ibn Abel Hadid, v.18, p.250]

In these divine sayings three facts have been pointed out: being
knowledge; perseverance; and the application of both which is God's
worship. It is also mentioned that knowledge, perseverance and their
application should be void of sin to be accepted by God. Knowledge of an
impious one, perseverance mixed with sin, and worship without piety are
all sources of harm or a waste of time. Those who achieved something in
this world achieved it through knowledge and wisdom, worship and
repentance, and piety and abstinence. The uninformed and the unwise; the
weak and the impatient; the slaves of lust and carnal desires; the ones
who delve in sin; and the refugees from good deeds are all useless folks
who are a source of harm.

We can conclude from these divine words that parents must first realize
their Islamic duties towards their children, and then patiently perform
their duties. They should be happy and proud of doing these duties, and
thank God for enabling them to attend to the needs of their children,
and respect their rights. If they have had some shortcomings in
performing their duties, they should ask

God to forgive them. They should be pious in all aspects so that their
efforts are not wasted. There is no doubt that attending to the needs of
the children, and striving to provide for them is a great form of
worship and a good deed which will be rewarded both here and in the
Hereafter.

#### Children’s Rights

The Prophet (Pbuh) said:

##### The rights of the child over the father consist of teaching him/her writing, swimming and shooting, and should only feed him/her clean and lawfully-earned food.

Of course, one need not directly perform these duties. If the father
just sends his child to school, and swimming and shooting classes, he
has done his job. The duty of feeding them only lawfully earned food is
really important, and one must be very careful about this so that no
problems arise here or in the Hereafter. How good it would be if there
were sports clubs and mosques next to all our schools so that our
children could go to learn how to swim or shoot after their studies, or
could go to the mosque to learn religious matters. Thus, in addition to
physical and mental development, they would receive spiritual training
too. Literacy, swimming, shooting and eating lawfully earned food are
four sources of power for the children. Once they are equipped with
these, they will be safe from many dangers. Pursuit of such activities
shall fill the free time of the youth, and is very effective in
balancing out their instincts and sexual energy. In the book entitled
"Mukhlat , Sheik Bahayee has narrated that a man called Hassan said:

##### Should I find a bit of lawfully earned bread, I will dry it; grind it firmly until it turns into powder, and keep it. Then whenever someone comes to me with an illness being difficult to cure, I will feed him with a bit of it so that he gets cured.

#### The Effects of Lawfully or Unlawfully Obtained Food

I heard the following from one of the great religious scholars: When I
studied in Qum as a student of Imam Khomeini , I used to go to the
villages for preaching during the first ten days of the month of
Muharram. I went to Imam Khomeini and asked him for permission to go to
a new village to preach for which I had been invited to do so. The Imam
prayed for me and advised me on how to treat the people and preach. I
went to that village.

When I entered that village which had no more than two to three thousand
residents, I saw a religious-looking farmer who asked if I had come
there to preach. When I replied positively, he told me to only preach
about the lawful and the unlawful as ordained by God. This, he said, is
what they need to know the most about since they do not care about it.
Then he asked me not to go to anyone's house except his since he is the
only one who strictly watches out for the divinely ordained lawful and
unlawful. He added that I would be more

enlightened and preach better if I dined at his house. So I went to stay
at his house, and everything was fine just as he had predicted. I could
deliver a good speech whenever I wanted to preach in the mosque. He used
to leave the house early each morning to go to the field, and I left the
house with him. He would come to the mosque for evening prayers, and we
returned to his house together after the preaching.

One day I accepted someone else's invitation to go to his house. I did
not inform my host. When I wanted to preach that night I was not at
ease. The audience did not notice anything but I had a hard time getting
words out of my mouth! My host who was among the audience noticed my
unusual state, and gave me a few bad looks which implied his objection
to what I had done. When we went back to his house that night, he asked
me why I went to someone else's house to eat that day. He stated that he
realized this from the way I preached. He ordered me not to go to anyone
else's house to eat for the rest of the duration of my stay there. He
also advised me never again to eat unlawfully obtained food and be
careful about whom I associate with. Once again I shall remind you about
what to feed your children by stating the divine words of the Prophet:

##### Do not take home anything but what is lawfully earned for your family's daily bread.

#### Sheik Zahed

Sheik Muhammad Husayn Zahed was a noble scholar in Tehran . He was a
real mystic who attracted many young fellows to the mosque or religious
ceremonies and gave them religious training. He once told me that he was
invited to a place where he should not have gone. He had only one ice
cream there. When he got up at night to perform his ablutions in
preparation for prayers, and then he fell down the stairs. He got
injured and his wife treated the wound on his forehead. He could not
pray due to the pain, and fell asleep. Then he heard a voice asking him
why he had eaten that ice cream. He woke up and realized that his
injured head was a penalty for committing that sin. The Prophet (Pbuh)
said:

##### The child's right over his/her father is that a good name be chosen for him/her, the provision of the means for his/her marriage when the time comes, and teaching him/her how to read and write. [Mizan al-Hikmat :Mizan al-Hikmat" , v.10, p.720].

A man asked the Prophet (Pbuh) what rights do his children have over
him? He replied:

##### Coose good names for them, teach them proper behavior and place them in good position. [Ibid]

He also said:

##### If a child grows up and gets ready for marriage, and the father can provide for his/her marriage but does not do so, then the father is responsible for any sin committed by the child. [Ibid].

The Commander of the Faithful said: The rights of a child over his/her
father include the choice of a good name, good upbringing and teaching
him/her the Quran. One of the men from the Ansar asked Imam Sadiq whom
should he treat kindly? He replied: Your parents. He said they have
perished. The Imam said: Treat your children kindly. [Bihar al-Anwar ,
v.104, p.98]

The Prophet (Pbuh) said: Adorn your children with the following three
characteristics: Love for your Prophet, love for the Household of the
Prophet, and reading the Quran. It is the duty of the father to acquaint
the children with the Prophet (Pbuh) and the pure Household of the
Prophet. This should start from childhood so that the child grows up
with their love and recognition. The child can also coordinate all
his/her life affairs with them, and adopt no other model to follow. This
is because love of the Prophet, of the Imams, and following them are the
best sources of prosperity for man.

#### A Good Memory

The first time I was invited to preach in Tabriz , I asked those who
invited me to get me a moderate-priced place to stay in the poor areas
of town. They accepted my condition. When I reached Tabriz, I was housed
in a two-story building. The house owner lived in one story and the
other story was used for religious meetings. He was a common man with a
moderate income. He was religious. He asked me if I knew the reason why
I was housed there? I told him that I had set up such a condition. He
then told me that was not so. He said that he had attended one of the
religious meetings I had held in Mashhad on the day of Arafeh. At the
end of that day, he had gone to the shrine of Imam Reza and prayed to
house me if I should ever come to preach in Tabriz. He believed that
Imam Reza had planned this.

He said that he and his family are all dedicated to serve the Household
of the Prophet, and those who serve them. He then told me the following
which was related to his father. He said his father used to say prayers
at night throughout his whole life. He would kindly wake up his son
since the age of thirteen and tell him that at night when everybody is
sleeping, it is the best time to cry for the oppressions done to Imam
Husayn . He told me that they are loyal to Imam Husayn and will not quit
serving him until they die and join him in the Hereafter to serve him
again. Imam Sadiq said:

##### A child should play for seven years, then study the book for another seven years, and then learn about lawfully and unlawfully obtained goods during the next seven years. [Mizan al-Hikmat , v.10, p.222]

The Commander of the Faithful said:

##### Ask your children to seek knowledge. [Ibid]

He also said:

##### Teach your children the prayer, and be serious about their prayers when they mature.

We read in three important Prophetic traditions that the parents may be
cursed by the children if they do not honor their rights, and the same
holds for the children. Both sides are required to honor each other's
rights. [Bihar al-Anwar , v.74, p.70; Mizan al-Hikmat , v.10, p.723]

#### A Note to Parents

The Prophet (Pbuh) said:

##### A good deed is recorded for whoever kisses his/her child. God will be pleased in the Hereafter with whoever pleases his/her child. The parents who teach their children the Quran shall be called in the Hereafter and given two dresses which are so shiny that will illuminate the residents of Heaven. [Furu al-Kafi, v.6, p.49]

The Prophet (Pbuh) said:

##### Whoever has a small child, should play childish games with him. [Vasa'il, v.15, p.203]

The Prophet (Pbuh) said:

##### Whoever kindly raises his daughter, kindly trains her, and feeds her from whatever God has bestowed upon him, shall have prepared himself a shelter from the Fire of Hell. [Mizan al-Hikmat , v.10, pp.705-707].

The Prophet (Pbuh) has made the following recommendations regarding
children:

##### Fear God and treat your children equally.[Ibid] Do not treat your children differently in terms of gifts, just as you like to be treated fairly. [Ibid] God likes you to treat your children equally even when kissing them.[Ibid]

The Prophet (Pbuh) saw a man with two kids. He was kissing one and
ignoring the other. He told him he should treat them equally, and kiss
both of them if he wants to kiss them. [Ibid]
