26
==

The Rights of the Parents
=========================

##### Thy Lord hath decreed that ye worship none but Him, And that ye be kind to parents. [Holy Quran: BaniIsrail: 17:23, p.700.]

#### A Heavy Burden

Honoring the rights of the parents is a really heavy burden which only
those who truly believe in God and the Hereafter can bear. The Holy
Quran has stated the characters of a believer in:

##### The answer of the Believers, when summoned to God and His Apostle, in order that He may judge between them, is no other than this: They say, "We hear and we obey": It is such as these that will attain felicity. [Holy Quran: Nur: 24:51-52]

Note the following verse regarding the rights of the parents: Thy Lord
hath decreed that ye worship none but Him, And that ye be kind to
parents. Whether one or both of them attain old age in thy life, say not
to them a word of contempt, nor repel them, But address them in terms of
honor. And, out of kindness, lower to them the wing of humility, and
say:

##### My Lord! bestow on them thy Mercy even as they cherished me in childhood. [Holy Quran: BaniIsrail: 17:23-24]

The fact that the rights of the parents are placed right after the
rights of God shows the importance of these rights. This has been
discussed in detail in the highly valuable book "Kafi , v.2, p.157. A
tradition from Imam Sadiq has been written there. Usul al-Kafi is an
authentic book due to the author being the noble, late Kolayni who lived
during the period of the short absence of the twelfth Imam, its
contents, and their narrators being close to the times of the Immaculate
Imams. Its order and the attention it has received make it one of the
most important sources of religious principles. Then no one's excuse
shall be accepted after the interpretation of this important verse
narrated from Imam Sadiq regarding the rights of parents. When Imam
Sadiq was asked about the meaning of this verse, he said: When it is
said treat your parents kindly it is meant that you should associate
with them patiently and treat them kindly; do not encounter them with a
bad attitude; provide for them whatever they may need without their
having to ask for it, even if they are rich; and take them something
whenever you go to visit them. Has not God said:

##### By no means shall ye attain righteousness unless ye give (freely) of that which ye love; [Holy Quran: Al-i-Imran: 3:92]

Imam Sadiq said:

##### If one of your parents or both of them were old, impatient and weak so much so that it bothers you, do not say the least thing to them. Do not raise your voice even if they hit you. Speak with them kindly, using only noble words. If they try to hit you again, just tell them may God forgive both of you.

These are noble words. Then Imam Sadiq instructs us to be most humble
with them; to look at them with passion; to always honor them and to
never walk in advance. He says you must pray for them to receive God’s
Mercy since they raised you from childhood till now. In another verse
God said:

##### And We have enjoined on man (to be good) to his parents: in travail upon travail did his mother bear him, and in years twain was his weaning: (hear the command),"Show gratitude to Me and to thy parents: to Me is (thy final) Goal. But if they strive to make thee join in worship with Me things of which thou hast no knowledge, obey them not; yet bear their company in this life with justice (and consideration), and follow the way of those who turn to Me (in love): in the End the return of you all is to Me, and I will tell you the truth (and meaning) of all that ye did." [Holy Quran: Luqman: 31:14-15]

#### An Amazing Point

Once he was appointed to the Prophethood, Moses was ordered to use
gentle speech when dealing with the Pharaoh. He asked the reason why and
was told that Pharaoh had spent fifteen years of his life to raise him,
and had suffered much hardship to raise him from when he was a baby
until he matured. Then he had the rights of parents and Moses should not
talk in harsh words with him.

#### A Delicate Issue

In the Quranic interpretation called Menhaj , we read the following
regarding the verse.

##### Did He not find thee an orphan and give thee shelter (and care)? [Holy Quran: Dhuha: 93:6]

God the Almighty told the Prophet (Pbuh) that He took away his father
before his birth, and took away his mother when he was still a child.
This was done because the Prophet (Pbuh) would have had a great
difficulty in honoring the rights of his parents, given his especial
circumstances as a Prophet of God.

#### Traditions Regarding Parent's Rights

A narrator asked Imam Sadiq: Which of our deeds are the best? He
replied: Being punctual about praying, being kind to parents, and
fighting in the way of God. [Kafi, v.2, p.158]

Imam Sadiq said:

##### What prevents you from treating your parents kindly whether they are living or have passed away. One asked the Imam what he should do for his parents who have passed away. He replied: Pray, give charity, go on the Hajj pilgrimage and fast on their behalf.[Kafi ; v.2, p.159]

#### Zacharias Serves His Parents

Zacharias , the son of Abraham, said he was a strict Christian, and then
became a Muslim. He said he was happy and went to Mecca to see Imam
Sadiq. Imam Sadiq told him to ask any questions he wished to ask. Then
he told Imam Sadiq that his family members were all Christian. His
mother was blind, and he had to live with them since his father had no
one else to rely on. He said his parents liked him to eat and drink from
the same set of dishes. Imam Sadiq asked him if his parents ate any
pork. He replied no. Then he asked if they touched any pigs? He answered
no. Then Imam Sadiq ordered him not to leave their house; not to
separate from his mother; to take care of her; to bathe her; to change
her clothes; and to feed her.

He said he followed all these instructions upon his return to Kufa .
Then his mother told him to tell her the truth about having become a
Muslim. Then he told her yes, and said he had been ordered by his living
leader, Imam Sadiq who was a descendant of the Prophet (Pbuh), to
perform all these services. His mother asked him if he was the Prophet.
He replied no. He is the sixth Imam and is the descendant of the
Prophet. The mother replied no: The things you do for me are the decrees
of the Prophets of God. I am blind, but I realize that your religion is
better than mine. I want you to guide me towards your religion. Then he
guided his mother to become a Muslim, and she performed her noon prayers
with him. At eve, she asked to say his evening prayers and let her say
her prayers with him. She did so, and passed away after she had finished
her prayers.

Then he remembered that Imam Sadiq had instructed him to bury his mother
by himself if she passed away. He invited the Shiites early the next
morning. Then they told him to call in her priest. He told them that she
was a Muslim, and they helped him to bury her. [Vasa'il, v.21, p.491].
Jaber Jafi said the following: I was in the presence of Imam Sadiq. A
man came and said: My parents are Sunni and very strict in their ways so
how should I treat them? Imam asked him how he treats real Shiites. He
replied with love, and assist them in solving their problems. Imam said:
Treat your parents likewise. [Ibid, p.490]

Imam Baqir said:

##### A young fellow served his parents well during their lifetime. However, his parents willed that he should repay a loan they could not. He refused to do so, and did not even ask God to forgive them. For this reason, God ordered that he be registered as one who is damned by his parents. Another child who was damned by his parents during his lifetime, paid back their debts after they passed away, and sought God's forgiveness for them, and was registered amongst those who treat their parents well. [Bihar al-Anwar , v.74, p.59].

Imam Sadiq has been narrated as saying the following in the book called
"Amali :

##### Moses saw a beautiful face in the shade of heaven. He asked whose shadow was over him? He was told he was one who has really treated his parents well and had never gossiped or caused disunion.

The sixth Imam said:

##### If you desire death to be easy for you, visit your relatives and be kind to your parents. Then the angel of death will be told to take it easy on you, and you will not become poor during your lifetime.

Next to the Ka’aba a man asked Abuzar why he looked at Ali's face a lot.
He replied that when he was next to the Prophet (Pbuh) and there was not
any distance between him and the Imam, the Prophet, told him: Looking at
Ali's face and kindly looking at one's parents is considered to be
worship. [Bihar al-Anwar , v.38, p.196]

Imam Ali said:

##### Accept all your parents orders, except for sinning.

The seventh Imam said:

##### A man asked the Prophet (Pbuh) to explain the rights of the father. He said: Do not call him by his name. Do not walk ahead of him. Do not sit down before he does, and do not swear at him. [Bihar al-Anwar, v.74, p.45]

Imam Sadiq said:

##### Three things are obligatory for children regarding their parents. They should always be grateful to them; they should accept their advice on all matters except sinning, and they should always wish them well. [Tuhaf ul-Uqool, v.47, p.238].

The Prophet (Pbuh) said that the following statement implies parents’
damnation:

##### Do whatever you wish, I will not forgive you. [Bihar al-Anwar ;Books:Bihar al-Anwar" , v.74, pp.61-74]

He also said:

##### Two things are quickly penalized in this world. They are being damned by one's parents and committing fornication. [Ibid]

He also said:

##### Anyone who makes his/her parents really sad, is damned by them. [Ibid]

The sixth Imam said:

##### Looking meanly at parents causes damnation.

A man told the Prophet: There is no evil deed which I have not done. Is
there any way for me to repent? The Prophet (Pbuh) asked him if his
parents were alive. He replied that his mother had passed away, but his
father was alive. He told him to go and treat his father kindly so that
his sins be forgiven. When the man left the mosque, the Prophet (Pbuh)
said: He would have been closer to forgiveness by God, if his mother was
still alive. Moses asked God for some recommendations three times. Then
he was twice recommended to treat his mother well, and once to treat his
father well. [Bihar al-Anwar , v.13, p.330]

Imam Baqir said:

##### One is not free in the following three cases: He is not free to do as he pleases in regards to what he is entrusted with, his promise, and being kind to his parents. [Vasa'il, v.21, p.490].

#### Sheik Ansari and His Mother

The great jurisprudent, and noble scholar called Sheik Ansari used to
carry his mother on his back to the public bath house, and would then
take her back home after her bath was finished. He used to come to kiss
her hands at night, and would not leave the house without her
permission. After she died, he cried a lot saying that he cries because
he is now deprived of the great blessing of serving her. He compensated
for all of her missed prayers by praying even though he was really busy
teaching and had many who came to visit him. Although his mother was one
of the most religious women at that time, he performed all those duties.

#### Mother's Damnation

A young man was about to die. The Prophet (Pbuh) came to visit him, and
told him to profess to God's unity and his Prophethood. He turned away
his face and refused to profess. The Prophet (Pbuh) asked if he had a
mother. He replied positively. He called her in and asked if she was not
pleased with him. She replied positively. The Prophet (Pbuh) asked her
to forgive him since he could not profess to God's unity. She said he
had hurt her and she was upset with him. The Prophet (Pbuh) asked her to
forgive him for the sake of the Prophet. She agreed and forgave her son.
Then the Prophet (Pbuh) asked the young man to profess to God's unity
and his Prophethood. The man uttered the words. Then the Prophet (Pbuh)
asked him why he had not uttered it the first time. The man said a scary
dragon would attack him and he could not talk. He added that now it had
left and he could talk.[Manazel al-Akherat ;Books:Manazel al-Akherat" ,
Mohades Qumi].

Imam Sajjad said:

##### Note the following regarding your mother. She carried you for nearly nine months in her womb, no one else could do so. She dedicated her love to you, no one else would do so; she protected you with all her existence, fed you and was hungry herself; gave you things to drink; and she remained thirsty herself; she clothed you, and did not care for her own clothing; she felt hot, but protected you from heat; she stayed up to care for you at night; and protected you in all circumstances so that she may have a child like you. You cannot be grateful enough for all she did unless God helps you. [Bihar al-Anwar , v.14, p.6]

Hakam Nami said that he told the sixth Imam: My father had donated a
house to me, and he now plans to move back into it. The Imam said: Your
father's deed is not good, but do not fight back if he fights with you;
and talk calmly with him, if he yells at you. [Vasa'il, v.18, p.224]
