27
==

A Couple’s Duties to Their Relatives
====================================

##### Say: Whatever ye spend that is good, is for parents and kindred... [Holy Quran: Baqara: 2:215]

#### Relatives

Each husband and wife has some relatives. Neither one is allowed to
force the other to stop seeing them. Each one has parents, brothers and
sisters, uncles, aunts, nieces and nephews, grandparents, etc. Visiting
them is considered worship, and associating with them is an excellent
deed and can help resolve many difficulties. A wife should not be so
unreasonable not to let her husband's relatives come to visit them, or
be rude with them when they come for a visit. She should not stop her
husband from associating with his relatives. The house is the husband's
property, and God has granted him authority over the wealth and
property. A woman is religiously required to obey her husband. Bothering
him is also religiously forbidden. Preventing him from associating with
his parents, brothers and sisters, or other relatives is totally
immoral, inhumane and against man's nature. A man should not prevent his
wife from associating with her parents and relatives either. This too is
against human passion and love. The wife and children who prevent one
from performing good deeds, worshipping, and associating with relatives
are considered man's enemies by the Quran. They are not enemies whose
hearts are filled with hatred. Rather they are enemies who want to
prevent us from attaining prosperity in this world and the Hereafter.

A man should not give in to his wife or children in his attempts to do
good deeds, solving the problems of the people, associating with
relatives, aiding his parents, brothers or sisters. Of course, believing
women who accept the Hereafter; feel responsible; want to prosper in the
Hereafter; recognize that they must respect their husband's rights;
adhere to divine etiquette and are in total agreement with their
husbands. They even encourage their husbands to associate with and help
his relatives, whenever they feel that their husbands are not serious
enough in this regard. But women who oppose God, or children who demand
things opposed to God's religion, are considered to be man's enemy by
the Quran. Man is instructed to do the following in these situations:

##### O ye who believe! Truly, among your wives and your children are (some that are) enemies to yourselves: so beware of them! But if ye forgive and

##### overlook, and cover up (their faults), verily God is Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful.[Holy Quran: Tagabun: 64:14, p.1558.]

You should not fight, separate, or get angry in this case. Just let them
insist on their views, and you yourself stay steadfast in obeying God
and spending in his way. Some women are really unreasonable. They are
deprived of God’s Mercy, and wish to deprive others of God’s Mercy too.
Some men are also too strict, and do this unreasonably and without any
gain but deprivation from God’s Mercy and favor. Why do some women
refuse to let their husband's relatives come to their house, and not let
their husband assist his relatives financially, while all their own
relatives can come to their house and use the husband's property to
serve them as they please. In these cases, many months or years go by
and the husband aspires to see his relatives and visit him, but the
wife's relatives are continually coming and going. Is this not a form of
oppression against the husband and his relatives?

Is this not the same dangerous mental state which is damned by God and
deprived of His Mercy. Such a woman will not have a good Hereafter. And
why do some men prevent their wives from visiting their relatives. This
is not liked by God, is a Satanic act and is certainly going to cause
one to be deprived of God’s Mercy. In addition to the verses on visiting
the next of kin, the Holy Quran has mentioned relatives twenty-three
times, and has issued some very important decrees in this regard. A
believing man is supposed to use the Prophet (Pbuh) as his model and
abide by his decrees in all issues. One duty is to guide his relatives,
since man always needs guidance.

##### And admonish thy nearest kinsmen, [Holy Quran: Shu'araa: 26:214]

How good is it for a man to gather his relatives and those of his wife
in his house every once in a while; and advise them about the
religiously forbidden and allowed things; and admonish them about the
consequences of evil acts and bad behavior; and introduce jurisprudence
and religious issues to them. Guiding the people towards divine issues
is similar to the act of the Prophets of God and the Imams, and has an
astonishing reward. It is said that Allameh Majlesi carried out this
program for his wife, child and relatives every Thursday night; and he
considered it a duty since scientific charity is similar to financial
charity, and is liked by God. The Quran considers being kind to one’s
relatives similar to being kind to one’s parents, thus showing the
importance of having good family ties.

##### And remember We took a covenant from the Children of Israel (to this effect): Worship none but God; treat with kindness your parents and kindred; and orphans and those in need; speak fair to the people; be steadfast in prayer; and practise regular charity. Then did ye turn back, except a few among you, and ye backslide (even now). [Holy Quran: Baqara 2:83]

Love for wealth and property is a part of human nature. Was it not for
this love, no one would be motivated to go to work in industry, arts,
business or agriculture. Man loves what he earns by hard work. The
Glorious Quran asks

man to use what he loves so much for solving the problems of his
relatives. Doing so is one of the signs of the believers.

##### To spend of your substance, out of love for Him, for your kin, for orphans [Holy Quran: Baqara: 2:177]

Relatives are so important in relation to one that they inherit one's
property after his/her death. Note the following verse in this regard.

##### But if at the time of division other relatives...[Holy Quran: Nisaa: 4:8]

The respect for relatives is very important. They are so honorable that
God's book orders us to be just even when we talk to our relatives.

##### Whenever ye speak, speak justly, even if a near relative is concerned; [Holy Quran: An'am: 6:152]

Belittling, making fun of or vain talk about relatives are all against
the religion and are immoral acts. God has ordered everyone to be kind
and just, and has specifically mentioned relatives in this regard.

##### God commands justice, the doing of good, and liberality to kith and kin [Holy Quran: Nahl: 16:90]

God does not like one who is rich to ignore those who need his charity.
This is also unaccepted from the viewpoint of the intellect, logic,
man's nature, ethics and the religion.

##### Let not those among you who are endued with grace and amplitude of means resolve by oath against helping their kinsmen [Holy Quran: Nur: 24:22]

We are strictly ordered to be just when we witness in a court, and also
avoid hiding what we know and can witness to even if it is against our
interest and that of our parents and relatives.

##### O ye who believe! Stand out firmly for justice, as witnesses to God, even as against yourselves, or your parents, or your kin [Holy Quran: Nisaa: 4:135]

Also we are instructed not to seek forgiveness for our relatives as long
as they are polytheists.

##### It is not fitting, for the Prophet and those who believe, that they should pray for forgiveness for Pagans, even though they be of kin [Holy Quran: Tauba: 9:113]

We are also instructed not to be friends with our parents, children or
relatives if they are enemies of God and his Prophet.

##### Thou wilt not find any people who believe in God and the Last Day, loving those who resist God and His Apostle, even though they were their fathers or their sons, or their brothers, or their kindred. For such He has written Faith in their hearts, and strengthened them with a spirit from Himself. And He will admit them to Gardens beneath which Rivers flow, to dwell therein (forever). God will be well pleased with them, and they with Him. They are the Party of God. Truly it is the Party of God that will achieve Felicity.[Holy Quran Mujadila 58:22]

Except for these especial cases, relatives are considered as a unit. The
husband or the wife do not have the right to forbid the other one from
associating with his/her relatives. Women, especially, are not allowed
to forbid their husbands from such highly rewarding acts. I recommend to
couples to honor the twenty-three verses of the Quran about relatives,
and respect their relatives, invite them over, and help them financially
if they need so. As can be understood from the traditions, the woman
should be careful not to make her husband angry, since his anger and
unhappiness is similar to God's anger and unhappiness. None of the deeds
of a woman whose husband is not pleased with her is accepted by God.
[Bihar al-Anwar , v.100, p.244].

Imam Sadiq said:

##### Damned is a woman who bothers her husband and makes him sad. [Ibid, p.253].

This can be partly related to the husband's relatives. She may be
unreasonable without any logical or religious reasons, and in this way
she deprives herself of God’s Mercy.
