29
==

Prosperity or Ruin of a Family
==============================

##### So fear God as much as ye can; listen and obey; and spend in charity for the benefit of your own souls. And those saved from the covetousness of their own souls, -- they are the ones that achieve prosperity.[Holy Quran: Tagabun: 64:16]

#### Prosperity or Ruin

Attaining prosperity or ruin is the result of one's acts, morals and
beliefs. Good morals, righteous beliefs and good deeds will result in
prosperity, while wrong belief, bad character and wicked deeds will
result in one's life getting ruined. Prosperity implies happiness in
this world and the Hereafter, while getting ruined implies a disastrous
life here and loss in the Hereafter. The result of prosperity is God's
Pleasure and Eternal Residence in Heaven, while the result of getting
ruined is God's animosity and eternal torture. The Muslim families
should remember these facts. A couple should try to gain what causes
prosperity and avoid what causes their ruin by helping each other when
they marry. Thus, they will have a healthy home environment for their
children.

Profiting from faith, good deeds and good morality, the family should
establish the basis of attaining God's Pleasure and an entrance ticket
to God's Heaven. The subjects of prosperity and getting ruined, and the
underlying causes have been extensively discussed in the Quran and
Prophetic traditions. All people have been warned not to deprive
themselves of their prosperity and ruin their lives. The families need
to consider morality and watch out for bad deeds to gain prosperity. We
shall leave the subjects of faith and actions to more detailed books.

Most families, especially the Iranian ones have faith in God and the
Hereafter, Prophethood and Leadership of the Immaculate Imams, and
perform their obligatory deeds such as prayer, fasting, pilgrimage, and
charity. They also avoid what has been forbidden, such as having
forbidden foods or drinks, and committing immoral lustful acts, etc.
Most problems that the families have to be more concerned with are
abiding by moral issues, and avoiding wicked desires. We shall suffice
to describe just two issues here.

#### Justice

Justice implies being just, serving others, wanting for others what we
want for ourselves, and not wanting for others what we do not wish for
ourselves. This issue must be considered by both the husband, the wife
and the children in regards to each other. Based on Islam, each person
is bound to be just to others, and consider the rights of the people in
all cases. Imam Sadiq has narrated the Prophet (Pbuh) as saying:

##### The most just person is one who wants for others what he wants for himself, and dislikes for others what he dislikes for himself. [Bihar al-Anwar , v.72, p.25].

The Prophet (Pbuh) said:

##### Whoever aids the poor, and is just to others is a true believer. [Bihar al-Anwar , v.72, p.25-28].

The Prophet (Pbuh) told the Commander of the Faithful that three things
constitute faith:

##### Charity in times of poverty, being just to others, and bestowing knowledge to whoever needs it. [Ibid].

A man asked the Prophet:

##### Please teach me something to ease attaining Heaven for me.

The Prophet (Pbuh) replied:

##### Do not get angry, do not beg, and want for others whatever you want for yourself. [Ibid].

The Commander of the Faithful said:

##### Beware that God will increase the grandeur and majesty of those who are just to people. [Bihar al-Anwar , v.72, p.33].

How sweet will be the life of a family whose members are all concerned
about each other and are just to one another. They do not wish for
others what they do not like for themselves in all that they do. It
should not be the case that the husband and the children do all the
resting, and the wife does all the work, or the parents work hard, but
the kids eat, drink and expect more. They should all be just to each
other, and help in all the affairs of the house. This way they will
become prosperous, and not get ruined.

#### Being Kind

It is important in Islam for the members of the family to be kind to
each other, and treat each other with passion. This is a form of worship
which is highly rewarding. The Prophet (Pbuh) said:

##### Being kind to each other is good and blessed while non-compliance and improper deeds are wicked. [Bihar al-Anwar , v.72, p.51-2]

He also said:

##### Should I inform you about people who will be safe from the fire of Hell?

They answered yes. He said:

##### Whoever takes it easy in life, and is kind and complaisant in one's life. [Ibid]

Moses told God:

##### What is the reward of one who does not bother others, and treats everybody kindly?

God said:

##### O' Moses The Fire of Hell shall tell him/her that you cannot enter. [Ibid]

The Prophet (Pbuh) was asked:

##### What is the best thing for one.

He replied:

##### If all Muslims are safe from one's tongue and hands. [Bihar al-Anwar , v.72, p.53-54]

The Prophet (Pbuh) said:

##### No deed is better than faith, and kindness to others in the sight of God and his Prophet, and no deed is worse than atheism and treating others harshly. [Ibid]

#### Advice

Giving advice and wishing the best for people has a reward in this world
and the Hereafter. Accepting advice is a cause of enlightenment of the
heart, and awareness, too. Everyone should advise others as much as
he/she can and wish them the best. The listener should take the advice
and use it, too. One must not be too shy to advise, and not too haughty
to accept advice. The Prophet (Pbuh) has considered shyness to be silly
and haughtiness to be a satanic trait which prevent us from accepting
advice. The head of the household should give advice to his wife and
children every once in a while. He should remind them of their duties.
Sometimes the wife should advise her husband, and at times the children
should advise their parents. Each one is required to put haughtiness
aside and accept the advice given. Imam Sadiq said:

##### Whoever notes that his brother is facing a loss- and can help him out but does not do so by warning him- has been disloyal to his friend. [Bihar al-Anwar , v.72, p.65]

#### Politeness

Being polite implies being respectful, talking properly, being a
gentleman and respecting others. A husband, a wife, and the children
should all be polite to each other. Being polite is a human value which
is a source of one's respect; it improves one’s social status; increases
the number of our friends. In addition, it causes one to obtain God’s
Mercy and it is also a form of worship. The Commander of the Faithful
said:

##### There is nothing better than politeness. [Bihar al-Anwar , v.72, p.67]

In some wise words he said:

##### As a sign of being polite, it is enough to dislike for others what you dislike for yourself. [Ibid]

In other saying he said:

##### The good thing about being polite is that it is like being a gentleman.

#### Protection of the Family from Accusations

As viewed by Islam, all the members of the family should behave and
associate with others in such a way that the family does not get
accused. Any accusation may destroy the foundations of the family, and
make it hard to live. One may feel that it is proper to meet someone,
but others may think different and misjudge. This may be gradually
misinterpreted, and then the people will think different about one and
his/her honor will be endangered in the society. Then the family will be
harmed. One may then try to engage in a business deal, or a social
affair like getting a wife for his son, or marrying off his daughter,
and this undue accusation may hinder him. Imam Sadiq said:

##### My father admonished me by saying the following: O' my son. Anyone who associates with bad people will not remain healthy. Whoever engages in a bad affair, will be accused and whoever does not watch what he says will be sorry. [Bihar al-Anwar , v.72, p.90].

The Prophet (Pbuh) said:

##### Those who associate with the accused will be the most proper candidates for accusation. [Ibid].

The Commander of the Faithful said:

##### Whoever gets in a situation whereby he/she may be accused, should not blame those who make accusations against him/her.[Ibid]

Imam Sadiq has been narrated as saying the following:

##### Avoid going to places where you may get accused. And do not stand in public places with your mother, since not all people know that the person you are with is your mother.[Bihar al-Anwar , v.72, p.91].

Indeed someone who does not know, or is ignorant spreads the word around
that you are flirting with a strange woman. He may warn people against
associating with you to protect the honor of his family. The man of the
house, the woman and the children should seriously avoid going to places
where they may get accused. This may harm the honor of the family, and
Islam is really strict in this regard.

#### Honoring One's Oath

Religiously speaking it is obligatory to honor one's oath. The wedding
contract between a couple is a divine contract to which both the husband
and wife must remain loyal. This is an oath between the husband and
wife, and to each other's

families. Any kind of oath that the parents give to their children, is
to be honored, too. The Quran states:

##### And fulfill (every) engagement, for (every) engagement will be inquired into (on the Day of Reckoning).[Holy Quran: Bani Isra'il: 17:34]

Honoring one's oath is a sure sign of a believer.

##### Those who faithfully observe their trusts and their covenants;[Holy Quran: Mu-minun: 23:8]

Imam Sajjad has considered all religious decrees to be summarized in the
following three things: Righteous words, acting justly, and honoring
one's oath. [Bihar al-Anwar , v.72, p.92].

Imam Sadiq said:

##### No one's excuse shall be accepted in this world and the Hereafter regarding the following issues: Safeguarding what one has been entrusted with, whether it is from a good person or a bad one; honoring one's oath to a believer or a corrupt person; and treating one's parents; kindly whether they are good or bad. [Ibid].

The Prophet (Pbuh) said:

##### One who does not respect his own oath and does not do what he has promised to do is irreligious.

Imam Reza said:

##### We are members of a Household who consider our oath as a debt just as the Prophet (Pbuh) said. [Bihar al-Anwar , v.72, p.97]

#### Consultation

A house should not be ruled by one who imposes whatever he/she wishes
upon the family. There are many benefits in consultation, and the
husband and wife will benefit if they consult with their elders who are
more experienced, or consult with their grown-up children. Insist on
consultation and respect the views of others. Do not think that you are
the know it all. Allow everyone to participate in consultations, as this
will help you a lot, and may at times help you out of disasters. The
Quran has placed especial emphasis on consultation in verse 159 of
Al-i-Imran, and verses 36-38 of Shura. Thus, consulting with others is a
way of following the Quran, a way to solve one's problems and a guard
against dangers. Imam Sadiq has said:

Consult with those who fear God about your life affairs. [Bihar al-Anwar
, v.72, p.98].

He also said:

##### Three things are burdensome: Overestimating your deeds, forgetting your sins, and being stubborn.[Ibid]

The Commander of the Faithful said:

##### Whoever is self-centered will be endangered [Bihar al-Anwar , v.72, pp.98-99].

One who is being consulted with should be considerate and provide the
best possible guidance. Giving wrong advice on purpose is considered to
be a great sin. Imam Ali said: I hate whoever is not sincere when he/she
is being consulted by the Muslims.[Ibid].

#### Humbleness

Humbleness- which is the sweet by-product of self-recognition and an
individual’s mysticism- is an Islamic, humans and moral state. A person
who considers himself to be a servant of God, and recognizes that God is
the source of all the blessings he has; considers others to be superior
to him, considers the people to be God's servants and knows that he is
nothing in this vast universe, is deeply involved in humbleness.

A man who considers his wife to be God's servant, and considers God to
be the owner of his children, considers himself to be their servants. He
who considers his wife and children to be what God has entrusted him
with will be humble towards them. When a woman is not haughty, does not
overestimate her family’s status when she faces her husband, and does
not overestimate her knowledge or degree, will then be humble towards
her husband and children. Also, wise children are humble towards their
parents. Humbleness will result in nobility and honor, and will maintain
a home sweet. It will bring love and strengthen the family bonds. A
haughty person should know that no one, even his wife and children like
him or respect him. Imam Hassan Askari said:

##### Anyone who is humble towards his religious brethren in this world will be considered righteous by God, and is a true follower of Imam Ali . [Bihar al-Anwar , v.72, p.117].

Imam Sadiq has narrated his grandfathers as saying:

Signs of humbleness are to sit wherever there is room when you enter a
family or public meeting, to greet anyone you visit, to avoid quarreling
even if you are right, not to like to be admired for piety and
righteousness. [Bihar al-Anwar , v.72, pp.118-119]

When the Commander of the Faithful was about to pass away, he said:

##### I advise you to be humble as this is the best form of worship.[Ibid]

#### Kindness to Younger Ones and Respecting the Elders

Islam has instructed all men and women to be kind with the younger ones
and respect the elders. The house must be a place to act upon the
instructions of God, the Prophet and the Imams. Then you can prosper. It
is a sin to get angry with, ignore, not kiss or not honor a promise
given to a younger one. It is also a sin to disrespect the elders, give
them a mean look, not fulfill their needs, or express that you get bored
with them. We have brought the younger ones into this world, and we are
responsible for them until they settle down. We should take care of them
kindly. We have been raised by the elders, so we should

respect them since we owe them a lot. When the Commander of the Faithful
was about to pass away, he said:

##### Be kind with the young members of the family, and honor and respect the elders. [Bihar al-Anwar , v.72, p.136]

The Prophet (Pbuh) said:

##### Respect the elders as this is equal to respecting God. [Ibid].

The Prophet (Pbuh) said:

##### Whoever is not kind to the younger ones, or does not respect the elders is not from my nation. [Bihar al-Anwar , v.72, p.137]

#### Hospitality

Some families are really strict about accepting guests. This is either a
sign of laziness or a sign of jealousy. Hospitality has been a way of
the Prophets and the Imams, and is an example of divine and righteous
men. Jealousy or laziness are not proper, in whatever form. The husband,
the wife, and the children should all treat their guests warmly. This
action which is according to the ethics of God's saints will please God
and ease our affairs, bring God’s Mercy and Favor, and cast away any
catastrophes from the members of the family. Hospitality is so
encouraged in Islam that we believe the guest brings in his daily bread,
and the host is the guest of his guests. It is highly praised to
encourage hospitality. This will improve our morality, and the opposite
is inhumane and despised by God. The sixth Imam said: There are ten
characters that make up nobility. Try to attain them all. One is
hospitality. [Bihar al-Anwar , v.72, p.458]

Imam Sadiq has said: Whenever guests enter your house, they bring God's
forgiveness for you and your household, and when they leave, they take
away your sins and those of your wife. [Bihar al-Anwar , v.72,
pp.459-460].

Imam Baqir said: Feeding four Muslims is equivalent to freeing a slave
from the descendants of Ismael . [Ibid].

Therefore being just, kind, wishing the best, politeness, staying away
from accusations, honoring one's oath, humbleness, being kind to younger
ones, and respecting the elders, and hospitality are all the basis of
nobility and cause prosperity in this world and the Hereafter.

#### Cause of Getting Ruined

Families should avoid the following issues, each of which is described
in many traditions and the Quranic verses: Not talking, separating,
accusing the innocent, quarreling, finding faults, and gossiping,
causing quarrels, deceit, wastefulness, haughtiness, jealousy, following
sinners, being a burden and hostility. Families should avoid the above,
since they are sins, some of which are great sins and will ruin the
family and cause misfortune. In addition to the Quran, you can find a
discussion of these issues in books like Kafi , v.2, Vasa'il, v.11,
Shafi Fayz,

Muhjat ul-Biyza , Jami al-Saadat Naraqi, and other moral or traditions
books. These are beyond our scope.
