30
==

Divorce and Inheritance
=======================

One of the things which angers God, the Almighty is divorce, [Vasa'il,
v.22, p.7]

#### Divorce is Despised

Divorce is not good. It is despised by God, the Prophet, and the Imams
unless it is for a religiously acceptable reason. Divorcing based on the
man or the woman's lust is immoral, inhumane, irreligious, and
disrespectful to the other party. Here I shall discuss the most
important tradition on divorce first, and then discuss the relevant
Quranic verses and the conditions for divorce. In his book "Sharh
i-Mathnavi , the great scholar Hajji Sabzevari has narrated the
Immaculate Imams as saying the following: Nothing is more loved by God
than freeing slaves, and nothing is more despised by God then separation
and divorce. [Sharh-i-Mathnavi, p.142]. The Prophet (Pbuh) said:

##### From among what is allowed by God, nothing is worse than divorce. [Vasa'il, v.15, p.280]

The Prophet (Pbuh) said:

##### God does not like men and women who treat their spouses as toys and want to divorce. [Mizan al-Hikmat , v.5, p.546]

Imam Baqir said:

##### Indeed God, the Almighty is angry with at whoever repeatedly divorces. [Vasa'il, Al-i-Bayt Press, v.22, p.8]

Imam Sadiq said:

##### God likes a house in which there is a marriage, and despises one in which there is a divorce. [Vasa'il, v.22, p.7]

The Prophet (Pbuh) asked someone what he had done to his wife. He said
he divorced her. Then the Prophet asked him why? He asked if there were
any flaws in her, or if she was ugly? The man answered yes. The man
married again. The same sequence repeated over and over. Then the
Prophet (Pbuh) said: God, the Almighty hates or damns any man, or woman,
who repeatedly marries and gets divorced. [Vasa'il, v.22, p.7]

#### Causes for Divorce

Divorce is allowed in cases when there exist conditions in the woman or
the man which cannot be corrected for and make the continuation of the
marriage difficult. In such cases, the couple and their relatives should
not worsen the conditions, and not say any improper things. The problems
that the couple have should not become a reason for them or others to
commit other sins such as gossiping, accusing, belittling, etc. Such
acts will only increase the hatred of the couple and their families, and
will cause torture in the Hereafter.

It is unfortunate to say that whenever the issue of divorce comes up,
the families start to gossip, make accusations, or express hatred, and
many commit these sins. It may be that the woman is too difficult to
live with because she does not attend to the needs of the family, or the
man does not abide by the conditions which he has accepted at the time
of the wedding, in which case the woman can ask for a divorce. If these
conditions exist, the couple should respectfully get divorced without
committing any sins. The families should not get involved, or commit any
sins. I must mention two great sins which the families may commit early
after divorce. Hopefully, by paying close attention to divine issues,
sins will be avoided.

#### Gossip

The Quran states:

##### Nor speak ill of each other behind their backs. Would any of you like to eat the flesh of his dead brother? Nay, ye would abhor it...[Holy Quran: Hujurat: 49:12]

The Prophet (Pbuh) said:

##### Gossip will ruin a Muslim's religion faster than food gets digested in his stomach [Vasa'il, v.72, p.152]

He also said:

##### I admonish you against gossiping as it is worse than fornication [Bihar al-Anwar , V.75, p.222]

The Prophet (Pbuh) said:

##### On the Night of Ascension, I saw some people who were peeling off their skin of their face with their nails, I asked Gabriel who they were. He said they are the ones who gossiped. [Mizan al-Hikmat, v.7, pp.332-333].

The Prophet (Pbuh) said:

God has forbidden gossiping, as he has forbidden harming a Muslim's
property or life. [Ibid]. The Commander of the Faithful said:

Gossiping is a sign of hypocrisy.[Ibid]

He also said:

##### Gossiping about the good people is one of the most wicked acts.[Ibid]

The seventh Imam said:

##### One who gossips about his believing brothers is deprived of God’s Mercy [Bihar al-Anwar , V.77, p.117]

The Master of the Martyrs (Imam Husayn) told a man who was gossiping:

##### Protect yourself from gossip as it is the food for the dogs in the Hell [Bihar al-Anwar , v.78, p.117].

In fact, there is no reason to gossip about a lustful, oppressive ruler
or one who is already an evil-doer. [Bihar al-Anwar , V.75, p.253]

The Commander of the Faithful has said:

##### One who listens to another who gossips is similar to one who gossips [Mizan al-Hikmat , V.7, p.352].

There is also a tradition from the Prophet (Pbuh) related to not
listening to gossip:

##### God will protect whoever defends the honor of his Muslim brothers in front of one who gossips, from the Fire of Hell. [Mizan al-Hikmat, v.7, p.353].

Therefore the only thing that must be discussed in a divorce is divorce
and nothing else. There should be no unjust talk since this will only
cause you to go to Hell.

#### Accusations

There are times when the husband or the wife accuses the other one to
justify the divorce. This may also be done by either family. This is a
very wicked deed with a serious misfortune in the Hereafter. Imam Sadiq
narrated a wise man as saying:

##### Accusing an innocent person is even heavier than tall mountains.[Vasa'il, V.12, P.288]

Imam Reza has narrated his grandfathers as having quoted the Prophet
(Pbuh) saying:

##### God will throw the one who accuses some innocent person, or ascribes something to someone without a justification into a fire in Hell until he proves what he has claimed.[Vasa'il al-Shiaa ,V.12, P.288]

#### A Lesson

They asked a man who wanted to divorce his wife for the reason. He said
it is forbidden to gossip about my wife. Then they got divorced, and the
woman got married to someone else. Again they asked that man why he had
divorced his wife. He replied it is forbidden to gossip about someone
else’s wife.

#### Divorce as Viewed by Quran

##### It is better if the couple can resolve their problems themselves. If not, they should each chose a religious, wise, patient and smart representative to discuss their problems. Perhaps this way they can avoid a divorce.

##### If ye fear a breach between them twain, appoint (two) arbiters, one from his family, and the other from hers; If they wish for peace, God will cause their reconciliation: for God hath full knowledge, and is acquainted with all things.[Holy Quran: Nisaa: 4:35]

A divorce is only permissible twice: after that, the parties should
either hold together on equitable terms, or separate with kindness. It
is not lawful for you, (men), to take back any of your gifts (from your
wives), except when both parties fear that they would be unable to keep
the limits ordained by God.

##### If ye (judges) do indeed fear that they would be unable to keep the limits ordained by God, there is no blame on either of them if she give something for her freedom. These are the limits ordained by God: So do not transgress them. If any do transgress the limits ordained by God, such persons wrong (themselves as well as others).[Holy Quran: Baqara 2: 229]

##### When ye divorce women, and they fulfill the term of their ('Iddat), either take them back on equitable terms or set them free on equitable terms; but do not take them back to injure them, (or) to take undue advantage; if anyone does that, he wrongs his own soul. Do not treat God's Signs as a jest, but solemnly rehearse God's favors on you, and the fact that he sent down to you the Book and Wisdom, for your instruction. And fear God, and know that God is well acquainted with all things.[Holy Quran: Baqara 2:231]

Note that the Quran reminds us of the blessings, the Quran, God’s
Infinite Knowledge and Wisdom when discussing divorce. This is so that
justice is fully honored. It is obvious that divorce will not be
mentioned in families which are religious and believe in God and the
Hereafter, and are adorned with good morals and deeds. They will live
together in peace forever and will raise their children with love and
affection. The laziness, depressions, addiction, quitting education, and
corruption of many of our children are rooted in the differences between
their parents or their divorce. If we want this horrible dragon called
divorce to disappear, then the man should not be oppressive, he must
respect the rights of his wife and honor his obligations, and use humane
and Islamic principles in treating his wife and children. The woman
should perform her duties as a mother and wife, too. God dislikes
divorce, and whoever is responsible for it will be questioned in the
Hereafter.

We should try to reduce the statistics of divorce. We should stop
sinning, flirting, and oppressing others so that there be no more
divorce. The judicial system of the country should publish a leaflet
outlining moral issues and stating the evil aspects of divorce. This
should be handed out to those who wish to get divorced. Reading it may
change their mind, and they may not return to

separation. Their life may be re-established. It is better that widows
as widowers not enter the society, since they may be corrupted by those
whose faith is weak.

#### Termination of Life

Life is the place for action to achieve our aspirations. It is
terminated by death which will transfer us to the Hereafter where we
shall face the results of our deeds, beliefs, and ethics. The Quran asks
both men and women to strive to put something aside for the Hereafter
while they live.

##### And let every soul look to what (provision) he has sent forth for the morrow.[Holy Quran: Hashr 59:18]

A very important issue to consider is a good will and testament as to
how to best spend one third of one's property. Each person can
explicitly will what to be done with this portion of his property, and
should choose a good person to carry out his will. All the Prophets, the
Imams and the saints paid close attention to this issue and none passed
away without a will. We have been instructed to leave a will by the
Prophet (Pbuh) and the Immaculate Imams and by verse 180 by Baqara.

##### It is prescribed, when death approaches any of you, if he leave any goods, that he make a bequest to parents and next of kin, according to reasonable usage; this is due from the God-fearing. [Holy Quran: Baqara 2:180]

The Prophet (Pbuh) said:

##### Every Muslim has the right to a will [Mizan al-Hikmat , V.10, pp.494-495]. He also said: A Muslim should not sleep without a will [Ibid].

He also said:

##### Whoever passes away and has a will has died according to the traditions of God and His Prophet, and his death is based on virtue and martyrdom, and God's Forgiveness. [Ibid]

It is much better today for one to act upon his will before he dies
since the laws are cumbersome and really bother the inheritors. One can
do whatever he wants done after he died when he is still alive. He can
spend his wealth and property in a good way , like providing for the
means of marriage of his sons and daughters, paying for the expenses of
the orphans, building schools, mosques, and housing for the poor, and he
can get rewarded after he dies. Imam Ali has recommended this: O' son of
Adam , act upon your will regarding your own wealth and property, and do
what you want done after you die now that you are alive. Anyway, try to
leave lawfully earned property behind, since what is unlawfully earned
cannot be inherited.

Do not will that more than one third of it to be spent as you wish,
since this will not be effective. Divide the other two-thirds according
to the Quran. This way none of the inheritors will be hurt. It is
obligatory for the inheritors to act according to a will that is
prepared according to the Holy Quran. Such an act is

worship, and is rewarding for the one who has passed away, and the
inheritors who act accordingly. The inheritors should pay off any
business debts, alms, the nuptial gift of the wife, and personal debts
or required pilgrimage expenses first. They cannot divide and use money
which belongs to others, since this will result in God's Punishment. The
share for the wife, the parents and the sons and daughters should
strictly be considered according to the divine book. Otherwise, a breach
of God's Limits has occurred which will deserve Divine Retribution.

Please consult the practical treatise of Muslim scholars regarding the
division of inheritance, or go to visit an expert in Islamic
jurisprudence. This way the soul of the one who has passed away will be
pleased. The inheritors should remember that the person who has passed
away has spent all his life working hard to run your lives, and he
suffered much. He may have even made some fiscal sins, so do not forget
him. Pray for him, fast for him, give charity, and do good deeds. Try to
remember him and please his soul any time you can especially on the eve
of Thursdays, the month of Ramazan and Rajab. This way your children too
will learn to remember you after you die.

Go to visit their graves every once in a while since God will then grant
their soul to become accustomed to you, then they may pray for you from
Purgatory. I have a friend who said whenever he had a problem, he
immediately went to Qum to visit the graves of his parents. He read the
Fatihah chapter of the Quran, prayed and paid charity for them. Then he
asked them to pray for him and he returns to Tehran . He has experienced
that his parents’ prayers for him follow him and his problem gets
resolved before sunset. It is not right to forget one's parents who
spent all their life and energy to raise their children. Something
should be done to help them be forgiven.
