6
=

Woman’s Status in the Logic of Revelation
=========================================

##### O Mary ! God hath chosen thee and purified thee above the women of all nations.[Holy Quran: Al-i-Imran 3:42]

#### God's Pure Religion

The revered religion of Islam fundamentally differs from other religions
and schools of thought in all areas. The Shiite school of thought is
actually Islam interpreted by the Household of the Prophet (Pbuh) and
the rightful successors to the Noble Prophet Muhammad (Pbuh). The
Orthodox Islam has been expressed in the words of the Impeccable Imams.
It differs greatly from all other schools of thought, cultures and
religions in regards to its views on and description of monotheism, the
Day of Judgment, the angels, the Prophethood, the religious leadership
(Imamat), the Quran, the individual, the family, the society,
materialistic and spiritual affairs, moral and practical matters, woman,
man, offspring, business affairs, training and education, governmental
issues, etc.

What Islam states in this regard is pure fact and measures which are in
accord with the physical world and our inner being. In short, Islam's
viewpoints are in line with the facts which exist in God's Knowledge and
the real world. What is expressed by the interpreters of truth in the
religion of Islam is the product of their pure knowledge and divine
insight, and is extracted from the depth of the Quranic verses.

The issues existing in this religion originate in the Glorious Quran.
The Holy Quran starts with the description of Mercifulness, Beneficence
and Sovereignty of God. The interpretation of these facts originates in
the angelic, divine heart of the Prophet of Islam (Pbuh); and continues
in the statements of the Immaculate Imams starting with Ali (Pbuh), the
son of Abu Talib: It ends with the twelfth Imam's statements.

"Merciful" (Ar-Rahman) is one of God's especial names, and is not meant
to be used for others; however, "Benevolent" (Ar-Rahim) can also be
applied to others. Both adjectives have the same root in Arabic "rahmat"
implies when

translated that God is Merciful. Some interpreters of the Quranic verses
hold the view that "Merciful" refers to God's general Mercy for all
people, whether they are good or bad; while "Beneficent" refers to God's
especial Mercy for his obedient, pious servants. His "Mercifulness" is
to be manifested in this world, but His "Beneficence" will be granted in
the Hereafter.

One cannot, however, see any difference between the two in the Holy
Quran:

##### But My Mercy extendeth to all things. [Holy Quran: A'raf 7:156]

It is noteworthy that this divine attribute can be realized in the
creation of all creatures, in provisions for their sustenance and their
security against catastrophes.

Man's supplication, using these two attributes, results in a mystic
state and an especial spirit and joy. This will in turn result in God's
attention and favor to his servant. It has been noted in the Islamic
literature that God said:

##### I am ashamed of not responding positively to man's request should he invoke me through my Mercifulness and Beneficence.

The creation of people and providing for their sustenance is the
realization of His Mercifulness, and their guidance and prosperity is
the product of His Beneficence. God has commended His Mercifulness in
other forms in the Glorious Quran in phrases such as "the Best of the
mercifuls", "the Most Merciful of the mercifuls" and "Possessing Mercy."

Even though figures cannot be used to express God's Mercifulness, the
Prophet (Pbuh) has tangibly explained the matter to help people
understand it:

##### There exist one hundred of God's Mercies. God distributed one of these over the seven Heavens and the Earth. He grants all people whatever they deserve with just that one mercy; and the people are loving and merciful to each other with what they gain from that one mercy. He has kept the other ninety-nine with Him so that on the Day of Judgment He add them to that one and distribute them amongst the obedient believers.

Sovereignty implies ownership since God's Ownership spans over all
creatures and worlds and is irrevocable. He is an Owner who has full
power over the growth and development of all creatures. The connection
between His Ownership and plans for all existing particles is real,
eternal and intrinsic. Therefore, it is not reasonable for man to choose
another Lord or Owner, or accept any plans or laws other than His.

Real monotheism can be really demonstrated in all aspects of life if man
wholeheartedly submits to His Ownership and Plans and rejects any other
ownership or claims thereof. He must reject any culture or school of
thought which oppressively intends to grasp a hold on man's life. The
delightful phrase "There is no God but God" carries exactly the same
meaning in all aspects of life.

Verily Gods' Mercy and His Light of Sovereignty encompass man's whole
physical and spiritual needs, and God's Plans, Benevolence and Favor
guarantee man's prosperity in this world and the Hereafter.

#### The Supplication of the Divine Prophets for God's Sovereignty and Mercy

All divine Prophets rejected all lords and owners, plans, mercy and
favor other than God's. They considered themselves to belong to Him and
be the objects of His Lordship and worshippers of the Worshipped at all
times. They carried out an all-out war against undue claimants to
Sovereignty. Some of them lost their lives to safeguard this
monotheistic culture and God's Sovereignty and Mercy forever. They would
always implore God's Sovereignty and Mercy at times of hardship and
need. Adam (Pbuh) stated:

##### Our Lord ! We have wronged our own souls: If Thou forgive us not and bestow not upon us thy Mercy, we shall certainly be lost. [Holy Quran: A'raf 7:23]

Noah in his prayers to free the believers and himself and to uproot
oppression, said:

##### O my Lord! Leave not of the unbelievers, a single one on earth! [Holy Quran: Nuh 71:26]

Abraham (Pbuh) used to pray like this:

##### O our Lord! I have made some of my offspring to dwell in a valley without cultivation, by Thy Sacred House; In order, O our Lord, that they may establish regular prayer. [Holy Quran: Abraham 14:37]

Moses implored God during a time of hardship at the town gates of Madin
and said:

##### O my Lord ! truly am I in (desperate) need of any good that Thou dost send me! [Holy Quran: Qasas 28:24]

The Prophet Joseph (Pbuh) said:

##### O my Lord ! Thou hast indeed bestowed on me some power, and taught me something of the interpretation of dreams and events-O Thou creator of the heavens and the earth! Thou art my protector in this world and in the Hereafter. Take Thou my soul (at death) as one submitting to Thy Will (as a Muslim), and unite me with the righteous. [Holy Quran: Yusuf 12:101]

Zacharias stated:

##### O my Lord ! leave me not without offspring, though Thou art the best of inheritors. [Holy Quran: Anbiyaa 21:89]

God taught His Noble Prophet to pray like this:

##### O my Lord! grant Thou forgiveness and mercy! For Thou art the Best of those who show mercy! [Holy Quran: Mu-minun 23:118]

God narrates that His Saints and Lovers stand in prayer in the darkness
of the night saying:

##### Our Lord! not for naught Hast Thou created (all) this! [Holy Quran: Al-Imran 3:191]

The word "Lord" (Rabb) has repeatedly been uttered in the prayers of the
Immaculate Imams: namely; Dua i-Kumail, Abu-Hamzeh, Arafeh and the
fifteen supplications of Imam Sajjad (Pbuh). The supplication of the
Prophets to their Lord and the repeated occurrence of the word "Lord" in
these prayers is a clear manifestation of the importance of this issue
and its influence on all aspects of man's life. Those who prayed not
only implored God's sovereignty and Mercy in words, but also this
encompassed their entire life, all their beliefs, actions and morality -
both theoretically and practically.

#### The Grand Status of Worshipping God

Men and women are essentially similar to each other. They are not any
different in the way they develop towards perfection, show signs of
humanity, and attain spiritual status. They will be saved from being
entrapped in selfish desires and being slaves to false deities, if they
accept God's Sovereignty. They can do this by following their inherent
inclinations; and by benefiting from wisdom, Prophethood, religious
Leadership (Imamat), sympathetic teachers and qualified trainers. Thus,
they will accept God's Sovereignty, Plans and Guidance in all aspects of
life and remain secure from satanic cultures and wrong schools of
thought. In this way they will benefit from belonging to the True Owner
and will attain a lofty angelic status.

In their outward appearance and natural disposition, men and women are
an example of God's Mercifulness, Beneficence and Sovereignty. This fact
is expressed in the verses of the Holy Scripture [14] and there is no
room for doubt. Woman is human possessing spiritual talents and
aptitude. In the logic of divine revelations, woman has the same
identity and essence as man. She is divine Mercy and a sign of God's
Sovereignty.

The following are all evil results left over from oppressive cultures,
Pharaohs of the past and claimants to man's ownership: belittling and
attacking her; not respecting her rights; not satisfying her legitimate
wants; considering her to be a weak human; unjustly divorcing her and
discrimination between the two sexes. In the old days when some fathers
had a daughter in Italy, they became really happy.

They thought that they had received new property which they could sell
as an aid thirteen or fourteen years later meeting their household
expenses. At times, they burned women in a big pan of frying olive oil
when they got angry with them. Women were used as maids or sex objects
and are still deprived of many of their due rights. But in the logic of
revelations and in God's religion, women are considered as having a high
status with spiritual essence and are full of divine powers and lots of
talents.

If women recognized their own position and protected their human status
and if they benefited from the excellent Islamic teachings for their
training and

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[14] the Holy Quran

development, then they would be able to reach the position of holy Mary,
the noble Khadijah and the esteemed Zaynab. Thus, they can reach a
status which ensures their nearness to God. Otherwise they will earn
nothing but eternal damnation and worldly degradation, if they do not
appreciate God's blessings just as some men do.

#### Woman in the Logic of Revelation

We read in the great commentary called Majma ul-Bayan [v.8, p.358]

##### Esma, the daughter of Amis, and wife of Jafar, the son of Abi Talib , went to visit the Prophet's wives upon returning from their divine emigration to Ethiopia which was done to safeguard the religion. She asked them if there existed any verses in the Holy Quran regarding women. They answered no. Then she rushed to see the Prophet (Pbuh) and told him that women were in despair and at a loss. The Prophet (Pbuh) asked the reason. She answered men have been favorably mentioned in the Holy Quran.

God the Benevolent revealed:

##### For Muslim men and women, - for believing men and women, for devout men and women, for true men and women, for men and women who are patient and constant, for men and women who humble themselves, for men and women who give in charity, for men and women who fast (and deny themselves), for men and women who guard their chastity, and for men and women who engage much in God's praise, - for them God has prepared forgiveness and great reward. [Holy Quran: Ahzab 33:35]

It is clearly stated in this verse that women, just like men, can attain
ten angelic spiritual positions and attain God's forgiveness and a great
reward in the Hereafter: 1) Islam (submission to God); 2) Faith; 3)
Obedience; 4) Truthfulness; 5) Patience and perseverance; 6) Humbleness
and fear of God's Glory and Punishment; 7) Benevolence and charity; 8)
Fasting; 9) Self-control of carnal desires and 10) Remembrance of God.

Esma, the daughter of Yazid Ansary went to see the Prophet Muhammad
(Pbuh) when he was with his companions. She said: "May my parents bestow
their lives upon you. I am a representative of other women. No woman in
the East or the West disagrees with me. You are appointed to men and
women by God. We have faith in you and God. However, women are really
restricted to the house. They submit to their husbands to satisfy their
lust and will be pregnant for a long time. However, men can freely
attend the congregation and Friday prayers; visit the sick; attend
burial ceremonies; go on pilgrimage several times; and most important of
all, fight in the way of God. While men go on pilgrimage or to guard the
country borders, women guard their property, sew their clothes and raise
children. What do we earn from this partnership?"

The Prophet (Pbuh) asked his companions if they had ever heard of
anything better than what she had said in regards to her religion. They
said they did not

think she had discovered such realities so properly. The Prophet (Pbuh)
addressed her and said: "Go and admonish all other women that if they
are good wives for their husbands, and if they seek to please their
husbands, and if they are complaisant with their husbands regarding
daily affairs, then their reward equals all that their husbands can earn
through all the acts you mentioned." The woman departed happily
chanting:

##### "There is no god but God. He is the Greatest". [Mizan al-Hikmat , v.9, p.96]

The eighth Imam has narrated his forefathers quoting the Prophet (Pbuh):

##### In the presence of God the believer is similar to the nearest angels. Verily a believer has a higher status than angels. Nothing is better liked by God than a repenting believing man or woman.

#### Intellect and Lust as Measures for Prosperity or Misery

Intellect is the force that aids in understanding and accepting facts,
planning for health and prosperity and designing beneficial affairs in
man's life. This precious pearl has been interpreted as the inner
Prophet in traditions from the Holy Household of the Prophet Muhammad
(Pbuh). [Usul al-Kafy, Chapter on the Intellect]

Lust is a natural God-given instinct which can be used to derive
pleasure from life, and provides for a motivation to strive for the life
of this world and also, at times for the Hereafter. If it is bound using
one's intellect, life will be good, and God's Mercy will be bestowed
upon it. Man's existence would then exemplify human traits and his worth
would be higher than that of the angels.

But if our intellect is enslaved by lust, it will not be able to guide
us. Then unbounded lust and numerous desires will govern our lives. Once
man follows lust he will not be able to see anything but material
affairs. His criteria in life will be based on food and lust. All signs
of humanity will vanish in him, and he will become worse than the
beasts.

It is narrated that Abdullah, the son of Sanan, asked Imam Sadiq (Pbuh)
whether men or angels were superior to each other. He responded that the
Commander of the Faithful Ali (Pbuh) said:

##### God the Glorious and the Almighty has given angels intellect with no lust; the animals have lust without intellect; and man has both intellect and lust. Whoever can govern his lust with his intellect is superior to the angels, and whoever loses control of his intellect or his lust is inferior to the animals. [Bihar al-Anwar , v.57, p.299]

This is true for both men and women. A women can also be nobler than the
angels should this be manifested in her. But if she ignores intellectual
foresight, the inner light and the prophet within, and strives for

jewelry and ornaments for lustful seduction of others, then she will be
worse than animals, just like infidels, and corrupt men.
