


Family and Social Milieu
Born in the twilight of the Mughal Era in the Indian subcontinent to a
distinguished family, Sayyid Ahmad Khan is the eldest of the five
prominent Muslim modernists whose influence on Islamic thought and
polity was to shape and define Muslim responses to modernism in the
latter half of the nineteenth century. Like the four--Sayyid Amîr Alî
(1849-1928), Jamâl al-Dîn al-Afghânî (1838-1897), Nâmik Kemâl
(1840-1888) and Shaykh Muhammad Abduh (ca.1850-1905)--Sayyid Ahmad Khan
was deeply concerned with the state of Muslims in a world dominated by
European colonizing powers.

Sayyid Ahmad Khan’s forefathers claimed direct blood relationship with
the Prophet of Islam through his daughter Fâtimah and son-in-law Alî.
They had migrated to Iran, then to Herat in Afghanistan and finally to
Shahjahân Abâd, which the Mughal Emperor Shah Jahân had built in 1648
near old Delhi. Ahmad Khan’s father, Sayyid Muhammad Muttaqî, and
mother, Aziz al-Nisa, were both endowed with great intellectual and
spiritual qualities. Aziz al-Nisa was the oldest daughter of Khwajah
Farîd al-Din Ahmad (1747-1828) whose family had originally migrated to
Kashmir from Hamadan in Iran. Khwajah Abd al-Azîz, the grandfather of
Khwajah Farid, finally settled in Delhi where the future father-in-law
of Ahmad Khan was born in 1747. The Khwajah family was a family of
merchants while the Sayyid family belonged to the Mughal aristocracy.
The great grandfather of Sayyid Muttaqi was a commanding office in
Emperor Aurangzeb’s  (1658-1707) army. Emperor Alamgîr II (1754-1759)
had bestowed the title of Jawâd Ali Khan and the rank of*yak-hazari*
(commander of one thousand) on Sayyid Hadî, the father of Sayyid
Muttaqî.

Ahmad Khan’s father, Sayyid Muttaqî, was mystically inclined and
frequently visited the monastery of Shah Ghulam Ali. His income was
derived from the agricultural land and the pension granted by the Mughal
Court which, in those  uncertain times, was rather irregular and much
less than the promised amount. By the time of his marriage, Sayyid
Muttaqî’s lofty ancestral house near Jamia Masjid in the prestigious
northeast section of Delhi had become unsafe and unfit. He lacked the
will and resources to restore it and after his marriage to Aziz al-Nisa,
he moved in with his father-in-law who lived in a palatial mansion built
by the famous architect Mehdi Qulî Khan.

It was in this palatial*haveli* (mansion) ¾ known as Haveli Mehdi Quli
Khan ¾ that Sayyid Ahmad Khan was born on October 17, 1817. He was the
third child of his parents. Two years before the birth of Ahmad Khan,
his maternal grandfather, Khwajah Farîd, had been appointed the Prime
Minister of Emperor Akbar Shah with the high sounding titles of*Dabîr
al-Mulk, Amîn al-Daulah, Maslah Jang.* This was the crowning achievement
in a career which had taken Khwaja Farîd to various parts of the
crumbling Mughal Empire which was quickly losing its power to the
British India Company. In 1781, he had gone to Lucknow where he studied
mathematics for three years with the famous scholar Allama Taffadal
Husain Khan who was also a*munshi* (tutor-cum-clerk) first to General
Palmer and then to W.W. Hunter. He returned to Delhi to spend the next
thirteen years but he

was back in Lucknow in 1797 where he gained access to General Martin and
other high-ranking British officials who recommended him to be the
Superintendent of the Company’s newly established Calcutta Madressah
(Maddressah Aliyâh).

In Calcutta, Khwajah Farîd impressed Lord Wellesley with his diplomatic
skills and was sent by him to Iran in 1803 as an attaché of the British
Embassy. Khwajah Farîd had a specific mission: he was to convince
Emperor Fateh Ali Shah of Iran to send another ambassador to India in
place of Ambassador Haji Muhammad Khalîl Khan who had been
“accidentally” killed by the Company’s soldiers on July 20, 1802.
Khwajah Farîd was able to accomplish his mission and Muhammad Nabî Khan
of Shiraz was appointed as the new ambassador of Iran to India. The
Company promoted Khwajah Farîd to the position of Political Officer at
the Court of Ava in Burma. After a few month’s stay in Burma, Khwaja
Farîd returned to Calcutta and was appointed*Tahsildâr* (revenue
officer) of the newly conquered territories in Bandiylkhand.

Once the British power was consolidated in that area, a permanent
revenue officer was appointed and Khwajah Farid returned to Delhi in
1810, which had been conquered by Lord Lake in 1803. After a few months,
he went back to Calcutta for about five years (1810-1815) before being
appointed as the Prime Minister of the helpless Mughal Emperor Akbar II
who drew his pension from the Company and who was under severe financial
constraints. The Emperor expected Khwajah Farîd to obtain more money
from the Company to pay his debts. Instead, Khwaja Farîd slashed the
royal expenditures by reducing the allowances of the Salatîn, who
numbered almost 3,000 and by abolishing the two royal kitchens that
prepared lavish food for hundreds of court employees. This made him very
unpopular in the Red Fort and eventually he resigned and left Delhi for
Calcutta. The Emperor attempted to negotiate with the British for
increase in his pension but realized that he could not do so without the
intersession of the Company’s trusted and loyal friend, Khwajah Farîd.
In 1819, the helpless Emperor re-appointed seventy-two-year old Khwajah
Farîd as his prime minister. He remained in that position for three
years but when his authority was curtailed by the Emperor by associating
Nawab Mîr Khan, Raja Kaydar Nath and Raja Sukh Ray with him as
co-ministers, Khwajah Farîd resigned from his premiership in 1822. Six
years later, he died; at his death, Sayyid Ahmad Khan was eleven and his
grandfather had already become the most important influence in his life.

The second most important influence on the life of young Sayyid Ahmad
Khan was that of his mother, who is described as an exceptional woman.
Her generosity and piety were legendary. When her eldest son died at the
age of 38, she “unrolled her prayer carpet and exclaimed: God’s Will was
done.” [^1] She also urged her relative not to postpone the marriage
plans of her daughter because of this death in the family. She
maintained several helpless and indigent old ladies in specially built
quarters adjoining her house and spent a great deal of money in charity.

In the Indian subcontinent Sayyid Ahmad Khan (1817-1898) and his
followers were the first champions of this reform agenda. Born in the

twilight of the Indian Tîmûrî era to a distinguished family, Sayyid
Ahmad Khan was involved in a wide range of activities—from politics to
education. He was to leave a deep mark on the new Islam and science
discourse through his writings and by influencing at least two
generations of Muslims who studied at the educational institutions he
founded.[^2]


