


Works and Ideas
It was during the decade of 1860s, that Ahmad Khan developed his ideas
of a “modern Islam” and a Muslim polity living under the British rule.
During this time, he wrote*Târîkh Sarkashî-e* *D* *il* *c* *a Bijnore* (
*A History of Insurrection in Bijnor District* ) and *Asbâb-e Baghâwat-e
Hind* ( *The Causes of Indian Mutiny* ). He sent 500 copies of the
latter book to the India Office of the British Government in London and
a personal copy to Lord Canning in Calcutta. The book was translated
into English by Colonel Graham and Sir Auckland Colvin and published in
Benares. In 1860-1861, he published another tract, *Risâlah Khair
Khawahân Musalmanân: An Account of the Loyal Mahomdans of India* , in
which he claimed that the Indian Muslims were the most loyal subjects of
the British Raj because of their kindred disposition and because of the
principles of their religion. He also wrote a commentary on the Old and
the New Testament, *Tabîyyan al-kalâm fî’l- tafsîr al-tawrâ wa’l-injîl*
*c* *alâ millat al-islam* ( *The Mahomedan Commentary on the Bible* )
*.* He attached a *fatwâ* (religious decree) by Jamâl ibn al- cAbd Allâh
cUmar al- Hanfî, the Mufti of Makkah, at the end of the book. This
*fatwâ* stated, “as long as some of the peculiar observances of Islam
prevailed in [India], it is *Dâr al-Islam* (Land of Islam).” This was to
counter the religious decrees that had been issued by many Indian
culamâ’, stating that the Indian subcontinent had become a *Dâr al-* *H*
*arb,* the land of war. This political overture was favorably received
in the ruling circles.

The first two decades after 1857 witnessed Sayyid Ahmad Khan’s
increasing preoccupation with the prevailing conditions of Muslims in
India. He perceived Muslims as backward and in need of education. This
period also saw an increasing degree of public involvement in
educational and social arenas. On January 9, 1864, he convened the first
meeting of the Scientific Society at Ghazipur. The meeting was attended,
among others, by Ahmad Khan’s future biographer, Colonel Graham, who was
convinced that India could benefit from England’s technological wealth.
The Society was established with two clear objectives; two more
objectives were added in 1867. Thus the goals of the Society were:

(i) to translate into such languages as may be in common use among the
people those works on arts and sciences which, being in English or other
European languages, are not intelligible to the natives; (ii) to search
for and publish rare and valuable oriental works (no religious work will
come under the notice of the Society); (iii) to publish, when the
Society thinks it desirable, any [periodical] which may be calculated to
improve the native mind; (iv) to have delivered in their meetings
lectures on scientific or other useful subjects, illustrated when
possible by scientific instruments.[^3]

Ahmad Khan and the Society moved to Aligarh in 1867 where he was able to
procure a piece of land from the government for experimental farming.
The Duke of Argyll, who was also the Secretary of State for India,
became the Patron of the Society and Lt. Governor of the N.W. Province
its Vice-Patron. Ahmad Khan was the secretary of the Society as well as
member of the Directing Council and the Executive Council. In a
memorandum of the Society to its President, Ahmad Khan wrote, in May 24,
1877, that for several years “the Society has cultivated wheat and
barley according to the methods prescribed in Scot Burn’s book on modern
farming and showed the results to*Talukdars* (estate holders) of
Aligarh;

new instruments were used to cultivate corn by Burn’s methods; several
vegetables were grown from newly developed European seeds and their
seeds were distributed to farmers; the Society cultivated American
cotton seeds, and demonstrated their superior product.” [^4]

Ahmad Khan now devoted all his energies and a portion of his personal
income to the Society. He was also able to receive small sums from
various Muslim and non-Muslim philanthropists. Ahmad Khan realized that
the political realities of India dictated that Muslims should establish
their own organizations. On May 10, 1866, he established The Aligarh
British Indian Association. The inaugural session was held at the
Aligarh office of the Scientific Society in the presence of a sizeable
number of local landowners and a few European officers. The Association
failed to achieve any degree of impact on the decisions of the
government and, one after the other, its plans were aborted. Ahmad Khan
wanted to establish a “vernacular university” for the N.W. Provinces but
he was discouraged by the champions of Hindi who wanted such a
university to teach in Hindi, rather than Urdu. In 1868, the Association
announced assistance for persons traveling to Europe for educational and
scientific purposes but at that time, most Muslims of northern India
considered social contacts with Englishmen undesirable for their moral
and religious integrity. Ahmad Khan had been elected an honorary Fellow
of the Royal Asiatic Society of London in 1864 and he decided to go to
England himself to see the ways of the British in their homeland.

On April 1, 1869, Ahmad Khan, his two sons, Sayyid Hamid and Sayyid
Mahmud, a younger friend, Mirza Khuda Dad Beg, and a servant known only
by the affectionate name of Chachu left Benaras and arrived in London on
May 4, 1869 after spending five days in Marseilles and Paris.[^5] To pay
for his trip, Ahmad Khan had to mortgage his ancestral house in Delhi
and borrow 10,000 rupees from a moneylender at 14 percent interest rate
for the first 5,000 rupees and at 8 percent for the rest. He had also
availed the opportunity created by the Government Resolution of the 30th
June 1868, which had founded nine scholarships for the Indian Youth for
their education in England and applied for a scholarship for his son,
Sayyid Mahmud, who was then a student at the Calcutta University.[^6]

Ahmad Khan lived in rented houses in London. His seventeen-month stay
(from May 4, 1869 to October 2, 1870) in England was full of social and
literary activity as well as political activity. He was “in the society
of lords and dukes at dinners and evening parties”, he saw “artisans and
the common working-man in great numbers”, he was awarded the title of
the Companion of the Star of India by none other than the Queen herself;
this “elevated” him so that henceforth he would call himself Sir Sayyid
Ahmad Khan Bahadur, C.S.I.; he dined with the Secretary of State for
India and though he was beset with economic problems, he fulfilled the
protocol by hiring private horse carriages for his visits which drained
his purse.[^7]

His visit to England convinced him of the superiority of the British.
“Without flattering the English,” he wrote, “I can truly say that the
natives of India, high and low, merchants and petty shopkeepers,
educated and illiterate, when contrasted with the English in education,
manners, and

uprightness, are like a dirty animal is to an able and handsome
man.”[^8] Ahmad counted himself among the “animals” and felt the pain
and anguish of being part of a degenerated culture.

While in England, Khan read William Muir’s biography of the Prophet
Muhammad, which “burned his heart”, and its “bigotry and injustice cut
his heart to pieces”. His outrage was both religious as well as
personal; after all, Prophet Muhammad was his ancestor. He resolved to
write a full-length biography of the Prophet as a refutation “even if
its preparation would turn him into a pauper and a beggar for on the Day
of Judgment, it would be said, ‘Bring forth the one who died penniless
for the sake of his grandfather Muhammad!’”[^9] From the moment he
started to read Muir’s book in August 1869, until he finished its
refutation in February 1870, Ahmad Khan could do nothing but think about
the rejoinder he wished to write. He wrote letters to friends in India,
soliciting books, references and money for his rejoinder. Because his
own English was inadequate, he had to hire an Englishman for polishing
his draft which he wrote until his back ached. He also had to pay for
the translation of Latin, German, and French material he used in his
book. But when he finally published the refutation, it was merely *A*
*Series* *of* *Essays* *on* *the* *Life* *of* *Mohammad* ; [^10] he
hoped to write the second volume but he was exhausted and penniless.

After finishing the book, Ahmad Khan was eager to return to India.
During his stay in England, he had visited universities of Oxford and
Cambridge and certain private schools, including Eaton and Harrow; these
would serve as models for his own Muhammadan Anglo-Oriental College.
Ahmad Khan returned home on October 2,1870.

After his return to India, Ahmad Khan started a periodical*Tahdhîb*
*al-Akhlâq* to “educate and civilize” Indian Muslims. He remained in the
judicial service until his early retirement in July 1876. After that, he
settled in Aligarh where he established the Muhammadan Anglo-Oriental
College in 1877. In 1920, the College would become Aligarh Muslim
University, an institution that would have a decisive impact on the
course of Islamic polity in India as well as on the history of India. In
1886, he instituted “The Muhammadan Educational Conference” which held
annual meetings in various Indian cities.

In his drive for modernization, Ahmad Khan wanted to re-interpret Islam.
“We need a modern c*ilm* *al-Kalâm,”* he said in a speech delivered at
Lahore in 1884, “by which we should either refute the doctrines of
modern sciences or show that they are in conformity with the articles of
Islamic faith.” But what became apparent in the subsequent writings was
the fact that Ahmad Khan was not really interested (or qualified) to
refute any modern scientific doctrine; all he could do was to
re-interpret Islam to show that the “work of God (nature and its laws)
was in conformity with the Word of God (the Qur’ân)”, an adage that
earned him the title of*Naturî.*

In his attempts to re-interpret Islam to accommodate modern Western
science, Ahmad Khan exposed his weaknesses in both domains of knowledge.
He was severely criticized by the culamâ’ for the lack of qualifications
to interpret the Qur’ân and Hadîth and the shallowness of his knowledge
of Western science and its philosophical underpinnings was

apparent from his own writings. He had no training in any natural
science or in philosophy of science and he had never finished his
traditional education. Yet, he tried to demythologize the Qur’ân and its
teachings. His interpretation of various fundamental aspects of Islamic
teachings which could not be proved by modern scientific methods, such
as the nature of supplication*(du‘â),* which he thought was merely
psychological rather than real, met fierce resistance from the
traditional scholars but in spite of this, he gained widespread
popularity among the ruling elite and in the early 1880s, he became the
acknowledged leader of the Muslim community. He was loyal to the British
Raj*,* but he fought various legal and constitutional battles with the
British administrators in order to secure fundamental rights for the
Muslim community. He was rewarded by the British in many ways. In 1878,
he was nominated as a member of the Vice Regal Legislative Council; in
1888, he was knighted as the Knight Commander of the Star of India; in
1889, he received an honorary degree from the University of Edinburgh.
In spite of his life-long interest in educational matters, Ahmad Khan
did not produce any new theory of education; he was merely interested in
promoting western education without reservation.

Like many other Muslim thinkers of the nineteenth century, Ahmad Khan
was convinced that Muslims need to acquire Western science and he
attempted to show that modern science is in perfect harmony with Islam.
Not only that, he went as far as proclaiming that the Qur’ânic
invitation to ponder and reflect on the perfect system of nature was, in
fact, a call to Muslims to excel in science¾an argument that gained
currency with time and is still used by many thinkers and rulers who
want Muslims to acquire Western science.

Others who advocated similar ideas during the nineteenth century include
Khayr al-Dîn al-Tunisî (d. 1889), Rifâcah al-Tathâwî (d. 1871), Jamâl
al-Dîn al-Afghânî (d. 1897) and Muhammad Abduh (d. 1905). This trend
also gave birth to modern scientific exegesis (*tafsîr* *c* *ilmî* ) of
the Qur’ân. In 1880, an Egyptian physician, Muhammad ibn Ahmad
al-Iskandrânî, published one such*tafsîr* [^11] in Cairo. This was
followed by another work of the same kind, though not a*tafsîr* .[^12]
It is not clear whether Ahmad Khan knew about these publications or not.
But in 1879, he wrote,

Now that*Ghadar* is over,[^13] and whatever had to pass for the Muslims
has passed, I am worried about improvement of our nation. I pondered
hard and after a long reflection came to the conclusion that it is not
possible to improve their lot unless they attain modern knowledge and
technologies that are a matter of honor for other nations in the
language of those who, through the Will of Allâh, rule over us.[^14]

As an aid to his mission, Ahmad Khan decided to write a*tafsîr* because
in all previous*tafsîr* literature, he “could only find grammatical and
lexicographical niceties, statements concerning the place and time of
revelation and descriptions of previous*tafâsîr* .”[^15] In the preface
to the first partial edition of his work, he wrote,

When I tried to educate Muslims in modern sciences and English, I
wondered whether these are, in fact, against Islam as it is often
claimed. I studied*tafsîr* , according to my abilities, and except for
the literary matters, found in them nothing but rubbish and worthless
(*fadûl* ) discussions, mostly based on baseless and unauthentic
traditions and fables (*mamlu bar rawâyât*

*da* c*îf wa modû* c*aur qasas bey saropa* ) which were often taken from
the Jewish sources. Then I studied books of the principles of*tafsîr*
according to my ability with the hope that they would definitely provide
clues to the principles of the Qur’ânic interpretation based on the
Qur’ân itself or which would be otherwise so sound that no one could
object to them but in them I found nothing but statements that the
Qur’ân contains knowledge of such and such nature… Then I pondered over
the Qur’ân itself to understand the foundational principles of its
composition and as far as I could grasp, I found no contradiction
between these principles and the modern knowledge… then I decided to
write a*tafsîr* of the Qur’ân which is now complete up to*Suratul Nahl*
.”[^16]

Ahmad Khan’s*tafsîr* was published as it was being written. The work
began in 1879 and was left unfinished at the time of his death in 1898.
This*tafsîr* faced fierce resistance not only from culamâ but also from
Ahmad Khan’s staunch admirers and friends. One of his friends, Nawâb
Muhsin al-Mulk wrote to him two long letters expressing his anguish at
Ahmad Khan’s radical interpretation of certain verses of the Qur’ân. In
response, Ahmad Khan composed a short treatise to explain the principles
of his*tafsîr.* This was published in 1892 as*Ta* *h* *rîr fi’l-asûl
al-tafsîr* .[^17]

Ahmad Khan declared that nature is the “Work of God” and the Qur’ân is
the “Word of God” and there could be no contradiction between the two.
But in his efforts to prove that there is no contradiction between the
Qur’ân and the modern scientific knowledge, Ahmad Khan denied all
miracles and insisted on bending the Word of God to suit his
understanding of His Works. In the Ninth Principle of his*tafsîr* , he
stated

there could be nothing in the Qur’ân that is against the principles on
which nature works… as far as the supernatural is concerned, I state it
clearly that they are impossible, just like it is impossible for the
Word of God to be false… I know that some of my brothers would be angry
to [read this] and they would present verses of the Qur’ân that mention
miracles and supernatural events but we will listen to them without
annoyance and ask: could there could not be another meaning of these
verses that is consonant with Arabic idiom and the Qur’ânic usage? And
if they could prove that it is not possible, then we will accept that
our principle is wrong… but until they do so, we will insist that God
does not do anything that is against the principles of nature that He
has Himself established.


