


Endnotes

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1] Malik ,Hafeez , SirSayyid Ahmad Khan and Muslim Modernism in India
and Pakistan (New York: Columbia University Press, 1980)

[^2] . Notably theAligarh College, established in 1881, which became a
university in 1920 and which remained the mainstay of Muslim education
in the Indian subcontinent until [^1947]:

[^3] . “Proceedings of the First Meeting of the Scientific
Society”,Ghazipur , January 9, 1864, published inFikr-o-Nazar , April
(1963),Aligarh , pp. 8-[^11]:

[^4] .Malik ,Hafeez (1980), SirSayyid Ahmad Khan and Muslim Modernism in
India and Pakistan, Columbia University Press, New York, pp. 88-[^89]:

[^5] . Panipat i,Shaikh Mu hammad Ismical (1976),Maktub at-e SirSayyid
,(Letters of SirSayyid Ahmad, henceforth Letters), 2
vols.,Majlis -eTaraqi -eAdab , Lahore, vol. 1, p. [^413]: Ahmad Khan’s
letters toNawab Mohsin al-Mulk , andMawlaviMahdi Ali Khan, written from
England, were first published in SirSayyid’s journalTahdh ib al-lkhl aq,
under the general title of SafarNamah -eMus afr an-e London.

[^6] . Ahmad Khan’s letter of July 28, 1869, to the Secretary of State
(George Douglas Campbell, the Eighth Duke of Argyll, 1823-1900), in
Panipat i,Shaikh Mu hammad Ismical (ed., 1993) Letters to and from
SirSyed Ahmad Khan, Board for Advancement of Literature, Lahore, pp.
3-[^5]:

[^7] . “One can easily live here in one hundred and fifty rupees per
month, except when one has to go for visits. It costs four hundred
rupees a month just for the coaches! And this will only fetch a
one-horse carriage with occasional two horse carriages. Last nightMahmud
was invited to the house of an Englishman, he spent two hours there, he
went there in a pathetic horse carriage, the like of which one can fetch
inBenaras for two or threeannas (one rupee had sixteenannas ); it cost
seven shillings, i.e. seven and a half rupees...”Ahmad Khan’s letter of
June 18, 1869 to Nawab Mahdi . Letters, op. cit, vol. 1, pp. 421-22, my
translation.

[^8] .Panipati ,Shaikh MuhammadIsma icl (ed. 1961),Mus afr an-e
London,Majlis Taraqi -eAdab , Lahore, p. [^184]:

[^9] . Letters, op. cit. vol. 1, p. [^431]:

[^10] .Published by Trubner & Co., [^1870]: In London, Khan had to
borrowRs . 3,000; the book cost himRs . 3,948; the sale of 20 copies and
donations from friends in India brought backRs . 1,691.(Letters, op.
cit.) Ahmad Khan’s book was a fitting rejoinder to Muir’s outburst
against the Prophet of Islam. He undertook a point-by-point refutation
of the main arguments in twelve essays which start with the “Historical
Geography of Arabia” and end with “On the Birth and Childhood of
Mohammed”. Interestingly, Ahmad Khan produced his own genealogy on the
back of the large size sheet which contains the genealogy of the
Prophet, tracing it back to the Prophet of Islam through his daughter
Fatima. This book has been reprinted many times. The one I have used was
reprinted by Premier Book House in 1968 in Lahore. The title page states
that the “original English text of these essays has been revised and
corrected by a friend” and author’s name is given asSyed Ahmed
KhanBahador , C.S.I. The Urdu version was published in 1887 asKhutbat
al- Ahmdia fi bl Arabwa Seeratul Mu hammadia ,Aligarh .

[^11] .Iskandar an i, Mu h ammad b. Ahmad (1297/1880),Kash al-Asrar can
al-Nuraniyya al-Qur abniyya fi-mayata callaqu bi al-Ajram as-Samawiyya
wa al-Ar diyya wa al-Hayawan atwa al-Nabatwa al-Jawahir al-Maacdaniyya ,
3 vols. Cairo.

[^12] . Al-Iskandar ani, Muhammad b. Ahmad (1300/1883),Tiby an al-Asr ar
al-Rabb aniyya fbil-Nabatwa bl Maacdinwa bl-Khaw sas al-Hawywaniyyah ,
Damascus.

[^13] . The 1857 effort to gain independence from the British rule was
called “mutiny” by the British; its Urdu equivalent,Gadar , was used by
some pro-British writers for this heroic effort which failed due to many
reasons, including treason by Muslims and Hindus loyal to the British.

[^14] . See Panipat i,Maulana Muhammadlsm ical (ed., 1963),Maqalat -e
SirSayyid , 16vols., Majlis-eTaraqqi-e Adad , Lahore, [henceforthMaq
alat], vol. 2, pp. 199-[^200]:

[^15] . ibid.

[^16] . ibid.

[^17] . For a discussion on Ahmad Khan’s reinterpretations, see Troll,
C.W. (1979),Sayyid Ahmad Khan:A Reinterpretation of Muslim Theology,
Oxford University Press, Karachi.
