


Introduction
In the person of al-Kindi (died ca. 870 A.D.), the Arabic tradition had
its first self-consciously "philosophical" thinker. Those familiar with
al-Kindi may know him chiefly because of his role in the transmission of
Greek philosophy, though it is his transformation of the ideas he
inherited that will interest us most here. While it is not clear whether
al-Kindi himself could read Greek,1 it is well documented that he guided
the efforts of several important early translators. These included
Ustath, translator of Aristotle's*Metaphysics* ; Yahya b. al-Bitriq, who
paraphrased several Platonic dialogues as well as translated
Aristotle's*De Caelo* ; and Ibn Na'ima al-Himsi. Al-Himsi translated
logical works of Aristotle and parts of the*Enneads* of Plotinus, the
latter in a paraphrase that has come down to us as a group of three
texts dominated by the so-called*Theology of Aristotle* .2 (I will refer
below to these three texts collectively as the Arabic Plotinus.)
Al-Kindi's circle of translators also produced a similar paraphrase of
Proclus's*Elements of Theology* , which went first by the name*Book on
the Pure Good* in its Arabic version and later, in its Latin version, by
the title*Liber de Causis* . Translations in the Baghdad circle were
made from both Greek and Syriac, and were supported by the 'Abbasid
caliphs al-Ma'mun**[End Page 297]** (reigned 813-33) and al-Mu'tasim
(reigned 833-42).3 In his own works, many of which are letters addressed
to al-Mu'tasim's son Ahmad, al-Kindi repeated and developed ideas and
terminology from the philosophical works he read in translation, often
in answer to questions posed by the recipient.

It would appear that al-Kindi considered the study of metaphysics to be
primary in his endeavor to reconstruct Greek thought. His most
significant remaining work,*On First Philosophy* , assimilates
metaphysics or "first philosophy" to theology, the study of "the First
Truth Who is the Cause of every truth."4 His survey of the works of
Aristotle likewise confirms that the*Metaphysics* studies God, His names
and His status as the First Cause.5 A similar conception underlies the
Prologue to the*Theology of Aristotle* , which claims to "complete the
whole of [Aristotelian] philosophy," and promises a "discussion of the
First Divinity . and that it is the Cause of causes."6 The Prologue also
seems to portray this project as continuous with that of
the*Metaphysics* . We might suspect, then, that al-Kindi took
Aristotle's aim in the*Metaphysics* of studying "being*qua* being" as
central to his own undertaking, and indeed as central to an adequate
philosophical understanding of God.

In this paper I shall try to confirm this suspicion through a study of
al-Kindi's corpus, focusing specifically on his conception of being, or,
rather, on his*conceptions* of being; for as we shall see there are two
competing treatments of being in al-Kindi. First, in common with the
Arabic Plotinus and the *Liber de Causis* , he has a conception that
emphasizes the simplicity of being, and opposes being to predication.
Second, he has a complex conception of being indebted to Aristotle.
These **[End Page 298]** two conceptions can be reconciled: simple
being, I will argue, is prior to and underlies complex being. Finally, I
will suggest that al-Kindi's simple conception of being anticipates
Avicenna's distinction between existence and essence, but only to a
limited extent.


