


2. Simple Being
With these terminological considerations in mind, we may now turn to a
philosophical analysis of the texts. Let us begin with the*Liber de
Causis* :

(A)*Liber de Causis* , Proposition 1: And we give as an example of this
being (*anniyya* ), living, and man, because it must be that the thing
is first being, then living, then man. Living is the proximate cause of
the man, and being is its remote cause. Thus being is more a cause for
the man than living, because it [sc. being] is the cause of living,
which is the cause of the man. Likewise, when you posit rationality as
cause of the man, being is more a cause for the man than rationality,
because it is the cause of its cause. The proof of this is that, when
you remove the rational power from the man, he does not remain man, but
he remains living, ensouled, [and] sensitive. And when you remove living
from him, he does not remain living, but he remains a being (*anniyya*
), because being was not removed from him, but rather living, for the
cause is not removed through the removal of its effect. Thus, the man
remains a being. So when the individual is not a man, it is a living
thing, and [when] not a living thing, it is only a being (*anniyya
faqat* ).17

The passage suggests a thought experiment, in which we strip away the
features or attributes from man. Of particular interest to us is that
when all the attributes have been removed, what remains is*anniyya
faqat* , "only a being" or "being alone."

Compare this with the following passage, from the Arabic Plotinus:

(B)*Sayings of the Greek Sage* I.10-11: The intellect became all things
because its Originator is not like anything. The First Originator does
not resemble anything, because all things are from Him, and because He
has no shape and no proper form attached to Him. For the**[End Page
300]** First Originator is one by Himself, I mean that He is only being
(*anniyya faqat* ), having no attribute (sifa) suitable to Him, because
all the attributes are scattered forth from Him.

Just as in passage (A), the phrase*anniyya faqat* is used here to refer
to the pure being that remains when all determinate features, or
"attributes" (si*fat* ), are removed. This is what I mean by saying that
for both authors, being alone is "simple": it is free of attributes or
predicates. The difference is that in the Arabic Plotinus, pure being is
not the outcome of a thought experiment, but is God Himself, the First
Originator who is equated with Plotinus's One and hence is also said to
be the cause of Intellect. That the author of the Plotinian paraphrase
should call God "being alone" has occasioned comment elsewhere.18 The
historical and philosophical importance of the claim is heightened by
the fact that it is contrary to Plotinus's statements that the One is,
in the words of Plato's*Republic* ,*epekeina tês ousias* , "beyond
being."19

Now, it is tempting to take the claim that God is being alone or "being
itself" as tantamount to the claim that God is pure actuality, as
Aristotle holds in the*Metaphysics* . Such later medieval writers as Ibn
Sina and Thomas Aquinas explicitly take this over from Aristotle. Nor is
such an understanding of God as actuality foreign to the Arabic
Plotinus, since we find there a remarkable passage where the author
writes that God "is the

thing existing truly in act. Nay rather, He is pure act" (*huwa al-shay'
al-ka'in bi-'l-fi'l* *haqqan, bal huwa al-fi'l al-mahd* ).20 While this
passage does most likely represent an Aristotelian influence on the
Plotinus paraphrase, it is an isolated example of that influence. (The
thought that God is actuality may also account for al-Kindi's frequent
descriptions of God as an "Agent" or the "First Agent."21 ) It is much
more frequent to find the paraphrase calling God "being alone" because
of His lack of attributes.22 Thus when the author says in passage (B)
and elsewhere that God is*anniyya faqat* , he seems above all to have in
mind God's absolute simplicity, and His resulting lack of attributes. It
is likely that this concern with simplicity and the exclusion of
attributes is related to contemporaneous debates over divine attributes
(si*fat* ), which already raged in the ninth century, when the Arabic
Plotinus was composed.23

It is significant for our understanding of passage (A) that we find the
same conception of God in the*Liber de Causis* . In Proposition 4, the
author of that paraphrase writes that God is "the pure being, the One,
the True, in whom there is no multiplicity in any way" ( *al-anniyya
mahda, al-wahid, al-haqq, alladhilaysa fihi* **[End Page 301]** *kathra
min al-jihat al-ashkhas* ). As in the Arabic Plotinus, God is nothing
but being, because He is simple. Being is contrasted to attributes,
because the being of a thing is distinct from the multiple features that
are predicated of that thing. Of course it is essential to created
things like humans that they have their predicated features, because
something cannot be a human without being alive, rational, and so on.
But being is not just another of these predicates, essential or
accidental. Rather, it is prior to the predicates.

What sort of priority is this? An answer is suggested by a remark of
al-Kindi's:

(C) FP 113.11-13 [RJ 27.17-19]: Corruption is only the changing of the
predicate, not of the first bearer of predication. As for the first
bearer of predication, which is being (*ays* ), it does not change,
because for something corrupted, its corruption has nothing to do with
the "making be" (*ta'yis* ) of its being (*aysiyyatihi* ).

This passage is not particularly clear, but it does explicitly make the
point that*ays* , "being," is the "first bearer of predication"
(*al-hamil al-awwal* ). The meaning of this assertion becomes clearer
against the background of texts (A) and (B). Being is prior to the
predicates of a thing, for example "living" and "rational" in the case
of a human, because it is the*subject of predication* .

If this is right, then "being" is treated as analogous to Aristotelian
matter. The analogy is suggested by both passages (A) and (C).24 Passage
(A) is reminiscent of Aristotle's discussion in the*Metaphysics* where,
on one traditional interpretation, he describes matter as the ultimate
subject of predication that underlies all the features of a thing.25
Also like Aristotelian matter, being subsists through change, as becomes
clear in passage (C) when al-Kindi says that being "does not change."
The point is an intelligible one: even in the case of substantial
corruption (such as death in the case of a human), there is not an
absolute destruction of being but merely of the way the thing is. This
is why the corpse that remains when the human is no

longer alive is yet something that*exists* . Finally, like Aristotelian
matter, mere being must be simple, where "simple" again means without
predicates. For, as the ultimate subject of predication, being itself
cannot be further analyzed into a complex of subject and predicates. The
analogy does break down insofar as matter is associated with
potentiality, whereas being (according to the Arabic Plotinus, as we saw
above) is more aptly associated with actuality.

As in the Neoplatonic translations, for al-Kindi this analysis of being
in the case of complex, created things is linked to a conception of God.
Al-Kindi follows the authors of the two paraphrases in saying that God
is being. For example, he**[End Page 302]** says that God is "the true
Being" (*al-anniyya al-haqq* ),26 and asserts that God creates "through
His being" (*bi-huwiyyatihi* ).27 Moreover, he follows them in
emphasizing that God is being because He is simple, or one:

(D) FP 161.10-14 [RJ 95.24-96.3]: The cause of unity in unified things
is the True, First One, and everything that receives unity is caused.
For every one that is not truly the One is one metaphorically, not in
truth. And every one of the effects of unity goes from [God's] unity to
what is other than [God's] being (*huwiyya* ), I mean that [God] is not
multiple with respect to existing (*min hayth yujadu* ). [The effect] is
multiple, not absolutely one, and by "absolutely one" I mean not
multiple at all, so that His unity is nothing other than His being
(*wa-laysa wahdatuhu shay'an ghayr huwiyyatihi* ).

It is clear from the end of this passage that for al-Kindi, unity is
convertible with being in the case of God,28 and that unity is here to
be understood as excluding multiplicity. Indeed text (D) is the
culmination of al-Kindi's efforts in the final surviving chapter of FP
to argue that God has no attributes. This fits well with text (C) and
the opposition it makes between being and attributes. So it would seem
that the notion of God in FP is the same as the one we discerned in the
Neoplatonic paraphrases: God is being, which is to say that He has no
multiplicity of attributes distinct from His being.29

We now need to make sense of the notion that this simple being is the
subject of predication in complex things. We can do this by bearing in
mind that complex things are created things. Hence the contrast in
passage (D) is between God, a simple and ineffable First Cause who is
identical with His own being, and the complex things that are*not*
identical with their own being. Yet the being of those created things is
in itself simple, as we see in passages (A) and (C), for it is distinct
from or prior to the predicates. Furthermore, the simple being of a
created thing is the direct effect of God. Indeed this is what creation
amounts to: the bestowal of the simple being upon which the created
thing's complexity is founded. Thus the *Liber de Causis* asserts that
"the first of originated things is being" and that created being then
"receives multiplicity." 30 The Neoplatonic lineaments of the **[End
Page 303]** theory are clear enough: createdness amounts to receiving
simple being from a simple One that is the principle of being, or pure
being. 31

It is in this sense that God's creating something is God's making that
thing exist. Thus al-Kindi uses the same terminology of "being alone" in
the following context:

FP 101.5-7: There are four scientific inquiries: [. .] "whether" (*hal*
), "what," "which" and "why" [. .] and "whether" is an investigation of
being alone (*'an anniyya faqat* ).

Here al-Kindi is drawing on Aristotle, who differentiates questions
regarding "whether" (*to hoti* ) from those regarding what a thing is (
*to ti estin* ) in *Posterior Analytics* II.1. Al-Kindi's explicit
discussions of creation bear out the equivalence of being created and
receiving being. In general, the generation of any given thing is a
"coming-to-be of being ( *ays* ) from non-being ( *'an lays* )" (FP
118.18 [RJ 33.25]). And in particular, "origination" ( *al-ibda'* ) or
creation is "the manifestation ( *izhar* ) of the thing from non-being (
*'an lays* )." 32 Such passages are further evidence that al-Kindi could
use terms meaning "being" to refer to the sheer existence of something,
the fact that it is: *to hoti* , in Aristotle's terminology. This act of
existing will be distinct from the predicates true of the created thing;
indeed, it will be ontologically prior to those predicates as their
subject.


