


3. An Objection: Unlimited Being
It might be objected that I am ascribing a remarkably impoverished view
of God and being to al-Kindi. Why think, this objector might say, that
simple being has to exclude attributes, instead of containing them all
implicitly? We might suppose that, on the contrary, God is the fullness
of Being, containing all things as a unity within Himself, so that in a
sense He has all attributes rather than none. His proper effect would
still be created being, which like God would virtually contain all
predicates until it became*specified* as a certain sort of thing.
Perhaps, then, we should talk of God as "unlimited" being rather than
"simple" being: as the Principle and Cause of all things, God would in
fact have all the attributes as a simultaneous unity, much in the manner
of Plotinian*nous* .

Our imaginary objector would find support in the Neoplatonic paraphrases
cited above. The Arabic Plotinus entertains the notion that God must
possess the same attributes as His effects, but in a more eminent way,
rather than excluding all attributes.33 In a discussion of God as cause
of the virtues, the author also suggests that God's being is*identical*
with the divine attributes:**[End Page 304]**

ThA IX.71 [B 130.9-10]: The virtues are in the First Cause in the manner
of a cause. Not that it is in the position of a receptacle for the
virtues; rather its entirety is a being (*anniyya* ) that is all the
virtues.

Here the emphasis on God's not being a "receptacle" (*wi'a* ') for the
virtues is intended to stress that there is no distinction between God
and the virtues. Even prior to al-Kindi's translation circle, a similar
position was taken by the Kalam thinker Abu 'l-Hudhayl, who is said to
have claimed that "[God] is knowing in an act of knowing that is He and
is powerful in a power of efficient causality that is He and is living
in a life that is He."34

We can illustrate the difference between "simple" and "unlimited" being
by distinguishing two ways in which a subject can relate to its
predicate. Take, for example, the statements "al-Kindi is rational" and
"al-Kindi is the first Arabic philosopher." In the former, the subject
and predicate are distinct, so that al-Kindi is not the same thing as
his rationality, whereas in the latter the subject is being identified
with the predicate.35 If we apply this to the case of God we have the
difference between simple and unlimited being. A believer in simple
being holds that a subject must be distinct from its predicate, as
al-Kindi is distinct from his rationality. The insight behind the notion
of being as unlimited is that if the subject is*identical* with the
predicate, then predication need not imply multiplicity. In the divine
case, we may say that "God is just" and "God is wise," but He is not
three things (justice, wisdom, and the subject of justice and wisdom).
Rather, God, His justice, and His wisdom are all identical. God will
still be simple, if "simple" means not multiple, but He will not be
simple in the stricter sense of lacking all attributes.**[End Page
305]**

However, there are good reasons for supposing that al-Kindi, as well as
the authors of the Neoplatonic translations we have considered, usually
supposed that a subject must be distinct from its predicate, so that
being must lack all predicates if it is to be simple. This comes out
most obviously in the final surviving section of FP, where al-Kindi
argues at length that

nothing can be predicated of God. After systematically showing that
every kind of predicate is incompatible with the divine unity, he
concludes: "therefore [God] is only and purely unity (*wahda faqat mahd*
), I mean nothing other than unity" (FP 160.16-17 [RJ 95.13-14]).
Similarly, the most explicit statement on divine predication in the
Arabic Neoplatonic texts is the thoroughly negative one in *Liber de
Causis* , Proposition 5. Further consideration of passage (C) above
yields the same result. Here al-Kindi not only says that being is the
subject of predication, but also that the predicate can change while the
subject remains. This makes clear that being, the subject, is not
identical to the predicate. Rather, we saw that as "the first bearer of
predication" being in itself lacks predicates, after the fashion of
Aristotelian matter. Likewise, passage (A) from the *Liber de Causis*
envisions "only being" as the result of *removing* predicates, not as a
richer principle that implicitly contains or is identical to all
predicates. Thus the passages considered so far presuppose that subject
and predicate are distinct, and draw the conclusion that being (in the
case of both God and created things) is simple in the sense of lacking
attributes. Yet we will now see that al-Kindi does have a notion of
being that includes complexity and attributes. This "complex" being is
appropriate only to created things, and presupposes "simple" being.


