


4. Complex Being
Others, such as Marie-Thérèse d'Alverny,36 have noted a double meaning
of*anniyya* in the texts produced by al-Kindi's circle. One the one
hand, as we have seen,*anniyya* can refer to mere existence. On the
other hand, it can include the actual nature or essence of a thing:
not*that* it is, but*what* it is. In the case of a human, for example,
being in this complex sense would mean "being a human." This
equivocation on the meaning of*anniyya* is already prominent in Ustath's
translation of Aristotle's*Metaphysics* , which uses*anniyya* to
translate both*einai* ("to be" or "being" in the broadest sense) and*to
ti* *en einai* ("essence").37

The complex conception of being is illustrated in passages like the
following:

FP 117.3-5 [RJ 31.22-24]: If time is limited, then the being (*anniyya*
) of the body [of the universe] is limited, since time is not an
existent (*bi-mawjud* ), and there is no body without time, since time
is the number of motion.

FP 120.3-4 [RJ 35.21-22]: Body is not prior to time, so it is not
possible that the body of the universe have no limit, because of its
being (*li-anniyyatihi* ). So the being (*anniyya* ) of the body of the
universe is necessarily limited.

Such passages actually play on the double meaning of*anniyya* . The
simple conception is employed here insofar as al-Kindi is indeed talking
about the sheer**[End Page 306]** existence of the world, and whether
that existence is eternal. But the complex conception is also evident,
because he says in the second passage that the*anniyya* of the body of
the universe causes it to have a limited, temporal existence.38 Here it
would be more natural to understand*anniyya* as "nature" or "essence."
Indeed, at one point he makes a remark that equates*huwiyya* , "being,"
with*ma huwa* , "what a thing is" (FP 119.15-16 [RJ 35.14-15]).

The complex conception seems to underlie another frequent usage of the
words*anniyya* and*ays* , where they mean "a being." Thus*anniyyat*
and*aysat* can mean "beings,"*onta* , as mentioned briefly above in our
terminological survey. A typical instance in al-Kindi can be found in
his treatise*On the First True Agent* , where he writes that God's
creative act is a "bringing-to-be (*ta'yis* ) of beings (*aysat* ) from
non-being (*lays* )" (FP 182.7 [RJ 169.6]). Here*lays* seems to be the
opposite of*ays* in the simple sense, so that "non-being" means simple
non-existence. Likewise the verbal noun*ta'yis* seems to be based on
simple being, much in the spirit of the definitions of creation cited
above at the end of section 2. But the plural*aysat* seems more likely
to mean "beings" in the sense of fully constituted entities.39 These
will be beings of a particular sort, complete with the predicated
features that are excluded from simple being.

The same is true for a more extended meditation on being and essence at
the beginning of the third section of FP, where al-Kindi gives a lengthy
argument designed to show that a thing cannot be the cause of its own
essence. In typical Kindian style, he proceeds with an exhaustive
consideration of four possibilities. First, that neither the thing nor
its essence (*dhat* ) are "a being" (*ays* ), that is, that they do not
exist. Second, that the

thing is non-existent and its essence is existent; third, that the thing
exists but its essence is non-existent; and fourth and finally, that
both the thing and its essence exist. He shows that, on any of these
assumptions, the thing could not cause its own essence. The key to the
argument is the repeated insistence that the thing and its essence are
not distinct. For example, on the second assumption, the thing's

essence would be distinct from it, because distinct things are those for
which it is possible that something happen to one without happening to
the other. Therefore, if it happens to it that it be a non-being, and it
happens to its essence that it be a being, then its essence will not be
it. But the essence of every thing is itself [*wa-kull shay' fa-dhatuhu
hiya huwa* ]. (FP 123.18-124.3 [RJ 41.16-18])

At first glance this argument seems to be using exclusively the simple
conception of being, since it considers merely whether a thing or its
essence exists. But**[End Page 307]** the overall thrust of the argument
is that the being of a thing is the same as the being of its essence.
This seems explicitly to reject the simple conception of being. For the
whole point of the simple conception is that we can think about the
being of a thing in abstraction from thinking about the thing's
attributes, some of which will constitute its essence. Instead, al-Kindi
insists here that we cannot consider a thing to exist, to be "a being,"
without simultaneously considering it to be identical with its essence.
His argument turns on the double meaning of *dhat* , which can signify
"self" as well as "essence," so that *al-shay' ghayr dhatihi* means both
"the thing is distinct from its essence" and "the thing is distinct from
itself." 40 And the latter, of course, would be absurd. By insisting on
this point, al-Kindi is insisting on the complex notion of being, on
which we cannot distinguish being from having a certain essence.


