


Endnotes
[^1]: See the discussion of this question in A. Cortabarria Beitia, "À
partir de quelles sources étudier al-Kindi?",MIDEO 10 (1970): 83-108.

[^2]: In what follows I shall assume that Himsi was in fact the author
of the paraphrase and the source of its deviations from Plotinus,
contrary to the earlier supposition that the paraphrase was originally
by Porphyry (see, e.g., P. Thillet, "Indices Porphyriens dans la
Théologie d'Aristote," inLe Néoplatonisme , Colloques internationaux du
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Sciences Humaines,
Royaumont 9-13, Juin 1969 [Paris, 1971], 293-302, and S. Pinès, "Les
Textes dits plotiniens et le courant 'porphyrien' dans le néoplatonisme
grec," in ibid., 303-17). For the case against Porphyry and for Himsi as
the sole author, see F. Zimmermann, "The Origins of the So
CalledTheology of Aristotle ," in J. Kraye et al., eds.,Warburg
Institute Surveys and Texts XI: Pseudo-Aristotle in the Middle Ages
(London: Warburg Institute, 1986), 110-240, esp. 131-3. For an update of
Zimmermann's views on al-Kindi's circle, generally consonant with his
conclusions in this earlier paper, see "Proclus Arabus Rides
Again,"Arabic Sciences and Philosophy 4 (1994): 9-51. See further P.
Adamson,The Arabic Plotinus: A Philosophical Study of the "Theology of
Aristotle" (London: Duckworth, 2002).

[^3]: Because al-Kindi's works are so closely engaged with the
translations he commissioned, it is important to consider those
translations in any consideration of his philosophy. Often passages in
the extant Arabic versions of Aristotle or the Neoplatonists provide a
starting-point for understanding his philosophical works, and indeed
this will be my strategy below. For a superb analysis of the translation
movement under the 'Abbasids, see D. Gutas,Greek Thought, Arabic Culture
(London: Routledge, 1998); on al-Kindi's circle in particular 145-50.
See also G. Endress, "The Circle of al-Kindi," inThe Ancient Tradition
in Christian and Islamic Hellenism , G. Endress and R. Kruk, eds.
(Leiden: Research School CNWS, 1997), 43-76.

[^4]:K. fi 'l-Falsafa al-Ula (On First Philosophy ), 98.1-2. All
translations from al-Kindi and other texts are my own unless otherwise
noted. The Arabic texts for many philosophical works of al-Kindi can be
found in al-Kindi,Rasa'il al-Kindial-Falsafiyya , M. Abu Rida, ed.
(Cairo: 1950-53). Page and line citations are to Volume One of this work
unless otherwise noted.

A most welcome development in al-Kindi studies is the series edited by
Roshdi Rashed and Jean Jolivet,Oeuvres Philosophiques & Scientifiques
d'al-Kind i, appearing with Brill in five volumes. As yet, only the
first two have appeared (Volume One:L'Optique et la Catoptrique [Leiden:
Brill, 1997], Volume Two:Métaphysique et Cosmologie [Leiden: Brill,
1998]). But as the Arabic texts provided in this series will undoubtedly
be the standard edition in the future, I will give additional page and
line citations to Volume Two of this series where applicable, marked in
brackets and with the abbreviation RJ.

[^5]:R. fi kammiyya Kutub Aristutalis wa ma yuhtaju ilayhi fi tahsil
al-falsafa (On the Quantity of the Books of Aristotle and What is
Required for the Attainment of Philosophy ), Abu Rida, 363-84 at 384.9.

[^6]: The Arabic text for the*Theology* and other parts of the Arabic
Plotinus is in*Aflutin 'inda 'l-'Arab* , A. Badawi, ed. (Cairo: 1955).
Translations are my own, but for the reader's convenience section
numbers are taken from G.**Lewis's** English translation in***Plotini
Opera*** , P. Henry and H.-R. Schwyzer (Paris: Desclée de Brouwer,
1959), vol. 2. I also give references to Badawi's edition by page and
line numbers in brackets prefaced by "B." Thus, for example, the passage
just quoted is Prologue 11 and 14 [B 6.1 and 6.7-8].

For an argument aimed at showing that al-Kindi was the author of the
Prologue to the*Theology* , see C. D'Ancona Costa, "Al-Kindi on the
Subject Matter of the First Philosophy. Direct and Indirect Sources of
'Falsafa-l-Ula,' Chapter

One," inWas ist Philosophie im Mittelalter , J. A. Aertsen and A. Speer,
eds., Miscellanea Mediaevalia (Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 1998), 841-55.

[^7]: For the Arabic text, see O. Bardenhewer,Die pseudo-aristotelische
Schrift über das reine Gute (Frankfurt a.M.: Minerva, 1882). The best
English translation currently available can be found in St. Thomas
Aquinas,Commentary on the Book of Causes , Guagliardo et al., trans.
(Washington, D.C.: Catholic University Press, 1996).

[^8]: It is now well established that three separate texts represent an
original, united Arabic Plotinus paraphrase: theUthulujiyya (Theology of
Aristotle ); theSayings of the Greek Sage , which assembles various
texts attributed to "the Greek Sage" (al-Shaykh al-Yunan i); and the
pseudo-FarabianR. fi 'l-'Ilm al-Ilahi (Letter on Divine Science ). See
Zimmermann (1986), 113.

[^9]: M.-Th. D'Alverny, "Anniyya-Anitas," inMélanges offerts a Étienne
Gilson (Toronto: Pontifical Institute, 1959), 65. See also R. M. Frank,
"The Origin of the Arabic Philosophical TermAnniyya ,"Cahiers de Byrsa 6
(1956): 181-201, which argues for a Syriac derivation.

[^10]: G. Endress,Proclus Arabus: Zwanzig Abschnitte aus der Institutio
Theologica in arabischer Übersetzung (Beirut and Wiesbaden: Steiner
Verlag, 1973), 80.

[^11]:Theology of Aristotle , VIII.125.

[^12]: The translation is referred to above in n. 6. Thathuwiyya
andanniyya are in fact synonyms in this work can be verified by
comparing, for example,Letter on Divine Science (100), where the
paraphrase refers to God ashuwiyya faqat , with our text (C) below,
where God is calledanniyya faqat . Similarly, we find intellect referred
to as bothhuwiyya andanniyya (e.g.,Theology X.3 and VIII.122-4, 135,
respectively).

[^13]:Sayings of the Greek Sage IX.3 andTheology of Aristotle VII.19.
See below for further discussion of this usage.

[^14]: Foranniyya andhuwiyya as "being" in the abstract sense, see,
e.g., al-Kindi, FP 117.4 [RJ 31.22] and 113.2 [RJ 27.9], respectively.
Foranniyyat , "beings," see FP 97.14 [RJ 9.13]. Jolivet, incidentally,
translates both terms with the French "existence."

For further comment on the termanniyya , see G. Endress and D. Gutas,A
Greek-Arabic Lexicon (Leiden: Brill, 1997), Fasc. 4, 428-[^36]:

[^15]: For references to the range of usage in al-Kindi, see the
comments onays in Endress (1973), 104-5.

[^16]: See further Endress (1973), 104-5. Again, Jolivet
translatesaysiyya as "existence," and usually rendersays as "un
existant." In the short physical treatiseR. fi'l-Jirm al -Hamil
bi-Tiba'ihi al-Lawn min al-'anasir al-Arba'a wa alladhihuwa 'Illa
al-Lawn fiGhayrihi (On the Body that is by Nature the Bearer for the
Color of the Four Elements, and which is the Cause of the Color in
Things Other than Itself ), Abu Rida, vol. II, 64-8, al-Kindi equatesays
with "the existent" (al-mawjuda ), 66.3.

[^17]: Cf. Proclus,Elements of Theology , Proposition 70.

[^18]: See especially R. Taylor, "Aquinas, thePlotiniana Arabica and the
Metaphysics of Being and Actuality,"Journal of the History of Ideas 59
(1998): 241-64.

[^19]: SeeEnneads V.4.2, V.6.6; Plato,Republic 509b.

[^20]:Theology of Aristotle III.47 [B 51.13].

[^21]: See especiallyAl-Fa'il al-Haqq al-Awwal al-Tamm wa 'l-Fa'il
al-Naqis alladhi huwa bi-'l-Majaz (On the True, First Complete Agent and
the Deficient Agent that is Metaphorically [an Agent ]) Abu Rida 182-4.
In Arabic, as in English, the word for "act" or "actuality,"fi'l , has
the same root as the word "agent,"fa'il .

[^22]:Theology of Aristotle V.14, 40, X.2, 88, 175-81,Letter on Divine
Science 107,Sayings of the Greek Sage I.27-28. The thrust of these
passages is often that, since God is simple, He does not have a will or
thought process external to His essence that He uses in creation. Thus,
He creates "through being alone." See further below, n. 27.

[^23]: The same conclusion is reached by C. D'Ancona Costa in her
article "Causa prima superior est omni narratione. Il tema delle sifat
Allah nel primo neoplatonismo arabo," forthcoming inOriente Moderno . I
defend the claim in Adamson (2002), 5.4.4.

[^24]: This has also been suggested with regard to passage (C) in a
brief remark by J. Jolviet,L'Intellect selon Kind i (Leiden: Brill,
1971), 121. The close analogy between being and matter, both simple and
immediate effects of a simple God, is underscored by the similar
vocabulary applied literally to matter in the contemporaneous Arabic
version of Proclus'sElements of Theology , Proposition 72: "The first
bearer of predication (hamil), namely matter, bears all things and is an
intellectual substrate. The First Agent makes it, and He is the Agent of
all things." See Endress (1973), 25, lines 7-9 of the Arabic edition.

[^25]: Aristotle,Metaphysics 1029a13-26. One part of the passage in
particular could have inspired the view we find in (A) and (C): "by
matter I mean what in itself is not a 'something' (ti ) or a quality,
nor anything else by which being (to on ) is defined. For there is
something of which each of these is predicated (katêgoreitai ), for whom
'to be' (to einai ) is other than it is for each of the predicates (tôn
katêgoriôn )" (1029a20-24).

[^26]:K. fi 'l-Ibana 'an al-'Illa al-Fa'ila al-Qariba li-'l-Kawn
wa-'l-Fasad (On the Explanation of the Proximate Cause of Generation and
Corruption ), Abu Rida 214-37, at 215.4.

[^27]: FP 162.3 [RJ 97.10]. The same claim is found frequently in the
Arabic Plotinus. See, for example,Theology of Aristotle V.46
(bi-huwiyyatihi ), X.88 (bi-anniyya faqat ).

[^28]: The same conclusion is drawn by J. Janssens, "al-Kindi's Concept
of God,"Ultimate Reality and Meaning 17 (1994): 7.

[^29]: For a similar line of thought on al-Kindi's part in a very
different context, compare a passage from his treatise against the
Christian doctrine of the Trinity. (The treatise is preserved by Yahya
Ibn 'Adi, who quotes it piece by piece in order to refute it. See A.
Périer, "Un traité de Yahya ben 'Adi. Défense du dogme de la Trinité
contre les objections d'al-Kindi,"Revue de l'Orient Chrétien , 3rd
series, 22 [1920-21]: 3-21. The text is now also available at RJ 123-7.)
Here al-Kindi writes that "everything composed is caused (kull murakkab
ma'lul )" (Périer, 4 [RJ 123.16]). The point, again, is that God's
primacy is incompatible with multiplicity in any form.

The same point appears in the cosmological treatiseR. fi Wahdaniyya
Allah wa Tanahi Jirm al-'Alam (On the Oneness of God and the Finitude of
the Body of the World ), Abu Rida 201-7: "Therefore [the Agent] is not
multiple, but one, without multiplicity—may He be praised—and He is much
higher than the attributes of the heretics" ([^207]:14 [RJ 147.2-3]).

[^30]: O. Bardenhewer (1882), 65.4, 65.10. CompareTheology of Aristotle
X.9, which says that God creates the "being (huwiyya ) of intellect."
See also the analysis provided by C. D'Ancona Costa in "La doctrine de
la création 'mediante intelligentia' dans leLiber de Causes et dans ses
sources,"Revue des sciences philosophiques et théologiques 76 (1992):
209-33, repr. inRecherches sur le Liber de Causis , Études de
philosophie médiévale, vol. 72. (Paris: J. Vrin, 1995).

[^31]: The main distinction between the view as I have presented it and
what we find in Greek Neoplatonists like Plotinus and Proclus is that,
for the Greek thinkers, the First Principle transcends being. Treating
the Neoplatonists' One as the principle of being helps al-Kindi and his
translators with their project of making the First Principle of the
philosophers into the Creator of Christianity and Islam.

[^32]:FiHudud al-Ashya' wa Rusumiha (On the Definitions and Descriptions
of Things ), Abu Rida 165-79 at 165.11. For this treatise, which seems
to be a storehouse of technical definitions culled largely from Greek
sources, see F. Klein-Franke, "Al-Kindi's 'On Definitions and
Descriptions of Things,'"Le Muséon: Revue des Études Orientales 95
(1982): 191-216.

[^33]: In the Arabic Plotinus this thought is sometimes expressed by
saying that God is "above (fawqa )" the attributes, but can be said to
have them paradigmatically with this qualification. See for example
theLetter on Divine Science , 117-9 [B 175.11-15]: "Even though we say
that He is other than them, and other than substance, other than
intellect, and other than all other things, we do not say that He is not
a substance, nor do we say that He is lacking intellect, lacking sight,
and lacking knowledge. But we say that He is above substance, and above
intellect, above sight, and above knowledge . Therefore He is the
knowledge that is above every knowledge, because He is the First
Knowledge. . ." This is one of many features of the Arabic Plotinus
materials that have led C. D'Ancona Costa to argue that the author was
influenced by the Pseudo-Dionysius. See the articles collected in
D'Ancona Costa (1995), and more recently her article "Divine and Human
Knowledge in the Plotiniana Arabica," inThe Perennial Tradition of
Neoplatonism , J. L. Cleary, ed. (Leuven: Leuven University Press,
1997), 419-42.

[^34]: From a passage in Ash'ari'sMaqalat , cited in Richard M. Frank,
"The Divine Attributes According to the Teaching of Abu 'l-Hudhayl
al-'Allaf,"Le Muséon 82 (1969): 453. Other Mu'tazilites held similar
positions and, like Abu 'l-Hudhayl, juxtaposed them with a largely
apophatic theology. Thus it is reported that Najjar and Dirar held that
God possesses the attributes "by Himself" (li-nafsihi ), while Ibn
Kullab is ascribed the statement that "the attributes of God are
essential to Him (li-dhatihi )." See H. A. Wolfson,The Philosophy of the
Kalam (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1976), 208 and 223.

[^35]: This is often called the difference between the "is of
predication" and the "is of identity." I am not focusing on the role of
the verb "is" here, as has been done in scholarship on ancient
philosophy, for example in discussions of Plato'sSophist . (See G. E. L.
Owen, "Plato on Not-Being," and L. Brown, "Being in the Sophist: a
Syntactical Enquiry," both inPlato 1: Metaphysics and Epistemology , G.
Fine, ed. [Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999], 416-54 and 455-78.
See more generally C. Kahn, "The Greek Verb 'to Be' and the Concept of
Being,"Foundations of Language 2 [^1966] and the response by M. Matten,
"Greek Ontology and the 'Is' of Truth,"Phronesis 28 [1983]: 113-35.) I
avoid this because of the disanalogies between verbs for "to be" in
Arabic and those in Greek or English. For example there is no infinitive
and no present tense copula in Arabic. Indeed it is worth emphasizing
that the words al-Kindi and his translators use for "being" are
exclusivelynouns , even though they translate verbs.Anniyya , for
example, is a noun that often translateseinai , which is an infinitive.
See further F. Shehadi,Metaphysics in Islamic Philosophy (Delmar, NY:
Caravan Books, 1982), 5-9 for discussion of the similar distinction
between the "complete" and "incomplete" uses ofkana , 31ff. for the
absence of the copula.

[^36]: D'Alverny (1959), esp. 73-4. See also A. Ivry,Al-Kindi's
Metaphysics (Albany: The State University of New York Press, 1974),
120-1 and note on FP 97.13.

[^37]: D'Alverny, op. cit., 72-3.

[^38]: Similar uses ofanniyya appear in two treatises by al-Kindi that
directly parallel the text of FP,R. fi Mahiyya ma la Yumkinu an Yakuna
la Nihaya wa ma alladhi yuqalu la Nihaya lahu (On the Quiddity of what
Cannot be Infinite, and What is Said to Have Infinity ), Abu Rida 194-8,
and the aforementionedOn the Oneness of God and the Finitude of the Body
of the World (see n. 29).

[^39]: There would be a problem of individuation if we wanted to take
the "beings" to be simple, since by definition they would have no
features or predicates by which they could be distinguished. With this
in mind we should note the ambiguity of the definition of

"generation" cited above, where al-Kindi said that it is the
"coming-to-be of being (ays ) from non-being." Hereays could refer to a
sheer existence that has been generated, and that will underlie an
essence predicated of it. But given the cognate definition of creation
that invokes the coming-to-be of a plurality of "beings," we should
perhaps translate the earlier definition as the "coming-to-be ofa being
from non-being."

[^40]: Likewise, the very question al-Kindi is considering, namely
whether a thing can be the cause of its own essence, may more
intuitively be seen as the question of whether something can be the
cause of itself. One might therefore raise the question whetherdhat
should be translated as "self," not "essence," throughout the passage in
question. The problem with such an interpretation is that the argument
proceeds by making a conceptual distinction betweenal-shay' , the thing,
and itsdhat . But ifdhatuhu here means "itself," then there is no such
distinction to be made. Hence other translations of FP also takedhat to
signify essence throughout this passage; indeed, this translation is
defended on similar grounds at RJ 105-6,ad n. 36.

[^41]:R. fi annahu Tujadu Jawahir la Ajsam (That There Exist Incorporeal
Substances ), Abu Rida 265-9 at 266.1-3.

[^42]: Al-Kindi acknowledges that substances corrupt through the loss of
their essential properties inThat There Exist Incorporeal Substances .
Indeed this is the distinguishing feature of essential, as opposed to
accidental, properties: " . by 'essential' I mean what is such that,
when it is separated from the thing, the thing corrupts. The accidental
is what may be separated from what it is in, without the latter
corrupting" (266.10-11). This renders puzzling a second definition of
"substance" given inOn the Definitions and Descriptions of Things (see
n. 32): "It is also said: [substance] is what does not admit of
generation and corruption . in what is proper to its substance (fikhass
jawharihi )." This definition seems to state unequivocally that
substance doesnot corrupt. I would suggest that the difficulty may be
resolved either by supposing that the second definition refers only to
separate, incorruptible substances (like God), or, more likely, that we
are meant to read a great deal into the phrase "in what is proper to its
substance." That is, al-Kindi may be saying that substance does not
admit of generation or corruption and remain the same substance. So this
is just to reiterate that substances undergo only accidental change.

[^43]: This is suggestedby the fact that the attributes removed from
"man" in passage (A) are the standard examples of essential predicates:
living and rationality.

[^44]: For example, he beginsMetaphysics Z.1 by observing that "of the
many ways of saying 'being' (tou ontos ) it seems that the primary one
is what something is (to ti estin ), which refers to substance (ousian
)" (1028a). Thus, to return to the distinction between what a thing is
and that it is, being in the primary sense is for Aristotle associated
with what a thing is, not merely that it is. Even though Aristotle

is aware of the distinction, he is not particularly interested in it.
His lack of interest seems to stem from the fact that it does not in his
viewadd anything to our notion of substance. For example, inMetaphysics
G.4, Aristotle says that "existing man and man are the same, since
nothing else is clarified about an utterance by saying it twice, once
about a man, and again about an existing man" (1003b).

[^45]: Here I am simply assuming that the distinction does not appear
earlier—in Plotinus himself, for example. Others have claimed, wrongly I
think, that Plotinus does distinguish existence from essence, for
example K. Corrigan, "A Philosophical Precursor to the Theory of
Existence and Essence in St. Thomas Aquinas,"The Thomist 48 (1984):
219-40. If we were to find the distinction in al-Kindi and his
translators, those who hold that the distinction is made by Plotinus
might simply think of the Kindi circle texts as providing an accurate
interpretation of theEnneads . (My thanks to Verity Harte for this
erenic proposal.)

[^46]: Ibn Sina,Isharat wa 'l-Tanbihat , S. Dunya, ed. (Cairo: Dar
al-Ma'arif bi-Misr, 1957-60), vol. 3, 443.3-5.

[^47]: Ibn Sina,al-Shifa': al Ilahiyyat , G. Anawati, ed. (Cairo:
Organisation Générale des Imprimeries Gouvernementales, 1960), 347.10.

[^48]: See, for example,al-Shifa': al Ilahiyyat , 38.11-39.4.

[^49]: FP 123.3-124.16 [RJ 41.3-43.7].

[^50]: See A. M. Goichon,La Distinction de l'Essence et de l'Existence
d'après Ibn Si na (Paris: de Brouwer, 1937), 41-4. In G. Anawati,La
Métaphysique du Shifa' (Paris: J. Vrin, 1978),anniyya is variously
translated as "essence" and "être" depending on the context (see, e.g.,
85 and 87, respectively).

[^51]:al-Shifa': al-Nafs , G. C. Anawati and S. Zayid, eds. (Cairo:
1975), V.7, 225. (Also seeAvicenna's De Anima , F. Rahman, ed. [London:
Oxford University Press, 1959], 255.9.) For Ibn Sina's terminology here,
see D'Alverny,Anniyya-Anitas , 81. On the different versions of the
argument, see M. Marmura, "Avicenna's 'Flying Man' in Context,"Monist 69
(1986): 383-95.

[^52]: Ibn Sina,Isharat wa 'l-tanbihat , vol. 3, 460.1-462.1.
Translation from L. E. Goodman,Avicenna (New York: Routledge, 1992), 78.

[^53]: F. Rahman, "Essence and Existence in Avicenna,"Mediaeval and
Renaissance Studies 4 (1958): 1-16. For a more recent defense of the
same position, see D. Burrell, "Aquinas and Islamic and Jewish
Thinkers," inThe Cambridge Companion to Aquinas , N. Kretzmann and E.
Stump, eds. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993), esp. 65-70.

[^54]: See especially Ibn Sina's commentary on theTheology of Aristotle
, in A. Badawi, ed.,Aristu 'inda 'l-'Arab (Cairo: Maktaba al-Nahda
al-Misriyyah, 1947), 37-84; G. Vajda, French trans. "Les notes
d'Avicenne sur la 'Théologie d'Aristote,'"Revue Thomiste 51 (1951):
346-406.

[^55]: I am grateful for comments and suggestions from David Burrell,
Richard Taylor, members of the Philosophy Department at King's College
London, and the anonymous referees at the Journal.

Source: Journal of the History of Philosophy [^40]:3 (2002) 297-312


