


Text
Mu’awiyah ibn Abu Sufyan ibn Harb played a major role in distorting the
Islamic creed by paying writers to tailor design "traditions" to serve
his interests and support his deviated views. He installed himself as
ruler of Syria1 in 40 A.H./661 A.D. and ruled for twenty long years till
his death at the age of seventy-eight. Mu'awiyah declared himself
"caliph" in Syria when he was 59 years old and assumed authority by
sheer force.

He was neither elected nor requested to take charge. He did not hide
this fact; rather, he bragged about it once when he addressed the
Kufians saying, "O people of Kūfa! Do you think that I fought you in
order that you may establish prayers or give*zakat* or perform the
pilgrimage?! I know that you do pray, pay*zakat* and perform the
pilgrimage. Indeed, I fought you in order to take command over you with
contempt, and Allāh‎ has given me that against your wishes. Rest assured
that whoever killed any of us will himself be killed. And the treaty
between us of amnesty is under my feet."2

Shortly before his death, which took place in the month of Rajab of 60
A.H./May of 680 A.D., he managed to secure the oath of allegiance to his
corrupt and immoral son, Yazid, as his successor. He did so by
intimidation once and once by buying loyalty and favors, spending in the
process huge sums of money that belonged to the Muslims, funds of
their*baytul-mal* , state treasury. The weak-minded majority of the
Muslims of his time swore allegiance to him. This proves that the
majority does not necessarily have to be right. Imām‎ al-Hussain*(Alaiha
al-Salam)* *[Peace Be Upon Him]* , together with a small band of
devotees to the cause of truth, refused to bow their heads to the
oppressive forces.

Yet the worst type of mischief which Mu'awiyah committed was his
embarking on the task of fabricating*hadīth* , traditions detailing what
the Prophet of Islam*(Salla-a-Allahu Alaihi Wa Alihi Wa Sallam) [Peace
and Blessings Be Upon Him and His Household]* said or did.*Hadīth* is
one of the two sources of Islam’s legislative system, the Shari’a, the
other being the Holy Qur’ān. Selecting Imām‎ ‘Ali*(Alaiha al-Salam)*
*[Peace Be Upon Him]* as his lifetime’s adversary, Mu'awiyah soon found
out that his cause was hopeless. ‘Ali’s merits were very well recognized
by every Muslim while Mu'awiyah’s family and dismal conduct were the
objects of their contempt. Mu'awiyah’s past record was dark and shameful
whereas that of ‘Ali*(Alaiha al-Salam)* *[Peace Be Upon Him]* was
glorious and shining, full of heroism in defense of Islam.

In order to sustain his campaign and raise the status of his likes,
Mu'awiyah had to attract the remnant of some companions of the
Prophet*(Salla-a-Allahu Alaihi Wa Alihi Wa Sallam) [Peace and Blessings
Be Upon Him and His Household]* whose characters were known to be weak
and who had a genuine interest in the material things of this world, in
its vanishing riches. He employed them to fabricate traditions
custom-designed to his own tailoring. This trend of fabricating*hadīth*
constituted a grave danger to the integrity of the Islamic tenets. It
was very important to ward off such a danger. To expose such a trend to
the Muslims at large was very vital,

pivotal, of the highest priority. It would be accomplished by exposing
and disgracing those who embarked upon committing and nurturing such
terrible mischief. Imām‎ al-Hussain’s revolution broke out in order to
undertake this very task.

Let us now review a few samples of fabricated traditions3 .

The main figure “credited” with fabricating “traditions” by the
thousands was one Abu Hurayra. Who is this man?

In the year 7 A.H./629 A.D., a young and very poor man from the Daws
tribe of southern Arabia (Yemen) named Abu Hurayra met the
Prophet*(Salla-a-Allahu Alaihi Wa Alihi Wa Sallam) [Peace and Blessings
Be Upon Him and His Household]* immediately after the battle of Khaybar
and embraced Islam.

He is well known in history as “Abu Hurayra,” the fellow of the kitten,
after a kitten to which he was very much attached. His name shone
neither during the lifetime of the Prophet*(Salla-a-Allahu Alaihi Wa
Alihi Wa Sallam) [Peace and Blessings Be Upon Him and His Household]*
nor of the four righteous caliphs but during the un-Islamic reign of
terror of the Umayyads which lasted from 661 to 750 A.D.

It was then that the Islamic world witnessed an astronomical number of
“traditions” which were attributed, through this same Abu Hurayra, to
the Prophet of Islam*(Salla-a-Allahu Alaihi Wa Alihi Wa Sallam) [Peace
and Blessings Be Upon Him and His Household]* . Since these traditions,
known collectively as*hadīth,* constitute one of the two sources of the
Islamic legislative system, the*Sharī’a* , it is very important to shed
light on the life and character of this man.

Abū Hurayra is supposed to have quoted the Prophet*(Salla-a-Allahu
Alaihi Wa Alihi Wa Sallam) [Peace and Blessings Be Upon Him and His
Household]* as saying, "Allāh‎ has trusted three persons for His
revelation: Myself, Gabriel and Mu'awiyah." We wonder what Allāh‎ was
doing for the revelation when Mu'awiyah was in the camp of the infidels.
This quotation is cited by Ibn Asakir, Ibn Uday, Muhammed ibn Aa’ith,
Muhammed ibn Abd al-Samarqandi, Muhammed ibn Mubarak al-Suri and
al-Khateeb al-Baghdadi. They all quote Abū Hurayra as saying,

<p dir="rtl">
“سمعت رسول الله يقول: ان الله ائتمن على وحيه ثلاثة أنا و جبرائيل و
معاوية".
</p>

Imagine! He even puts his name before that of archangel
Gabriel!*Astaghfirullāh!*

According to al-Khateeb al-Baghdadi, Abū Hurayra claimed,

<p dir="rtl">
“ناول النبي معاوية سهما فقال: خذ هذا السهم حتى تلقاني به في الجنة!"
</p>

The Prophet*(Salla-a-Allahu Alaihi Wa Alihi Wa Sallam) [Peace and
Blessings Be Upon Him and His Household]* gave Mu'awiyah an arrow then
said to him, "Take this arrow until we meet in Paradise." What a lucky
arrow to enter Paradise! Let us stop here to discuss this man, Abū
Hurayra, who may have had the lion’s share in distorting the Prophet’s
Sunnah especially when we come to know that he was quoted by a host
of*tabi’īn* who in turn are quoted by hundreds others who in turn are
quoted by

thousands others..., and so on and so forth. This is why his name is in
the forefront of narrators of*hadīth* .

It is of utmost importance to expose the facts relevant to Abu Hurayra
so that Muslims may be cautious whenever they come across a tradition
narrated by him or attributed to him which, all in all, reached the
astronomical figure of 5,374 “traditions,” that is, more “traditions”
than anyone else in history...

This figure is questioned not only due to the short period during which
he saw the Prophet*(Salla-a-Allahu Alaihi Wa Alihi Wa Sallam) [Peace and
Blessings Be Upon Him and His Household]* but also due to the fact that
Abu Hurayra did not know how to read and write, and although he spent no
more than three years in the company of the Prophet*(Salla-a-Allahu
Alaihi Wa Alihi Wa Sallam) [Peace and Blessings Be Upon Him and His
Household]* , that is to say, on and off, whenever such company did not
involve any danger to his life.

This fact is supported by the renown compiler al-Bukhari, the most
famous compiler of*hadīth* , who endorses no more than 93 of them!
Muslim, another compiler of*hadīth* , endorses only 89 of Abū Hurayray’s
alleged*ahādīth* . The reader can easily conclude that this figure of
5,374 “traditions” is quite unrealistic when he comes to know that Abu
Bakr, friend of the Prophet*(Salla-a-Allahu Alaihi Wa Alihi Wa Sallam)
[Peace and Blessings Be Upon Him and His Household]* and one of the
earliest converts to Islam, narrated no more than 142 traditions. ‘Umar
ibn al-Khattab narrated no more than 537 traditions. ‘Othman ibn ‘Affan
narrated no more than 146 traditions.

And ‘Ali (ع), the man who was raised by the Prophet*(Salla-a-Allahu
Alaihi Wa Alihi Wa Sallam) [Peace and Blessings Be Upon Him and His
Household]* and who was always with him, following him like his shadow
for 32 years, and whose memory and integrity nobody at all can question,
narrated no more than 586 traditions.

All these men, especially ‘Ali*(Alaiha al-Salam)* *[Peace Be Upon Him]*
and Abu Bakr, spent many years of their lives in the company of the
Prophet*(Salla-a-Allahu Alaihi Wa Alihi Wa Sallam) [Peace and Blessings
Be Upon Him and His Household]* and did not hide when their lives were
in jeopardy, as is the case with Abu Hurayra, yet they did not narrate
except a tiny fraction of the number of “traditions,” many of which
cannot be accepted by logic and commonsense, narrated by or attributed
to Abu Hurayra.

These facts and figures are stated in the famous classic reference
titled*Siyar A’lām an-Nubalā’* سير أعلام النبلاء  by at-Thahbi. This is
why it is so important to discuss this man and expose the factories of
falsification of*hadīth* established by his benefactors, the Umayyads,
descendants and supporters of Abu Sufyan, then his son Mu’awiyah, then
his son Yazid, all of whom were outright hypocrites and had absolutely
nothing to do with Islam.

There is no agreement about what Abū Hurayra’s name was, nor when he was
born or when he died. Yet his name is said to be ‘Omayr ibn ‘Amir ibn
‘Abd Thish-Shari ibn Tareef, of the Yemenite tribe of Daws ibn ‘Adnan4 .

His mother's name is Umaima daughter of Safeeh ibn al-Harith ibn Shabi
ibn Abu Sa’b, also of the Daws tribe. His date of birth is unknown, but
he is said to have died in 57, 58, or 59 A.H., and that he had lived to
be 78. This would put the date of his birth at 677, 678 or 679 A.D.

Some say that his name was Abdul-Rahmān ibn Sakhr al-Azdi. He accepted
Islam in 7 A.H./628-9 A.D. immediately after the Battle of Khaybar, and
he was then more than thirty years old. He was one of those indigent
Muslims who had no house to live in, so they were lodged at the Suffa, a
row of rooms adjacent to the Prophet’s Mosque in Medīna. These residents
used to receive the charity doled out to them by other Muslims. He used
to see the Prophet*(Salla-a-Allahu Alaihi Wa Alihi Wa Sallam) [Peace and
Blessings Be Upon Him and His Household]* mostly when it was time to
eat. He missed most of the battles in defense of Islam waged after that
date although he was young and healthy and capable of serving in the
army.

What is the meaning of his*kunya* “Abū Hurayra”, man of the kitten? Ibn
Qutaybah al-Dainuri quotes Abū Hurayra on p. 93 of his book
titled*Al-Ma’arif* المعارف  as saying,

<p dir="rtl">
… و كنيت بأبي هريرة بهرة صغيرة كنت ألعب بها
</p>

“… And I was called ‘Abū Hurayra’ because of a small kitten I used to
play with.”

In his*Tabaqāt* book, Ibn Sa’d quotes Abū Hurayra as saying,

<p dir="rtl">
“كنت أرعى غنما و كانت لي هرة صغيرة فكنت اذا كان الليل وضعتها في شجرة
فاذا أصبحت أخذتها فلعبت بها فكنوني أبا هريرة"
</p>

“I used to tend to a herd, and I had a small kitten. When it was night
time, I would place her on a tree. When it was morning, I would take her
and play with her, so I was called ‘Abū Hurayra’ [man of the small
kitten].”

The Umayyads found in Abū Hurayra the right man to fabricate as many
"traditions" as they needed to support their un-Islamic practices and
then attribute them to the Prophet*(Salla-a-Allahu Alaihi Wa Alihi Wa
Sallam) [Peace and Blessings Be Upon Him and His Household]* , hence the
existence of such a huge number of traditions filling the books of the
Sunnah. And the Umayyads rewarded Abū Hurayra very generously.

When he came from Yemen to Hijaz, Abū Hurayra had only one single piece
of striped cloth to cover his private parts. When Mu'awiyah employed Abū
Hurayra to work in the factories producing custom-designed "traditions,"
he rewarded him by appointing him as the governor of Medīna. He also
married him off to a lady of prestige for whom Abū Hurayra used to work
as a servant and built him al-Aqeeq mansion. Who was that lady?

She was Bisra daughter of Ghazwan ibn Jābir‎ ibn Wahab of Banu Mazin,
sister of emir (provincial governor) Utbah ibn Ghazwan, an ally of Banu
Abd Shams, the man who was appointed by ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab as governor
of Basra. Utbah ibn Ghazwan عتبه بن غزوان was a famous*sahābi* and a
hero of Islam, and he died during the time of ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab.

Then Mu’awiyah married Abū Hurayra off to Utbah’s sister, Bisra, a
number of years after the death of her famous brother. He used to work
for Bisra as a servant. Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani mentions Bisra in the
first setion of his famous work*Al-Isaba fi Akhbar al-Sahāba* الاصابة في
أخبار الصحابة  and says the following about Bisra,

<p dir="rtl">
“و كانت قد استأجرته في العهد النبوي ثم تزوجها بعد ذلك لما كان مروان
يستخلفه في امرة المدينة على عهد معاوية
</p>

“She used to let him work for her during the time of the
Prophet*(Salla-a-Allahu Alaihi Wa Alihi Wa Sallam) [Peace and Blessings
Be Upon Him and His Household]* , then he married her after that when
Marwan [ibn al-Hakam] used to let him be in charge of Medīna during the
time of Mu’awiyah.” In his*Tabaqāt* , Ibn Sa’d quotes Abū Hurayra as
saying the following about his wife, Bisra,

<p dir="rtl">
أكريت نفسي من ابنة غزوان على طعام بطني و عقبة رجلي... فكانت تكلفني أن
أركب قائما، و أورد حافيا، فلما كان بعد ذلك زوجنيها الله فكلفتها أن تركب
قائمة و أن تورد حافية!!
</p>

“I placed myself at the service of the daughter of Ghazwan in exchange
for food for my stomach and for something to wear on my feet… She used
to order me to ride while serving her and to approach her barefoot to
serve her. After that, Allāh‎ made her my wife, so I ordered her to ride
as she served me and to approach me barefoot!!” Thus, Abū Hurayra “got
even” with the unfortunate lady!

Abū Hurayra found himself during the Umayyads’ reign of terror and
oppression a man of wealth and influence, owning slaves and having
servants. Prior to that, ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab appointed him as governor
of Bahrain for about two years during which Abū Hurayra amassed a huge
wealth, so much so that people complained about him to ‘Umar who called
him to account for it. Finding his excuse too petty to accept, ‘Umar
deposed him.

‘Umar also questioned him about the unrealistically abundant traditions
which he was attributing to the Prophet*(Salla-a-Allahu Alaihi Wa Alihi
Wa Sallam) [Peace and Blessings Be Upon Him and His Household]* ,
hitting him with his cane, reprimanding him for forging traditions and
even threatening to expel him from the Muslim lands.

All these details and more can be reviewed in famous references such
as:*Ar-Riyad an-Nadira* الرياض النضرة  by at-Tabari, in Vol. 4 of the
original Arabic text of al-Bukhari’s*Sahīh* , where the author quotes
Abū Hurayra talking about himself, in*Abū Hurayra* book by the Egyptian
scholar Mahmoud Abū Rayyah, in سير أعلام النبلاء  *Siyar A’lam
an-Nubala’* by al-Thahbi, in شرح نهج البلاغة  *Sharh Nahjul-Balāgha* *‎*
by Ibn Abul-Hadeed, in

البداية و النهاية*Al-Bidaya wal Nihaya* by Ibn Katheer, in طبقات
الفقهاء*Tabaqāt al-Fuqaha* by Ibn Sa'd (also famous as*Tabaqāt Ibn Sa'd*
), in تأريخ الأمم و الملوك*Tarikh al-Umam wal Muluk* by at-Tabari, in
تاريخ الخلفاء*Tarikh al-Khulafa* by as-Sayyuti, in فتح الباري*Fath
al-Bari* by Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani, in المستدرك*Al-Mustadrak* by
al-Hakim, and in numerous other references.

Yet some Muslims label Abū Hurayra as "Islam’s narrator," propagating
for his fabrications without first studying them in the light of the
Qur’ān‎ and going as far as invoking the Almighty to be pleased with
him....

Abdullāh ibn ‘Umar (ibn al-Khattab) claimed that the
Prophet*(Salla-a-Allahu Alaihi Wa Alihi Wa Sallam) [Peace and Blessings
Be Upon Him and His Household]* said, "You will see greed after me and
things with which you will disagree." People, he went on, asked, "O
Messenger of Allāh‎! What do you order us to do then?" The
Prophet*(Salla-a-Allahu Alaihi Wa Alihi Wa Sallam) [Peace and Blessings
Be Upon Him and His Household]* , Abdullāh continued, said, "Give the
governor what is his and plead to Allāh‎ for yours." Islam, true Islam,
never condones toleration of unjust rulers.

Another fabricated tradition is also narrated by Abdullāh ibn ‘Umar who
quotes the Prophet*(Salla-a-Allahu Alaihi Wa Alihi Wa Sallam) [Peace and
Blessings Be Upon Him and His Household]* supposedly saying, "Put up
with whatever conduct you do not like of your rulers because if you
abandon the جماعة Jama’a (group) even the distance of one foot then die,
you will die as unbelievers."

Surely many despots ruling the Muslim world nowadays can appreciate such
"traditions" and will not hesitate to publicize for them and be generous
to those who promote them; they would give them generous salaries and
build them mansions... Such fabricated "traditions" are not only in
total contrast with the Qur’ān‎ and the Sunnah as well as with other
verified traditions, they invite the Muslims to be the slaves of their
rulers.

This is exactly what Mu'awiyah wanted, and this is exactly what
so-called “Muslim” rulers like him want in our day and time...
Unfortunately for the Muslims and fortunately for their enemies, there
are many “Muslim” rulers like this Mu'awiyah. This is why there is
poverty, ignorance, dictatorship, injustice, oppression and subjugation
to the enemies of Islam throughout the Muslim world nowadays.

When Abu Hurayra came to the Prophet*(Salla-a-Allahu Alaihi Wa Alihi Wa
Sallam) [Peace and Blessings Be Upon Him and His Household]* , he was
young and healthy and, hence, capable of enlisting in the Prophet's
army. But he preferred to be lodged together with the Muslim destitute
at the Suffa referred to above. Most of the time which Abu Hurayra spent
with the Prophet*(Salla-a-Allahu Alaihi Wa Alihi Wa Sallam) [Peace and*

*Blessings Be Upon Him and His Household]* was during the lunches or
dinners the Prophet*(Salla-a-Allahu Alaihi Wa Alihi Wa Sallam) [Peace
and Blessings Be Upon Him and His Household]* hosted for those
destitute.

Abu Hurayra himself admitted more than once that he remained close to
the Prophet*(Salla-a-Allahu Alaihi Wa Alihi Wa Sallam) [Peace and
Blessings Be Upon Him and His Household]* so that he could get a meal to
eat. Another person who used to shower the destitutes of the Suffa with
his generosity was Ja’far ibn Abu Talib (588 - 629 A.D.), the Prophet's
cousin and a brother of ‘Ali ibn Abu Talib*(Alaiha al-Salam)* *[Peace Be
Upon Him]* . He was, for this reason, called “Abul Masakeen”, father of
the destitutes.

This is why Abu Hurayra used to regard Ja’far as the most generous
person next only to the Prophet*(Salla-a-Allahu Alaihi Wa Alihi Wa
Sallam) [Peace and Blessings Be Upon Him and His Household]* . When the
Prophet*(Salla-a-Allahu Alaihi Wa Alihi Wa Sallam) [Peace and Blessings
Be Upon Him and His Household]* mandated military service for all able
men in the Mu'ta expedition, Ja’far ibn Abu Talib did not hesitate to
respond to the Prophet's call, but Abu Hurayra, who considered Ja’far as
his patron, preferred not to participate, thus violating the order of
the Prophet*(Salla-a-Allahu Alaihi Wa Alihi Wa Sallam) [Peace and
Blessings Be Upon Him and His Household]* . History records the names of
those who did likewise.

In 21 A.H./642 A.D., during the caliphate of ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab, Abu
Hurayra was made governor of Bahrain. After two years, he was deposed
because of a scandal. The details of that scandal are recorded in the
books of Ibn ‘Abd Rabbih, the Mu’tazilite writer, and in Ibn al-Atheer's
famous classic book*Al-’Iqd al-Fareed* . A summary of that incident runs
as follows:

When Abu Hurayra was brought to him, ‘Umar said to him: “I have come to
know that when I made you governor of Bahrain, you did not even have
shoes to wear, but I am now told that you have purchased horses for one
thousand and six hundred dinars.” Abu Hurayra said, “I had horses which
have multiplied, and I received some as gifts.” ‘Umar then said, “I
would give you only your salary. This (amount) is a lot more than that
(more than your salary for both years). Pay the balance back
to*baytul-māl* (the Muslim state treasury)!”

Abu Hurayra said, “This money is not yours.” ‘Umar said, “By Allāh! I
would bruise your back!” Saying this, ‘Umar whipped Abu Hurayra till the
latter bled. Then ‘Umar thundered: “Now bring the money back!” Abu
Hurayra replied: “I am to account for it before Allāh.” ‘Umar said,
“This could be so only if you had taken it rightfully and had paid it
back obediently. I shall throw you back to your mother as though you
were dung so that she would use you to graze donkeys.” Some sources say
that ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab was able to extract ten thousand gold dinar
pieces from Abu Hurayra which were deposited at*baytul-māl* .

Even before becoming caliph, ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab was fully aware of
what type of person Abu Hurayra was, and he knew that the man did not
enjoy any respect among the Prophet’s*sahāba* . In his *Musnad* ,
Musaddad narrates through Khalid ibn Yahya who quotes his father quoting
Abu Hurayra himself saying that ‘Umar once reprimanded him on hearing
that he

was narrating incredibly too many traditions and attributing them to the
Prophet *(Salla-a-Allahu Alaihi Wa Alihi Wa Sallam) [Peace and Blessings
Be Upon Him and His Household]* . He rebuked him once and said,

<p dir="rtl">
“لتتركن الحديث عن رسول الله أو لألحقنك بأرض دوس أو بأرض القردة
</p>

“You shall leave alone quoting the Messenger of Allāh or I shall send
you back to the Daws land or to the land of apes.”

This same quotation is cited by Ibn Asakir and is*hadīth* No. 4885, p.
239, Vol. 5 of*Kanzul-Ummal* . The reader ought to remember than even
before becoming caliph, ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab was a man of power and
prestige, let alone being the Prophet’s father-in-law; so, his word
carried weight even then.

‘Umar had little or no toleration for people who abuse the
Prophet’s*hadīth* , so much so that on p. 34, Vol. 1, of his *Sahīh*
book, Muslim tells us that ‘Umar once hit Abu Hurayra during the
lifetime of the Prophet *(Salla-a-Allahu Alaihi Wa Alihi Wa Sallam)
[Peace and Blessings Be Upon Him and His Household]* so hard, causing
the man to fall on his rear end. Here are Muslim’s exact words as they
exist in his famous *Sahīh* book which is one of the main 6 books of
traditions:

<p dir="rtl">
انه (عمر) ضربه على عهد النبي ضربة خر بها لأسته
</p>

As for ‘Ali ibn Abu Talib*(Alaiha al-Salam)* *[Peace Be Upon Him]* , he
came to know that Abu Hurayra used to say, “My friend (meaning the
Messenger of Allāh) talked to me,” or “I saw my friend,” so he said to
him,

<p dir="rtl">
متى كان النبي خليلك يا أبا هريرة؟
</p>

When did the Prophet*(Salla-a-Allahu Alaihi Wa Alihi Wa Sallam) [Peace
and Blessings Be Upon Him and His Household]* ever be your friend, O Abu
Hurayra?!” as we read on p. 52 of Ibn Qutaybah’s work تأويل مختلف
الأحاديث*Ta’weel mukhtalaf al-ahādīth* .

According to the sequence employed by Ibn Sa’d in his*Tabaqāt* , Abu
Hurayra ranks in the ninth or tenth class of narrators of*hadīth* . He
came to the Messenger of Allāh near the end of the seventh Hijri year.
Hence, historians say that he accompanied the Prophet*(Salla-a-Allahu
Alaihi Wa Alihi Wa Sallam) [Peace and Blessings Be Upon Him and His
Household]* no more than three years5 according to the best estimates,
while other historians say it was no more than two years if we take into
consideration the fact that the Prophet*(Salla-a-Allahu Alaihi Wa Alihi
Wa Sallam) [Peace and Blessings Be Upon Him and His Household]* sent him
to accompany Ibn al-Hadrami to Bahrain, then the Messenger of Allāh died
while he was still in Bahrain.6

Abu Hurayra was not known for his*jihad* or valour, nor was he among
those who were regarded as brilliant thinkers, nor among the jurists who
knew the Qur’ān by heart, nor did he even know how to read and write...
Yet the man of the kitten became famous for the abundance of*ahādīth*
which he used to narrate about the Messenger of Allāh.

This fact attracted the attention of verifiers of*hadīth* especially
since he had not remained in the company of the Prophet*(Salla-a-Allahu
Alaihi Wa*

*Alihi Wa Sallam) [Peace and Blessings Be Upon Him and His Household]*
for any length of time and to the fact that he narrated traditions
regarding battles which he had never attended.

Some verifiers of*hadīth* gathered all what was narrated by the
righteous caliphs as well as by the ten men given the glad tidings of
going to Paradise in addition to what the mothers of the faithful and
the purified Ahl al-Bayt, and they did not total one tenth of what Abu
Hurayra had narrated all alone.

Then fingers were pointed at Abu Hurayra charging him with telling lies
and with fabricating***and forging hadīth*** . Some went as far as
labelling him as the first narrator in the history of Islam thus
charged. Yet he is called by some Muslim narrators and is surrounded
with a great deal of respect. They totally rely on him, even go as far
as saying “*Radiya Allhu ‘anhu”* , Allāh pleased with him, whenever they
mention his name.

Some of them may even regard him as being more knowledgeable than
‘Ali*(Alaiha al-Salam)* *[Peace Be Upon Him]* due to one particular
tradition which he narrates about himself and in which he says, “I said,
‘O Messenger of Allāh! I hear a great deal of your*hadīth* which I have
been forgetting!' The Prophet*(Salla-a-Allahu Alaihi Wa Alihi Wa Sallam)
[Peace and Blessings Be Upon Him and His Household]* said, ‘Stretch your
mantle! I had created the heavens, the earth, and all creation in seven
days.’”

When ‘Umar heard about it, he called him in and asked him to repeat
that*hadīth* . Having heard him repeating it, ‘Umar struck him and said
to him, “How so when Allāh Himself says it was created in six days,
while you yourself now say it was done in seven?!” Abu Hurayra said,
“Maybe I heard it from Ka’b al-Ahbar...” ‘Umar said, “Since you cannot
distinguish between the Prophet's*ahādīth* and what Ka’b al-Ahbar says,
you must not narrate anything at all.”7

We have to stop here to discuss who this Ka’b al-Ahbar كعب الأحبار was.

He is “Abu Ishaq” Ka‘b ibn Matti (Matthew) al-Himyari al-Ahbār, a
prominent rabbi from Yemen. He belonged to the clan of Thu Ra'in or Thu
al-Kila’ from the Arab Himyari tribe to which Balqees, the Queen of
Saba’ (Sheba), wife of Prophet Solomon, belonged. Ka’b was Arab by
birth, Jewish by faith.

Before quoting what others have said about Ka’b al-Ahbar, the author of
this book wrote this footnote for p. 102 of Dr. Muhammed al-Tijani
al-Samawi’s book*Shi’as are the Ahl al-Sunnah* :

His full name is “Abu Ishaq” Ka’b ibn Mati’ (Matti, Matthew) (d. 32
A.H./652 A.D.). He was a Jew from Yemen who pretended to have embraced
Islam then went to Medina during the reign of ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab. Then
he went to Syria to be one of Mu’awiyah’s advisors. He died in Homs,
Syria. He is believed to have succeeded in injecting a great deal of
Judaicas into the Islamic beliefs.

Muslims are divided in their judgment of this man and his influence on
the Islamic creed and on its followers:

1. Some Sunnis say that the man accepted Islam during the time of ‘Umar
ibn al-Khattab, so they count him among the*tabi’in* , quoting many of
his Isra’iliyyat (Judaicas). Some other Sunni scholars say that he

remained Jewish till his death in Homs, Syria, during the time of Othman
ibn Affan after serving for a number of years as advisor to Mu’awiyah
ibn Abu Sufyan, having lived more than a hundred years, which is more
accurate.

Ka’b accompanied ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab during his trip to Jerusalem
(al-Quds). He helped locate the foundations of the ancient Jewish temple
where ‘Umar built the Aqsa Mosque. He also later helped find the place
of the Rock. ‘Umar cleaned it from rubble and fenced it, and an Umayyad
ruler later built the Dome of the Rock over it as an integral part of
the Aqsa Mosque.

As regarding the “traditions” which he succeeded to infiltrate into
Islamic literature, al-Bukhari does not quote any of them at all. There
is one narration in Muslim transmitted from Ka’b al-Ahbar through the
authority of none other than this Abu Hurayra who reported it relying on
the authority of al-A’mash who cited Abu Salih. Muslim, Abu Dāwūd and
al-Tirmithi have recorded his “*hadīth* ”. Some of his “*hadīth* ” is
included in al-Qurtubi’s*Tafsīr* on Chapter Ghāfir (Ch. 40 of the Holy
Qur’ān).

Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani, a 14th century Sunni Shafi'i Islamic scholar,
regards Ka’b al-Ahbar as being trustworthy (calling him*thiqah* ),
ranking him in the second *tabaqa* (class of reporters of *hadīth* ).

2. As regarding what Shi'ite Muslims think of this Jewish rabbi, all
their scholars without any exception reject him, discard his stories,
which he narrated from the Torah, and warn against accepting his
narratives. According to Shi’ites, ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab and a number of
prominent companions had a very positive attitude towards Ka’b.

However, the most knowledgeable and the most farsighted among them,
namely Imām ‘Ali*(Alaiha al-Salam)* *[Peace Be Upon Him]* , discredited
Ka’b who did not dare to come close to Imām ‘Ali*(Alaiha al-Salam)*
*[Peace Be Upon Him]* despite the fact that the Imām*(Alaiha al-Salam)*
*[Peace Be Upon Him]* was in Medina for the duration of Ka’b's stay. It
is reported that Imām ‘Ali*(Alaiha al-Salam)* *[Peace Be Upon Him]* said
about Ka’b: “Certainly he is a professional liar!”

One of the contemporary Shi’ite scholars who have expressed their
opinion about Ka’b al-Ahbar is Dr. Muhammad al-Tijani al-Samawi, a
convert to Shi’ite Islam from the Tijani Sufi*tarīqa* . Al-Tijani’s
ancestors had originally come from Samawa, Iraq, but he was born in
Tunisia on February 2, 1943 and earned two Ph.D. degrees one of which
was from the Sorbonne (University of Paris).

He is famous for his first book titled*Then I was guided* in which he
narrates his experience with converting from Sunni to Shi’ite Islam. The
author of this book translated al-Tijani’s book titled*Shi’as are the
Ahl al-Sunnah* to which reference is made in this Volume and in other
books which he has written. Al-Tijani discredits Ka’b and makes a
reference to him on these pages of his work referred to above: 74, 102,
208, 209 and 215. Here is what al-Tijani says about Ka’b al-Ahbar on p.
215:

Judaica and Jewish doctrines have filled the books of*hadīth* . Ka’b
al-Ahbar, a Jew, may have succeeded in getting such doctrines and
beliefs included into the books of*hadīth* , hence we find traditions
likening or

personifying Allāh, as well as the theory of incarnation, in addition to
many abominable statements about the prophets and messengers of Allāh:
All of these are cited through Abu Hurayra.

Imām Muhammad Jawad Chirri (who was born in Lebanon on October 1, 1905
and died in Dearborn, Michigan, on November 10, 1994), a 21st century
Shi'a Islamic scholar, is credited for getting the Azhar University of
Islam to issue on July 1, 1959 a statement recognizing the Shi’ite
Ja’fari School of Islamic Thought. He is more famous for two books which
he wrote:*The Brother of the Prophet Muhammad, The Imām ‘Ali* and
*Inquiries about Islam* . Having quoted one *hadīth* , Chirri wrote
saying,

This dialogue should alert us to the deceptive and successful attempt on
the part of Ka'b to influence future events by satanic suggestions. It
contains a great deal of deception which produced many harmful results
to Islam and the Muslims.

Now it is up to the reader to make up his mind whether we, Muslims,
should pay attention to what this Jewish rabbi had said or not.

It is also narrated that ‘Ali ibn Abu Talib*(Alaiha al-Salam)* *[Peace
Be Upon Him]* has said, “Among all the living, the person who has told
the most lies about the Messenger of Allāh is Abu Hurayra al-Dawsi,” as
we read on p. 28, Vol. 4, of Ibn Abul-Hadeed’s*Sharh Nahjul-Balāgha* .
Mother of the faithful ‘Ā’isha, too, testified to his being a liar
several times in reference to many*ahādīth* which he used to attribute
to the Messenger of Allāh. For example, she resented something which he
had once said so she asked him,

<p dir="rtl">
ما هذه الأحاديث التي تبلغنا أنك تحدث بها عن النبي؟ هل سمعت الا ما سمعنا
و رأيت الا ما رأينا؟
</p>

“What are all these ahādīth which reach us and which you tell people
that the Prophet*(Salla-a-Allahu Alaihi Wa Alihi Wa Sallam) [Peace and
Blessings Be Upon Him and His Household]* said them? Have you heard
anything which we did not hear, or have you seen anything which we did
not see?”

In a rude and impolite way, Abu Hurayra answered the Mother of the
Faithful with these words:

<p dir="rtl">
يا أماه! انه كان يشغلك عن رسول الله المرآة و المكحلة
</p>

“Mother! The mirror and the kohl diverted you from the*hadīth* of the
Messenger of Allāh.”

This text exists on p. 509, Vol. 3 of al-Hakim’s*Sahīh al-Mustadrak* ,
and al-Thahbi testified to its authenticity, adding that ‘Ā’isha did not
accept Abu Hurayra’s excuse by the token she boycotted him till she
died. Marwan ibn al-Hakam, her cousin, interfered and took upon himself
to verify one*hadīth* the authenticity of which ‘Ā’isha questioned.

It was then that Abu Hurayra admitted, “I did not hear it from the
Messenger of Allāh; rather, I heard it from al-Fadl ibn al-’Abbas,” as
we are told on p. 232, Vol. 2 of al-Bukhari’s*Sahīh* in a chapter
dealing with a fasting person who wakes up finding himself in the state
of*janaba* , and also on p. 272, Vol. 1, of Malik’s*Mawta'* . It is
because of this particular

narration that Ibn Qutaybah charged him with lying saying, “Abu Hurayra
claimed that al-Fadl ibn al-’Abbas,*who had by then died* , testified to
the authenticity of that tradition which he attributed to him in order
to mislead people into thinking that he had heard it from him.”8

In his book titled*Ta'weel al-Ahādīth* , Ibn Qutaybah says, “Abu Hurayra
used to say: ‘The Messenger of Allāh said such-and-such, but I heard it
from someone else.” In his book*Siyar A’lam al-Nubala* , al-Thahbi says
that Yazid ibn Ibrahim once cited Shu’bah ibn al-Hajjaj saying that Abu
Hurayra used to commit forgery.

In his book*Al-Bidaya wal Nihaya* , Ibn Katheer states that Yazid ibn
Haroun heard Shu’bah ibn al-Hajjaj accusing Abu Hurayra of the same,
that is, that he forges*hadīth* , and that he used to narrate what he
used to hear from Ka’b al-Ahbar as well as from the Messenger of Allāh
without distinguishing one from the other.

Ja’far al-Iskafi has said, “Abu Hurayra is doubted by our mentors; his
narrations are not acceptable.”9

During his lifetime, Abu Hurayra was famous among the*sahāba* of lying
and forgery and of narrating too many fabricated*ahādīth* to the extent
that some of the*sahāba* used to deride him and ask him to
fabricate*ahādīth* agreeable with their own taste.

For example, a man from Quraysh put on once a new*jubba* (a long outer
garment) and started showing off. He passed by Abu Hurayra and
sarcastically said to him, “O Abu Hurayra! You narrate quite few
traditions about the Messenger of Allāh; so, did you hear him say
anything about my*jubba* ?!” Abu Hurayra said, “I have heard the father
of al-Qasim saying, ‘A man before your time was showing off his outfit
when Allāh caused the earth to cave in over him; so he has been rattling
in it and will continue to do so till the Hour.' By Allāh! I do not know
whether he was one of your people or not.”10

How can people help doubting Abu Hurayra's traditions since they are so
self-contradictory? He narrates one*hādīth* then he narrates its
opposite, and if he is opposed or his previously narrated traditions are
used against him, he becomes angry or starts babbling in the Ethiopian
language. 11

How could they help accusing him of telling lies and of forgery after he
himself had admitted that he got traditions out of his own pouch then
attributed them to the Prophet*(Salla-a-Allahu Alaihi Wa Alihi Wa
Sallam) [Peace and Blessings Be Upon Him and His Household]* ?

Al-Bukhari, in his*Sahīh* , states the following:

Abu Hurayra said once, “The Prophet*(Salla-a-Allahu Alaihi Wa Alihi Wa
Sallam) [Peace and Blessings Be Upon Him and His Household]* said, ‘The
best charity is willingly given; the higher hand is better than the
lower one, and start with your own dependents. A woman says: ‘Either
feed me or divorce me.' A slave says, ‘Feed me and use me.' A son says,
‘Feed me for the woman who will forsake me.'” He was asked, “O Abu
Hurayra! Did you really hear the Messenger of Allāh say so?” He said,
‘No, this one is from Abu Hurayra's pouch!”12

Notice how he starts this “tradition” by saying, “The
Prophet*(Salla-a-Allahu Alaihi Wa Alihi Wa Sallam) [Peace and Blessings
Be Upon Him and*

*His Household]* said,” then when they refuse to believe what he tells
them, he admits by saying, “... this one is from Abu Hurayra's pouch!”
So congratulations to Abu Hurayra for possessing this pouch which is
full of lies and myths, and for which Mu’awiyah and Banu Umayyah
provided a great deal of publicity, and because of which he acquired
position, authority, wealth, and mansions. Mu’awiyah made him the
governor of Medina and built him the Aqeeq mansion then married him off
to a woman of honorable descent for whom he used to work as a servant...

Since Abu Hurayra was the close vizier of Mu’awiyah, it is not due to
his own merits, honor, or knowledge; rather, it is because Abu Hurayra
used to provide him with whatever traditions he needed to circulate. If
some*sahāba* used to hesitate in cursing “Abu Turab,” namely Commander
of the Faithful ‘Ali ibn Abu Talib*(Alaiha al-Salam)* *[Peace Be Upon
Him]* , the man who was raised by the Prophet*(Salla-a-Allahu Alaihi Wa
Alihi Wa Sallam) [Peace and Blessings Be Upon Him and His Household]* ,
who married the Prophet’s sinless daughter Fatima and founded the first
Infallible Family in Islam, who fought for Islam like a lion, a man for
whose knowledge*Nahjul-Balāgha* book testifies, the man whose true worth
is known only by Allāh and the Messenger of Allāh…, finding such cursing
to be embarrassing, Abu Hurayra cursed ‘Ali*(Alaiha al-Salam)* *[Peace
Be Upon Him]* in his own house and as his Shi’as heard:

Ibn Abul-Hadeed narrates the following:

When Abu Hurayra came to Iraq in the company of Mu’awiyah in the Year of
the Jama’a, he came to Kufa's Mosque. Having seen the huge number of
those who welcomed him, he knelt down then beat his bald head and said,
“O people of Iraq! Do you claim that I tell lies about the Messenger of
Allāh and thus burn myself in the fire?!

By Allāh! I heard the Messenger of Allāh saying, ‘Each prophet has a
sanctuary, and my sanctuary is in Medina from Eer to [the mountain of]
Thawr; so, anyone who makes it unclean will be cursed by Allāh, the
angels, and all people, and I bear witness that ‘Ali had done so.” When
Mu’awiyah came to hear this statement, he gave him a present, showered
him with his generosity and made him governor of Medina (then capital of
the Islamic world).13

Suffices us to point out to the fact that he was created governor of
Medina by none other than Mu’awiyah. There is no doubt that verifiers
and researchers who are free from prejudice will doubt anyone who
befriended the enemy of Allāh and His Messenger and who was antagonistic
towards the friends of Allāh and of His Messenger...

There is no doubt that Abu Hurayra did not reach that lofty position of
authority, namely being the governor of Medina, the then capital of the
Islamic domains, except by virtue of the services which he had rendered
to Mu’awiyah and other authoritative Umayyads. Praise to the One Who
changes the conditions!

Abu Hurayra had come to Medina with nothing to cover his private parts
other than a tiny striped piece of cloth, begging passers-by to feed
him. Then he suddenly became ruler of the sacred precincts of Medina,
residing in the Aqeeq mansion, enjoying wealth, servants and slaves, and
nobody

could say a word without his permission. All of this was from the
blessings of his pouch!

Do not forget, nor should you be amazed, when nowadays we see the same
plays being repeatedly enacted, and history certainly repeats itself.
How many ignorant indigent persons sought nearness to a ruler and joined
his party till they became feared masters who do and undo, issuing
orders as they please, having a direct access to wealth without being
accounted for it, riding in automobiles without being watched, eating
foods not sold on the market...?

One such person may not even know how to speak his own language, nor
does he know a meaning for life except satisfying his stomach and sexual
appetite. The whole matter is simply his having a pouch like the one Abu
Hurayra used to have with some exception, of course, yet the aim is one
and the same: pleasing the ruler and publicizing for him in order to
strengthen his authority, firm his throne, and finish his foes.

Abu Hurayra loved the Umayyads and they loved him since the days of
‘Othman ibn ‘Affan, their leader. His view with regard to ‘Othman was
contrary to that of all the*sahāba* who belonged to the Muhājirūn and
the Ansār‎; he regarded all the*sahāba* who participated in or
encouraged the killing of ‘Othman as apostates.

Undoubtedly, Abu Hurayra used to accuse ‘Ali ibn Abu Talib*(Alaiha
al-Salam)* *[Peace Be Upon Him]* of killing ‘Othman. We can derive this
conclusion from the statement he made at Kufa's mosque and his saying
that ‘Ali*(Alaiha al-Salam)* *[Peace Be Upon Him]* made Medina unclean
and that he, therefore, was cursed by the Prophet*(Salla-a-Allahu Alaihi
Wa Alihi Wa Sallam) [Peace and Blessings Be Upon Him and His Household]*
, the angels, and everyone else. For this reason, Ibn Sa’d indicates in
his*Tabaqāt* that when Abu Hurayra died in 59 A.H./679 A.D., ‘Othman's
descendants carried his coffin and brought it to the Baqee’ to bury it
as an expression of their appreciation of his having had high regards
for ‘Othman. 14

Surely Allāh has his own wisdom in faring with His creation. ‘Othman ibn
‘Affan, the master of Quraysh and their greatest, was killed although he
was the Muslims' caliph bearing the title of “Thul-Noorayn” and of whom,
according to their claim, the angels feel shy.

Yet his corpse did not receive the ceremonial burial bath nor was it
shrouded; moreover, it was not buried for full three days after which it
was buried at Medina's then Jewish cemetery. Abu Hurayra died after
having enjoyed pomp and power. He was an indigent man whose lineage and
tribal origins were not known to anybody. He had no kinship to Quraysh.

Despite all of this, the caliph's sons, who were in charge of running
the affairs during Mu’awiyah's reign, took to bearing his corpse and to
burying it at the Baqee’ where the Messenger of Allāh was buried...! But
let us go back to Abu Hurayra to examine his attitude towards the
Prophet's Sunna.

In his*Sahīh* , al-Bukhari quotes Abu Hurayra as saying,

<p dir="rtl">
حفظت عن رسول الله وعاءين فأما أحدهما فبثثته، و أما الآخر فلو بثثته قطع
هذا البلعوم
</p>

I learned the fill of two pouches (receptacles) [of*ahādīth* ] from the
Messenger of Allāh: I have disseminated only one of them; as for the
other, if I disseminate it, this throat will be slit,” as we are told on
p. 38, Vol. 1, of al-Bukhari’s*Sahīh.*

Here is Abu Hurayra revealing what erstwhile is hidden, admitting that
the only traditions he quoted were the ones that pleased the ruling
authorities. Building upon this premise, Abu Hurayra used to have two
pouches, or two receptacles, as he called them. He used to disseminate
the contents of one of them, the one which we have discussed here that
contains whatever the rulers desired.

As for the other, which Abu Hurayra kept to himself and whose*ahādīth*
he did not narrate for fear his throat would be slit, it is the one
containing the authentic traditions of the Prophet*(Salla-a-Allahu
Alaihi Wa Alihi Wa Sallam) [Peace and Blessings Be Upon Him and His
Household]* . Had Abu Hurayra been a reliable authority, he would never
have hidden true*ahādīth* while disseminating illusions and lies only to
support the oppressor, knowing that Allāh curses whoever hides the clear
evidence.

On p. 37, Vol. 1, of the same reference, we find al-Bukhari quoting him
saying once, “People say that Abu Hurayra narrates too many*ahādīth* .
Had it not been for two [particular] verses in the Book of Allāh, I
would not have narrated a single *hadīth* :

‘Those who conceal what We have revealed of clear proofs and the
guidance, after Our having clarified [everything] for people in the
Book, these it is whom Allāh shall curse, and those who curse shall
curse them, too' (Qur’ān, 2:159).

Our brethren from the Muhājirūn used to be busy consigning transactions
at the market-place, while our brethren from the Ansār used to be busy
doing business with their own money, while Abu Hurayra kept in the
shadow of the Prophet*(Salla-a-Allahu Alaihi Wa Alihi Wa Sallam) [Peace
and Blessings Be Upon Him and His Household]* in order to satisfy his
hunger, attending what they did not attend, learning what they did not
learn.”

How can Abu Hurayra say that had it not been for a couple of verses in
the Book of Allāh, he would not have narrated a single*hadīth* , then he
says, “I learned two receptacles [of*ahādīth* ] from the Messenger of
Allāh: I have disseminated one of them; as for the other, if I
disseminate it, this throat will be slit”?! Is this not his admission of
having concealed the truth despite both verses in the Book of Allāh?!

Had the Prophet*(Salla-a-Allahu Alaihi Wa Alihi Wa Sallam) [Peace and
Blessings Be Upon Him and His Household]* not said to his companions,
“Go back to your people and teach them”? as we read on p. 30, Vol. 1, of
al-Bukhari’s*Sahīh* .

Had he not also said, “One who conveys is more aware than one who
hears”? Al-Bukhari states that the Prophet*(Salla-a-Allahu Alaihi Wa
Alihi Wa Sallam) [Peace and Blessings Be Upon Him and His Household]*
urged the deputation of ‘Abd Qays to learn belief and scholarship “...
Then convey what you learn to those whom you have left behind,” as you
can read on the same page of the previous reference.

Can we help wondering: Why should the throat of a*sahābi* be slit if he
quotes the Prophet*(Salla-a-Allahu Alaihi Wa Alihi Wa Sallam) [Peace and
Blessings Be Upon Him and His Household]* ?! There must be a secret here
which the caliphs do not wish others to know. Here, we would like to
briefly say that “the people of the remembrance أهل الذكر” was [a phrase
in] a Qur’ānic verse revealed to refer to ‘Ali's succession of the
Prophet*(Salla-a-Allahu Alaihi Wa Alihi Wa Sallam) [Peace and Blessings
Be Upon Him and His Household]* . Actually, this phrase “أهل الذكر”
carries a greater meaning than “the people of the remembrance.”

The word الذكر  referred to in this Qur’ānic phrase means the Holy
Qur’ān. So, the more accurate meaning of it should be: “the people who
have with them the knowledge of the Qur’ān.” Is there anyone else in
Islamic history besides the Prophet of Islam*(Salla-a-Allahu Alaihi Wa
Alihi Wa Sallam) [Peace and Blessings Be Upon Him and His Household]*
who knew the Holy Qur’ān better than ‘Ali*(Alaiha al-Salam)* *[Peace Be
Upon Him]* ?

Abu Hurayra is not to blame; he knew his own worth and testified against
his own soul that Allāh cursed him, and so did those who curse, for
having hidden the Prophet's*hadīth* . But the blame is on those who call
Abu Hurayra the “narrator of the Sunna” while he himself testifies that
he hid it then testifies that he fabricated it and told lies in its
regard, then he further goes on to testify that it became confused for
him, so he could not tell which one was the statement of the Prophet
*(Salla-a-Allahu Alaihi Wa Alihi Wa Sallam) [Peace and Blessings Be Upon
Him and His Household]* and which one was made by others. All of these
*ahādīth* and correct admissions are recorded in al-Bukhari's *Sahīh*
and in other authentic books of *hadīth* .

How can anyone feel comfortable about a man whose justice was doubted by
the Commander of the Faithful ‘Ali ibn Abu Talib*(Alaiha al-Salam)*
*[Peace Be Upon Him]* who charged him with lying, saying that among the
living, nobody told more lies about the Prophet*(Salla-a-Allahu Alaihi
Wa Alihi Wa Sallam) [Peace and Blessings Be Upon Him and His Household]*
than Abu Hurayra?!

‘Umar ibn al-Khattab, too, charged him of the same; he beat him and
threatened to expel him. ‘Āyisha doubted his integrity and many times
called him a liar, and many other*sahāba* cast doubts about his
credibility and rejected his contradictory*ahādīth* , so he would once
admit his error and would sometimes prattle in Ethiopian language
(Amharic).15

A large number of Muslim scholars refuted his traditions and charged him
with lying, fabricating, and throwing himself at Mu’awiyah's dinner
tables, at his coffers of gold and silver.

Is it right, then, for Abu Hurayra to become “Islam's narrator” from
whom the religion's injunctions are learned?

Finally, there are more “traditions” narrated by Abu Hurayra which
apparently came from Ka’b al-Ahbar and are cited in Volume One of this
book. They depict the Almighty as having a material form, so He walks,
talks, laughs, puts His leg in Hell in order to fill it…, up to the end
of a long

list of such nonsense in which unfortunately many Muslims of the world
still believe and “credit” for which goes to Abu Hurayra…

Our conclusion is that we do not mean in this essay that Muslims should
discard all traditions transmitted by Abu Hurayra; rather, they must be
careful when coming across such traditions and must not accept them
blindly. This rule should not be applied only to Abu Hurayra’s*hādīth*
but to all*hādīth.*


