


Endnotes
1- Actually, it was not Syria but Sham, a word which is not quite common
in English. Sham used at the time to include Syria, Palestine, Lebanon
and Jordan.

2- Ibn Abul-Hadid,*Sharh Nahjul-Balāgha* شرح نهج البلاغة, Vol. 16, p.
15.

3- For more information about this man, Abū Hurayra, refer to Shī’a‎s
are the Ahl as-Sunnah, a book written in Arabic by Dr. Muhammed
at-Tijani as-Samawi and translated into English by myself. It is
available for sale from Vantage Press, Inc., 516 West 34th Street, New
York, N.Y. 10001, or you may order it through the Internet’s worldwide
web: www.amazon.com. Its title in the said web is “Shī’a‎s are the Ahl
as-Sunnah.”

4-  1According to*Al-Munjid fil lugha wal a\`lam* المنجد في اللغة و
الأعلام, however, Abu Hurayra's name is recorded as \`Abd al-Rahmān ibn
Sakhr al-Azdi, and that he died in 59 A.H./678 A.D. The same reference
indicates that this man spent “a long time” in the company of the
Prophet, which is not true at all; he accompanied the Prophet from time
to time for less than three years.

The Publisher of this Munjid, namely Dar al-Mashriq of Beirut, Lebanon,
is sponsored by the Catholic Press of Beirut. Undoubtedly, the
information about Abu Hurayra in this Arabic-Arabic dictionary must have
been furnished by Sunnis who try their best to elevate the status of Abu
Hurayra even at the risk of sacrificing historical facts.

5-  Al-Bukhari, Sahīh, Vol. 4, p. 175, where the author quotes Abu
Hurayra talking about himself in a chapter dealing with the
characteristics of Prophethood.

6-  I have excerpted some paragraphs for this text from my own
translation of Muhammed al-Tijani al-Samawi's book Shi\`as are the Ahl
al-Sunna (New York: Vantage Press, 1996), pp. 207-215.

7-  Refer to the book titled Abu Hurayra by the Egyptian author Mahmoud
Abu Rayyah.

8-  This is stated in al-Thahbi's book*Siyar A\`lām al-Nubalā’* .

9-  Ibn Abul-Hadeed,*Sharh Nahjul-Balāgha* , Vol. 4, p. 68.

10-  Ibn Katheer,*Al-Bidaya wal Nihaya* , Vol. 8, p. 108.

11-  Al-Bukhari,*Sahīh* , Vol. 7, p. 31.

12-  Al-Bukhari,*Sahīh* , Vol. 6, p. 190, in a chapter dealing with
spending on the wife and children.

13-  Ibn Abul-Hadeed, Sharh Nahjul-Balāgha, Vol. 4, p. 67.

14-  Ibn Sa\`d, Tabaqāt, Vol. 2, p. 63.

15-  Abu Hurayra was bilingual. He spoke Arabic (his mother tongue) and
Amharic. Historically speaking, during Abu Hurayra's time, Amheric was
the language of “aristocrats” due to the fact that the Ethiopians had
for many years colonized Yemen till they were kicked out of it at the
hands of Sayf ibn Thi Yazun (or Yazin), Himyar's king who died in 574
A.D.


