A new consciousness: social and educational considerations
==========================================================

Most of us are hesitant to fancy that we might be living through one of
the most fundamental shifts in the history of Western civilization
(Harman, 1998, p. xviii).

Given the daunting and discouraging scenario that has been discussed in
the first part of this paper, there is a distinct need to find ways to
transcend it and it is, therefore, heartening to discover signs that
proclaim a shift in human consciousness; a move towards a more connected
way of being; indeed, a ‘spiritual awakening’. Groome (1998) used these
words to describe ‘people’s abiding desire for something more than
possessions or personal success… a renewed consciousness of the hunger
of the human heart that only Transcendence can satisfy (p. 323).

A particular viewpoint offered by Willis Harman (1998) is that there are
various signs that the Western world is going through a paradigm shift.
Harman argues that at one level of Western society there is an emerging
consciousness which is tracing a move away from a positivistic,
reductionistic scientific worldview to one that is grounded in the
totality of human experience, that is, an integration of an objective
and subjective reality. He reflects on the duality that pervades western
thought generated by the compartmentalization of science and religion.
It is Harman’s contention that every knowledge system reflects and is
shaped by the society that constructs it, and it is sustained because it
satisfies the tests that are put to it, that is, it is confirmed by
lived human experience in the society of its origin. In other words,
western science is what it is because of the particular nature of the
society in which it was developed and other knowledge systems (for
instance, in the East) differ from it because they reflect the
characteristics that were valued in the particular societies where they
evolved. In noting the implications that arise from this contention,
Harman suggests that while the West has assumed a certain confidence and
superiority that its scientific view of reality is essentially correct
and all other views are wrong, there is a need to consider that other
views may perceive reality through different cultural windows which
emphasize other aspects of the total human experience.  This would make
them complementary rather than wrong.

Harman bases his argument on the shift that, he believes, is taking
place in the understanding of metaphysics, that is, the understanding of
reality and how things have come to be. The first, M1 (Metaphysic 1),
has been the dominant perspective in the past and it holds that
consciousness evolved from matter and it can only be understood by a
study of the physical brain. The second, M2 (Metaphysic 2), recognizes
two dimensions to knowledge, one which can be studied objectively but
which recognizes the value and complementarity of subjective study as
well. The third, M3 (Metaphysic 3), recognizes that consciousness came
first and all matter-energy is somehow generated by the mind.

Ultimately, Harman attributes the cause for the global mind change that
is becoming evident in the contemporary world to the shift of the
understanding of the metaphysic from M1 to M3 which does not necessarily
deny the reality of the physical world; rather it offers a different
vantage

point from which to view the world, that is, it appears to point to*‘a
reality behind the physical world that modern science, in its present
form, is in no position to affirm or deny’ (p. 31)* . To support his
contention, Harman identifies three characteristics that he believes are
evidence of this paradigm change and which distinctly contrast with the
positivistic, reductionist view of modern science:

•Increased emphasis on the interconnectedness of everything which
includes both our inner and outer worlds, for instance, in the various
social movements - ecological, feminist, holistic health and the new
spirituality.

•A shift in the locus of authority from external to internal, for
instance, the growing disenchantment in religious and political spheres
with external authorities which has prompted more reliance on intuition
and inner wisdom. Harman particularly points to the assumption of inner
divinity in transpersonal psychology and other forms of contemporary
spirituality.

•A shift in the perception of cause from external to internal, for
instance, the concept that we create our own reality and that ultimate
cause is to be sought not in the physical world but in our minds, or
consciousness.

In the end, Harman asserts that it is the neglect of the subjective
realm of experience in Western cultures that has created a certain
confusion about values for it is, ‘ultimately in this realm of the
subjective, the transcendent, and the spiritual that all societies have
found the basis for their deepest value-commitments and sense of meaning
(p. 24). Thus, the recognition that the human world may be living
through the dawning of a new era of consciousness which brings into
interplay the objective and subjective realities of existence has
certain implications for educational programs, which in the recent past
have been determined by objective and rationalistic thinking and
dominated by learning in the cognitive domain. The next section of this
paper revisits an integral learning approach which incorporates the
objective and subjective aspects that Harman speaks about, which in turn
address the inner and outer lives of students to enhance their learning
experiences.


