Learning that addresses the inner and outer lives of students to their enhance learning in religious education.
===============================================================================================================

As discussed earlier, there are certain implications for educators,
particularly in the field of religious education if they desire to
enhance the learning experiences of their students by addressing the
spiritual elements of meaning and connectedness, and also to raise their
awareness of themselves as empathetic and compassionate people. There
are two aspects to the recommendations provided here. The first (A
)relates to general principles and the second  (B) are specific to
classroom practice and environments.

A.General principles:
---------------------

**1.** To begin with this new generation is going to be more than ever
influenced by technology and multimedia. They are used to presentations
that are technically brilliant with audio-visual gadgetry and
sophistication. They have spent many hours in front of different sized
screens which compose much of their entertainment, and in general, their
concentration span equals the amount of time during which a commercial
TV program may screen before it is interrupted by advertisements; in
other words, about 10 or 15 minutes. Accordingly, it is necessary for
educators to factor in some consideration of these elements in the
delivery of their learning programs if they want to really engage their
students and move them beyond the surface of their conscious minds.

**2.** An additional factor is the need to raise awareness amongst
students of the influential factors in their external environment that
affect their unconscious minds so that these influences can be
identified, articulated and addressed. This is particularly important in
the current climate where particular religious groups are being targeted
overtly and covertly through the media and by different public figures
which may lead individuals to display biased attitudes that are
generated by their adaptive unconscious (Wilson, 2002). Indeed,
educators themselves may need to constantly raise their own awareness of
the determining influences of their own adaptive unconscious minds
especially in recognizing their own levels of tolerance and empathy for
groups who are different from themselves and with whom they may have had
little engagement.

**3.** One way that this situation may be addressed is for educators and
students to become better informed about the different beliefs and
practices of adherents of different religions; this should include the
differences of belief and practice within particular traditions that
pertain to culture and geographical location, for instance, recognizing
that differences exist between Muslims from different countries just as
differences exist between Christians from different countries. As well,
it could be beneficial to examine elements of different traditions that
bear similarities to one another and which may provide a unifying
component. In this respect, it may be possible to begin with the
perennial philosophy contained in all the great wisdom traditions. In
the mid twentieth century, an extensive study by Huxley (1954) alerted
western scholars to this very feature:

*Philosophia perennis… the metaphysic that recognizes a divine Reality
substantial to the world of things and lives and minds; the psychology
that finds in the soul something similar to, or even identical with,
divine Reality; the ethic that places man’s final end in the knowledge
of the immanent and transcendent Ground of all being - the thing is
immemorial and universal (Huxley, 1945, p. 9).*

Huxley described two thought patterns to all the main religions, the
esoteric and the exoteric. The first subscribes to the metaphysic of a
divine Reality at the core of being; it is the spiritual, almost
secretive face of religion and is practised by only a few adherents. The
second is the exoteric form which is the public form by which the
religion is usually identified, that is, through its rituals, practices,
architecture and so on. Arguably, it is this latter form in today’s
world that tends to exclusivity; it provides a boundary around its
followers which promotes a sense of ‘us’ and ‘them’. Thus, in the hands
of some, the exoteric form may encourage divisiveness but we need to
keep in mind that the essence of esoteric thinking is connectedness.

**4.** Further, it is important to recognize the role of engagement with
people who are different in moving the individual from tolerance to
empathy and compassion.

**5.** Finally, it would be useful for religious educators to encourage
discussions, forums and research that will lead to public debate about
the significance of inter-religious studies for all children which,
potentially, could promote social and spiritual capital in pluralist
contexts.

B. Teaching for transformation: Implications for learning programs and environments
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

For several years now I have been writing about the complementarity of
the cognitive, affective and spiritual dimensions in learning which are
generated by notions of the rational, emotional and spiritual
intelligences and which could and should lead to transformation. I have
drawn on various perspectives in literature and research to describe
processes in learning which address both the inner and outer life of the
student which involve perceiving, thinking, feeling and intuiting. By
encouraging and prompting intuitive responses, learning is enhanced and
deepened (see de Souza, 2001, 2003, 2004a, 2004b, 2005). In general,
this model of learning is conceivably different from many educational
programs and practices in Australia, particularly ones which focus on
the outer person and reflect a fragmentation and compartmentalization of
subject areas as well as of elements in the learning process. In
addition, there are those practices that attend more to cognitive
learning and assessment procedures that measure particular standards in
the achievement of knowledge and skills, all of which are reflective of
the positivistic, reductionistic mindset of a twentieth-century
education system.

In contrast, addressing the spiritual dimension of learning reflects
aspects of the inner person and is about promoting connectedness between
content and between individuals. This is especially important in the
current climate which reflects certain negative overtones which relate
to religious pluralism,

separateness and extremism. Certainly, there is some hope for progress
to be made with such an approach to education if we are, indeed,
experiencing a shifting paradigm and a changing consciousness as
suggested by Harman. One sign, in Australia, is the Federal Government
drive towards the incorporation of a values based education. Another
corresponding change is the increased focus being given to emotional
literacy and the role of the imagination and intuition in the learning
process. Therefore, children should be encouraged to access and develop
this area of their lives. To do this, we need to explore ways to change
various aspects of learning programs and environments of contemporary
classrooms so that they promote connectedness in the learning experience
and promote self knowledge in students through their engagement and
interaction with Other. Some factors that may be useful in the
development of learning programs and environments that aim to nurture
the spirituality of children and adolescents are discussed below.

### The role of the arts and perennial philosophy/Wisdom Literature found in the esoteric forms of most mainstream religions

###

I have previously examined the arts as a valuable and useful resource to
promote learning across the curriculum in classrooms composed of
students of mixed abilities and backgrounds, where different beliefs and
values may be evident (de Souza, 2003, 2004a, 2004b, 2005). Given the
religious pluralism that set the context of this paper, it would seem
that as well, perennial philosophy which has often been a neglected area
in the teaching of world religions should also become an intended focus
in teaching across the curriculum. Neither of these areas should be
confined to a particular discipline but should reflect the connectedness
they espouse through their links to literature, the humanities, social
sciences and the sciences. With the variety of cultural, social and
religious backgrounds that may be present in any one classroom, these
could provide authentic and valid meeting points; as well, they may
prompt a variety of responses from students which can be useful entry
points for subsequent activities and discussions that allow students to
listen to the stories and experiences of Other. Sometimes these could be
completely outside the circle of the students’ own experiences but, at
the same time, may produce some resonances which help them to
shape/change their worldview. In particular, the arts and perennial
philosophy can be used to explore the interconnectedness of all things.

### Accessing the universal teachings of great spiritual leaders and modelling spiritual traits.

###

All people need inspiration and role models to aspire to. However, the
role models provided in society for young people tend to come from the
successful personalities in sports, business, film, media and politics.
More often than not, the reflection is on the material values of
contemporary culture, devoured by consumerism and economic
rationalization. Unfortunately, and within various contexts, these often
negate the universal values of truth, honesty, justice, care and
compassion. Using metaphor and story to teach the life and works of
great spiritual leaders can make the universality of their teachings
accessible and meaningful in a pluralist

classroom.  Indeed, modelling the values of human decency at all levels
of the school community is one way to inculcate them amongst students
and bridge difference. Thus, universally accepted values should be made
explicit in school documents, in language, in classroom practice and in
relationships where overt displays of listening and respect, sensitivity
and empathy, care and compassion are evident.

### Strategies to raise self-knowledge and inner awareness

###

A particular feature that can be derived from Harman is the need to
address the interior world of the student. Strategies that encourage the
development of imagination and intuition are one way to begin this
process; as also mentoring and nurturing activities to promote self
knowledge and to discover their potential. In addition, in the busyness
of their world, students often lose their awareness of experiences of
joy, awe and wonder in their everyday. Strategies that may help them to
achieve these things are journal writing, personal goal setting,
meditation and other contemplative activities including sitting or
walking in complete silence. This aspect links closely with the next
one.

### Addressing the relational aspect of students’ lives and promoting opportunities for students to discover the Other within themselves:

###

It is an important factor that engaging with Other is a path to self
knowledge as one responds to resonances arising from interactions with
Other. Concept maps are a useful strategy to show the connectedness of
different subjects, themes, ideas and places and people. The
relationships students develop are an essential element in their
spiritual, emotional and, therefore, intellectual wellbeing therefore it
is important to develop inclusive communities that are open to dialogue
and that welcome and celebrate diversity in a real and meaningful way.
If an atmosphere of trust, respect and partnership are built through
different structures within school communities, not just in the
classroom, students will be more inclined to articulate questions of
concern.

### Prompting action for social justice and accepting responsibility to act for the common good.

###

Some ways to promote awareness and different perspectives on issues of
social justice and inequity are the use of hypotheticals and
dramatizations which encourage problem solving using intuitive and
imaginative thinking to complement analytical and logical thinking. As
well a study of media, film and other texts can be used to prompt
students to accept responsibility and commit to action for the common
good.

### Sacred spaces, silence and solitude

###

It is important to create sacred spaces at school which are prayerful
and aesthetic and allow experiences of solitude. If such spaces reflect
a particular religious tradition they may be less accessible to those
who do not belong to that tradition. This is a particularly pertinent
factor in contemporary classrooms where children come from a variety of
religious backgrounds, some churched and others unchurched. Such
diversity needs to be treated with sensitivity. Further consideration
should be given to

building quiet times into daily timetables for students and teachers to
experience silence and stillness. Various resources may be used to
inspire contemplation during these times.

### Transcendence

###

Many of the activities that have been discussed above may help students
and teachers to become aware of a transcendent dimension in their
everyday and they should be encouraged to respond to this. These can be
moments of revelation when the core of their being may be stirred by
beauty, goodness and truth, and the interconnectedness of everything so
they experience something beyond the physicality of their world, a sense
of freedom that allows them to rise above the minutiae of their
everyday.

To sum up, an educational approach that incorporates these factors would
shift from the rational/analytical mode of thinking that dictates
current educational programs to one that requires a balance between it
and creative/intuitive thinking. Such an approach would require whole
school action and response where structural and organizational
processes, curriculum offerings, teaching and learning strategies and
behavioural patterns will signify an evolving consciousness that
nurtures the inner and outer lives of each child; appreciate the
plurality of belief and practice that may exist within the educational
community whilst also recognizing the interconnectedness that links each
to Other; embraces wholeness and connectedness; and ultimately,
recognizes the validity of a subjective and transcendental reality. To
experience such a learning context should enhance the lives of every
child, adolescent and teacher and promote their capacity for empathy and
living in peace and harmony in a shrinking, divisive global world.


