


Divine Revelation, Human Reason and Science
Knowledge and Action
--------------------

Man is a thinking creature whose action is guided by his thought. It is
neither possible to deprive him of thought nor to suspend his faculty of
action and turn him into an inert, inactive object. It is also
impossible to ignore the relationship which exists between human action
and thought.

Therefore, human existence is a mixture of knowledge and action, in
which action is based on and guided by knowledge. That is, besides the
fact that man is an active and aware \`being, his knowledge and
awareness demarcate the outlines of his activity, and his work benefits
from his vision. His knowledge finds concrete expression in his activity
and his activity stimulates his knowledge.

This is a vital fact of human life. If knowledge does not manifest
itself in action and action is not guided by knowledge, and if there is
no fusion between the two, life, which is the result of a fusion and
harmony between them, will cease to exist. In other words, a “living”
being is an active intelligence in which the leadership of knowledge and
the obedience of action are fully realized.1

Eternal life as a Fruit of Knowledge and Action
-----------------------------------------------

Since the life of man is directly dependent on his thought and action,
and the quality of his thought and action directly affects the quality
of his life, the deeper his knowledge, the wiser his action, the
stronger the ties between his thought and activity, and more rational
and fruitful his life would be.

This is because the significance of life is as much as the significance
of its constituent factors and their value is the same as the value of
life. Therefore, the best life, which is the eternal life, is the result
of the best knowledge and the most profitable action and effort, and
existence of an unbreakable fusion and coordination between such
knowledge and effort

The Leading Role of Knowledge
-----------------------------

Since the highest aim of Divine Revelation is revival of humanity2 the
three principles mentioned above (that is the principle of knowledge,
the principle of action, and the principle of leadership of knowledge
over action and subservience of action to knowledge have occupied a
prominent position in the teachings of the prophets (saws).

This so because, with their realization life comes into existence, and
these principles are abandoned, human life would deteriorate. This is
clearly stated in the Qur'an, so that sometimes it praises “certain
knowledge” and encourages “firm action”, exhorting human beings to
strengthen the bond between knowledge and action.

At other times, it denounces ignorance, idleness and disunion between
knowledge actions.3 The Qur'an thus attempts to provide grounds for
correct action and accurate knowledge and a harmonious relation between
the two which is the basis of the “rational life” of individual and
society.

Thereby it seeks to safeguard humanity from falling into the abyss of
ignorance, inertness and death, and to vitalize it. Furthermore, in
order to make it easier for humanity to traverse this path and reach its
sacred end, the

prophets, as perfect human beings who had attained to “rational life” on
the basis of the three principles mentioned, accepted the responsibility
of guiding humanity towards realization of this ultimate goal.

Theoretical and Practical Knowledge
-----------------------------------

The relationship between knowledge and action in the human being is such
that all its actions are based on its knowledge, dictated by, it, and
follow its leadership. However, not all of man's knowledge directly
affects his actions. In fact, some of man's knowledge has a purely
speculative and theoretical aspect, having no direct or clear cut
in­fluence over his activities. Whereas other aspects of his knowledge
directly affect his actions and provide the plan and framework for them.

Thus, the domain of human knowledge is wider in scope than, that of
human action. In other words, knowledge is something unlimited, while
action is something limited. That is why knowledge enjoys a stature
completely denied to and out of reach of action. The reason for this is
that some of the things known by the mind transcend the \`, arena of
human life, and the human being plays no role in their realiza­tion.

On the contrary, the human being owes its existence to some of these
realities and is an “effect” of which they are the “cause”. Other things
known to man, however, fall within the domain of his life, and their
realization depends on his will and efforts, so that if man did not
exist these things would also not exist.

It is, at this point that division of knowledge into “theoretical” or
speculative” science and “practical” science (*al-hikmah al-nazariyyah*
and*al-hikmah al-\`amaliyyah)* is established, and the influence and
limits of human knowledge in each of these areas are studied.
Furthermore, it is here that the role of Divine Revelation in each of
these fields can be examined.

Such analysis would clearly show to what extent man is capable of
attaining knowledge of reality, and clarify the' new approaches
suggested by Divine Revelation with respect to the human Sciences. We
shall know then what is to be done if there arises any incongruity
between human discoveries and the Revelation, what authority to consult
in such cases and which of them to consider prior to the 'other.

Basically, is it possible for any difference to occur bet­ween
definitive and certain human knowledge and Divine Revelation, or not?
And supposing that such incongruity is possible, can it be over­ come?
Each one of these issues could be studied separately.

Method of Reasoning in Speculative and Practical Sciences
---------------------------------------------------------

The axis around which the discussions of the speculative sciences
revolve, and the rational basis of arguments involved in these branches
of, human knowledge, are completely and fundamentally distinct from
those of the practical sciences. The very axis of study in the
speculative sciences is something whose reality .transcends the domain
of human \` will and science and whose realization or non-realization is
not affected by man's being.

This is true whether the subject under discussion is the general
principle of being and non-being, or that of the being or non being of a
finite object; the first class of questions belongs to the domain of
philosophy, and the

second class of questions belongs to the domain of mathematical and
experimental sciences.

The foundations of the reasoning in the speculative sciences, especially
philosophy and metaphysics, are self-evident axioms, whose validity is
beyond doubt. All complicated theoretical statements must refer to that
series of self-evident axioms, so that their complexity is resolved and
their validity or invalidity can be determined.

In order to do this, we are forced to discover the series of
self-evident truths and their interrelationships so as to reach complex
propositions, and then to analyze the complex propositions with utmost
care by referring them to basic, self-evident truths.

In other words, both the axiomatic material through synthesis of which,
or through reduction to which, complex propositions are solved; must be
self-evident and certain, and the method of synthesis or analysis and
the reasoning process must be self-evident and certain.

This is, necessary, because if, either the axiomatic material or the
reasoning methods have the slightest uncertainty about them, the
conclusions attained would be uncertain, and the theoretical problem
under consideration would retain its peculiar complexity ambiguity even
though a partial aspect of it may be clarified.

Thus one cannot rely on conjecture, analogy, imagination or fantasy and
the like, either in regard to the axiomatic material or in regard to the
method of reasoning. The only thing that can be relied upon is pure
reason. Discussion about the primary axiomatic material and the method
of inference is the task of philosophy and logic.

However, as said above, the axis of the study of the practical sciences
is situated within the realm of human existence and these sciences
depend on human initiative and will for their existence. Things such as
justice and injustice, humility and pride, contentment and greed etc.,
are examples of problems that practical philosophy*(al-hikmah
al-amaliyyah) is* concerned with, and all of them are of the \`do' and
\`don't' variety.

The method of reasoning for reaching conclusions is based on
self-evident moral values and criteria. In other words, those things
whose “evilness” and “badness” (*fujur* ) are indubitably ate certainly
perceived by the mind, serve as the reference points and foundations
upon which all inference regarding the \`don'ts' is based,' whereas all
those things the “goodness” and “desirability” ( *taqwa* ) of which are
indubitably clear to the

human mind serve as the foundation on which all judgements regarding the
\`do's' are based. 4

All the complex and difficult problems of practical philosophy are
solved through reference to primary and self-evident goods and evils We
reach solutions to our problems either through synthesizing these
primary value with one another, or by analyzing the complex problems,
reducing them to a series of simple and self-evident values.

In any case, there is no alternative to reference to these primary and
self-evident values; either in the form of synthesis or in the form of
analysis and reduction:'

If there is an imperfection in any of the two that is either in the
basic, underlying axiomatic material or the method of inference, or in
other words, if the “goodness” and “badness” of a thing is not
self-evident, or if the method of inference is not absolutely reliable
the conclusions reached would lack certainty as a result, that
particular problem of practical philosophy which we are dealing with
would retain its former complexity and ambiguity, even if some aspects
of the problem may resolved.

We must conclude, then, that neither in the axiomatic material used for
our arguments nor in the form of reasoning used, is there any room for
conjecture, fancy, personal prejudices, desires, likes and dislikes. The
only things which can be relied upon are pure reason and healthy
instinct. Passion and desire should influence neither the material of
our arguments nor the method of reasoning.

Description and definition of -the primary 'evils', and \`goods” and the
form of reasoning-whether in the form of synthesis or analysis-are
amongst the duties of ethics*(\`ilm al-'akhlaq)* and practical
philosophy*(al-hikmah al-\`amaliyyah).*

Reason and Revelation, Conjecture and Certainty
-----------------------------------------------

Revelation consists of witnessing all those truths and realities the
knowledge of which is necessary for man's rational existence through
\`direct experience'*(al-\`ilm al-huduri),* as well as attainment of
complete understanding and comprehension of them after
revelation*(al-nuzul)* through \`acquired knowledge'*(al-\`ilm
al-husuli),* which is absorbed in the form of perceptible signs and
comprehensible concepts.

Since the source*(al-mabda' al-fa\`ili* ) of such Revelation is a
creator who has absolute knowledge of the totality of existence, and is
free from any trace of ignorance, forgetfulness or neglect, and since
the carrier of the Revelation is the knowing and truthful angel
*(Gabriel),* and since its receiver *(al-mabda' al-qabili) is* the
infallible consciousness of the Pro­phet (saws), consequently, if the
message can be verified as being Divinely revealed, it can be also said
to correspond to absolute truth.

In other words, it is impossible for something to be indubitable Divine
Revela­tion and still admit the possibility of even the smallest amount
of error. The issue of the infallibility and reliability of Revelation
is arrived at by the rational mind through the process of either
analysis or synthesis, the basis of both of which are the self-evident,
primary \`propositions.

However, if there is any doubt about something being Divine Revelation,
it means that there can be no certainty 'about its infallibility either.
In other words, since the necessary correspondence between Divine
Revelation and reality depends upon its immunity from mistake,
ignorance, and forgetfulness even as the reliability of philo­sophic
reason depends on its purity from any contamination by conjecture,
surmise and prejudice.

It can be relied upon only when its being Divine Revelation has been
proved beyond doubt. If there is uncertain­ty about its being Divine
Revelation it cannot be the source and foundation of “speculative
philosophy”, whose realm lies outside the domain of \`do's' and
\`don'ts'. Moreover, purely rational statements, if they are not
self-evident, or

incapable of being reduced to basic self-­evident truths, shall be
devoid of authority and acceptability in theologi­cal matters.

Accordingly, \`conjectural revelation'*(al-wahy al-zanni* )*,* as well
as rational statements based on conjecture and surmise are outside the
scope of our discussion. Their sole worth lies in problems of “practical
philosophy” and in issues relating to \`do's' and \`don'ts' as
“conjec­tural evidence” (*dalil zanni* ) That is, it is subject to
limitation and restriction if more definite evidence is found.

In a case where conjectural revelation has a general applicability and
is found to be contrary to a certain rational evidence, the general
application of “conjectural revelation” be it based on verses of the
Qur'an or on the prophetic traditions or on traditions traced to the
Imams, must be abandoned\` because “conjectural evidence”*(dalil zanni*
) can never be maintained when “definitive evidence”*(dalil qat\`i) is*
available.

If, on the one hand, we have a*dalil naqli* (a statement handed down by
tradition) whose authenticity of source, is as certain as that of the
Qur'an, but whose literal purport is not precise and clear but is based
on interpretation and conjecture and which, moreover, has a general

applicability, and if on the other hand, we have indubiterational
reasons to the contrary, its general applicability is superceded by the
*dalil qat\`i,* even though the *dalil* *naqli's* authenticity of
source, may be certain.

Characteristics of Wahy Qat'i
-----------------------------

*“Wahy qat\`ti”* refers to Revelation that has been proven beyond doubt
to have originated from one of the Ma'sumun (the Prophet and Imams) and
which is clear and precise in its content and purport and which allows
of no ambiguity, or multiplicity of interpretation to contrary.
Moreover, the statement must have been issued with the purpose of
expressing true judgement, not for the purpose of dissimulation,
(*al-taqiyyah* )*.*

If something definitely possesses the three characteristics just
mentioned, it can be said to be*“wahy qat'i”.* And if the entire three
or any one, of the above characteristics cannot conclusively be shown to
belong', to it, then its being a revelation is conjectural*(zanni)*
rather than definitive*(qat\`i).*

In other words, if the claim that one of the*Ma\`sumun* made certain
statement cannot be proven beyond doubt, or if the content of' the
statement is not perfectly clear and unambiguous, or if it cannot be
categorically proven that it was issued for the sake of announcing a
*hukm* (command), such a statement cannot be judged to be *wahy qat\`i,*
rather it must be considered to be *“wahy ghayr qat\`i”,* that is
“uncertain” or “conjectural revelation”.

Non-contradiction between Wahy Qat'i and Aql Qat'i
--------------------------------------------------

It would be impossible for*wahy qat'i* (definitive Revelation) and*\`aql
qat\`i* (correct reason) to contradict each other, and if,
hypothetically, such a conflict were to arise, it would be impossible to
resolve. That is, as it is not possible for two definitive rational
statements to contradict, each other or for two statements definitely
based on Revelat­ion to contradict each other; it is also impossible for
two statements, one of which is based on*wahy qat'i*

(definitive Revelation) and another on*\`aql qat'i* (definitive or
correct reason), to contradict each other.

Moreover, if such a contradiction between two definitive rational
statements or two definitive revealed statements, or two statements one
of which is based on reason and another on Revelation, were it to arise,
it would be impossible to resolve. Any such hypothetical conflict would
imply that each of these definitive statements is self-contradictory.

This is so because the foundation of all categorical' and definitive
logical propositions is the law of contradiction, which says that
“nothing can be both A and not A” and, when applied to propositions,
that “no proposition can be both false and true”. It means that nothing
with all its characteristics such as subject and predicate, potentiality
and actua­lity, generality and particularity, time and place and
relations, be existent and non-existent.

Whenever a proposition is said to be defini­tive it means that on the
basis of this eternal and irrefutable law, it is impossible for it to
contradict with another definitive proposition.

Since*\`aql qat\`i* (definitive reason) affirms the necessity and
infal­libility of*wahy qat\`i* (definitive Divine Revelation) and
the*wahy qat'i* affirms the authority*(hujjiyyah)* of*\`aql qat'i,*
presents its message in .the form of ratiocinated statements, calls upon
all rational human beings to join the intellectual struggle on the side
of righteousness and truth, and all its teachings meet the criteria
of*\`aql qat'i,* it follows that*wahy qat'i* and*\`aql qat'i* cannot
contradict each other.

Since such a contradiction would, in essence, be self-contradiction.
Moreover, if such a contradiction were, hypothetically speaking, to
occur, it would be incurable, because preferring one to the other would
bring about the collapse of both. This is so because both of them are
based on one principle, namely, the law of contradiction, and if any one
of them is moved off this base, it means that its foundation is
destroyed. When the foundation is destroyed the other edifice would also
collapse.

Moreover, since all definitive propositions in the field of acquired
knowledge*(al-\`ulum al-husuli* ) are based on the law of
contradic­tion, there would be no solution to any contradiction, whether
bet­ween two definitive propositions of Revelation*(wahy qat'i),* or
between two definitive rational statements (*\`aql qat\`i),* or between
two propositions each of which is drawn from*wahy qat'i* and*\`aql
qat\`i.*

Now, as far as Divine Revelation is concerned, its reality is that of
direct apprehension of the truth and “knowledge through
presence”*(al-\`ilm al-huduri)* and does not rely on acquired
knowledge.*(al-\`ilm al ­husuli).* It, therefore, has no need of
affirmation by reference to the law of

contradiction. In other words, Divine Revelation is, its own
justification arid requires no extraneous justification.

However, it is something experienced only by the Ma'sumun (as), and is a
shrine closed to all others. It, therefore, transcends the limits of our
present discussion. What is referred to here as*“wahy qat'i* ”, then, is
that which has been passed down to us in the form of acquired knowledge
*(al-ilm al-husuli)* and the authenticity of which is judged through the
triple criteria of

“definitive origin”, “definitive interpretation”, and “intended
definitive issuance of Divine command.”

Priority of Wahy Qat'i and \`Aql Qat\`i over Wahiy Zanni and \`Aql Zanni
------------------------------------------------------------------------

As has been already said, in any conflict between*\`aql qati wahy
zanni,* that is, between “definitive reason” and “conjectural,
revelation”, priority and preference always lies with*\`aql qat\`i.* In
general, in any conflict between*wahy qat\`i* and*wahy zanni,* and
between \`*aql qat'i* ' and \`*aql zanni,* priority and preference
always lies with the*qat\`i* over the*zanni.*

That is, the definitive is always preferred to the conjectural. This so
because conjectural propositions owe their validity to the definitive
propositions, while the definitive propositions have inherent validity
and priority and authority, and serve as the principle on which the
validity of the conjectural propositions depends.

We can say, therefore, that conjectural propositions are on a different
plane than that of the definitive propositions. On the basis of this
difference of planes, they cannot contradict with the definitive
propositions, because contradiction is possible only when propositions
are on the same plane.

It should be kept in mind, however, that definitive rational
propositions are rarely found outside the field of metaphysics and
mathematics, because their realization in the natural sciences such as
biology and medicine is extremely improbable, while their attainment in
the humanities and the social sciences such as law, sociology,
psychology, etc., is most difficult.

If we carefully consider the meaning of “certainty”*(yaqin)* and
preconditions necessary for its attainment as they have been enumerated
in Ibn Sin'a*Shifa'* in the section on logic we shall realize that in
many fields of humanities and the social sciences, attainment of a
hundred percent certainty, if not impossible, is at least very difficult
­even in such fields as astronomy.

The problems of which appear at first glance to have definite answers,
yet many of these answers lose their unchallengeable certainty when
examined through the eyes of such a profound and brilliant logician and
philosopher as Ibn Sina.

It is neither possible, therefore, to use a series of experimental laws,
laboratory hypotheses and such, to produce certainty, and then to delude
oneself into attacking Divine Revelation and its products and finally
try to establish the superiority of reason (*\`aql* ) over
tradition*(naql)* nor is it possible to depreciate tradition by relying
on conjectural rational evidence*(dalil zanni \`aqli)* and then to judge
Revelation while standing on such shaky grounds considering it opposed
to reason and science.

This, according to Ibn Sina, is caused either- by failure 'to understand
what “certainty” is, or by an inability to judge fairly. Because it is a
manifestation of weak thinking to ignore “definitive evidence” and the
limitations it puts on the application of any ruling, based on a
superficial and literal interpretation of quoted evidence.

Similarly, to rely on superficial and literal meanings in fields other
than practical philosophy, such as the experimental sciences, which are
outside

the realm of \`do's' and \`don'ts' and giving them precedence over the
accumulated knowledge and experience of man, seems rather unreasonable.

Much the same charge can be leveled against those who, relying on
certain conjectural pieces of evidence and inconclusive experiments,
abandon the literal meaning of quoted evidence in the field of practical
philosophy, mistake hypothetical and theoretical postulates for
self-evident axioms, and confuse imitation with research, and surmise
with certainty.

All this is caused by careless reasoning and inept synthesis between
conflicting views, arising probably out of a refusal to completely obey
the teachings and instruc­tions which have been conveyed through Divine
Revelation.

Accordingly, if in any problem of one of the fields of practical
philosophy, such as ethics, jurisprudence, or law, any conflict arises
between a ruling based on “conjectural experimental evidence”*(dalil
tajrubi zanni)* (the kind of evidence which relies on hypothesis rather
than on self-evident truths) and a ruling based on “conjectural
jurispru­dential evidence”*(dalil fiqhi zanni),* we cannot abandon the
jurispru­dential ruling and give preference to the “conjectural
experimental evidence”*(dalil tajrubi zanni)* over the “jurisprudential
evidence” (*dalil* *fiqhi)* which, in fact, is the same as conjectural
revelation*(wahy zanni* ).

In the case of the branches of the natural sciences, such as biology and
physics, if any conflict arises between “conjectural experimental
evidence” and “literal quoted evidence”*(dalil lafzi naqli),* one cannot
give preference to the “literal quoted evidence”, because the issues in
hand are not in the realm of moral obligations and duties and do not
fall into the category of \`do's' and \`don'ts'.

In all such cases, therefore, preference belongs to the “conjectural
experimental evidence”. It is clear, therefore, that conflict between
reason and Revelation is readily solvable in the field of natural
sciences that is, either it does not arise, or, if it does, it is
superficial and easily solvable.

True Reason is the same as Revelation
-------------------------------------

What is important is the conflict between reason and Revelation in
metaphysics and -cosmology, that is, in regard to Divine*Unity (tawhid)*
, prophethood*(al-nubuwah),* resurrection*(al-ma\`ad)* and other general
conceptions which are related to these three principles. However, as has
already been mentioned, there is no possibility of any conflict arising
between “definitive Revelation” and “definitive reason”, and if,
hypothetically, such a conflict were to arise, it would be insolvable.

As said before, this insolvability is caused by the fact preference of
one over the other would require the destruction of the common base
which is the law of contradiction, and the destruction. The common base
would automatically mean the collapse of both which are superstructures.
Because, the foundation on which belief in the truth of Revelation and
the necessity of obeying its command is based, is definitive reason.

Relying on axiomatic propositions,*\`aql qat'i* rules that the existence
of Divine Revelation and prophethood is necessary, and that it may be
received only through miraculous means. Miracle is essentially different
from other occult “sciences” such as magic, witchcraft, astrology, and
palmistry.

Miracle is the sign of the Divine mission and prophethood of one who
performs it.

In any case, miracles and other things like it are irrefutable evidence
when it comes to the question of Divine Revelation and prophethood and
when they are confirmed and proved by*\`aql qat\`i* . If moreover, all
these speculative matters are resolved by*\`aql qat'i* with the final
result that Revelation and prophethood are proved.

To invalidate the judgement of*\`aql qat\`i* on account of a*dalil*
*lafzi* (superficial or literal evidence), which is, of course, a piece
of “conjectural revelation” rather than “definitive Revelation”, would
mean giving priority to “conjectural evidence” over “definitive
evidence” and its certain*conclusions. The* final consequence of such a
process would be the collapse of all those metaphysical beliefs which
were affirmed*and* proved through*\`aql qat\`i.*

In the impossible condition when a*wahy qat\`i* be opposed toa *dalil
\`aqli qat\`i* (definitive rational evidence), if we attempt to give
preference to *wahy* *qat'i* over the “definitive rational evidence”,
this would necessitate invalidation of *\`aql qat\`i.* Consequently,
invalidation of the *dalil \`aqli qat\`i* means nothing less than total
collapse of the metaphysical foundations, belief in the validity of
which forms the basis on which *wahy* itself is proved (this point
should be noted carefully).

To put it in another way, attempting to invalidate definitive rational
evidence by the means of definitive Revelation is like attempting to
deny the existence of a ladder after one has climbed it rung by rung
and' is now standing on its top most rung.

If there was no ladder with its hierarchy of rungs, climbing to such a
height would have been impossible. In the same way, if definitive
rational evidence had no validity, how could the necessity of Revelation
and the authority*(hujjiyyah)* of its message is confirmed?

Instances of Harmony and Mutual Support between Revelation and Reason
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Just as the necessity of Revelation and prophethood is proved by \`*aql
qat'i* , and the integrity and reliability of its message is confirmed
by rational arguments and evidence, the legitimacy and validity of
reason and of the conclusions made by*\`aql qat\`i* are confirmed and
strengthened by*wahy* (Divine Revelation).

Therefore, the whole of the Qur'an is full of invitation to thought and
reason. It commands the faithful to seek certainty, knowledge and
clarity. It warns the Muslims to stay away from ignorance and not to
rely on conjecture, surmise, imagina­tion, probability, irrational
doubt, and all unscientific and prejudiced views and positions.

The Qur'an presents the heights of revealed truth in the form of logical
arguments so as to demolish the arguments of those who deny the Truth
and to dissipate the conjectures of idolaters and materialists by
presenting definitive arguments which demonstrate their inherent
weakness and irrationality.

For this reason the Qur'an is presented as “light”, that is something in
which there is not a trace of uncertainty, doubt, ambiguity, or
complexity-all of which are forms of darkness and have no place in
Truth, which is absolute light.

Therefore great emphasis is laid by the Divine Revelation that man must
always make an effort to attain certain knowledge and should not accept
or reject anything without research and investigation. The following are
a few examples of the harmony and mutual support that exist between
Revelation and reason.

### First Example

###

The sixth Imam, Ja\`far ibn Muhammad al-Sadiq (as), has been quoted as
saying that in two verses of the Qur'an God has commanded His creatures
not to talk about something of which they are ignorant, and not to deny
the validity of something which they do not understand.5 The first verse
is:

<p dir="rtl">
... أَلَمْ يُؤْخَذْ عَلَيْهِم مِّيثَاقُ الْكِتَابِ أَن لَّا يَقُولُوا
عَلَى اللَّـهِ إِلَّا الْحَقَّ...
</p>

***“....Hath not the covenant of the Scripture been taken on their
behalf that they should say concerning Allah nothing but the truth”***
*?* ***(7:169)***

The second verse is:

<p dir="rtl">
بَلْ كَذَّبُوا بِمَا لَمْ يُحِيطُوا بِعِلْمِهِ وَلَمَّا يَأْتِهِمْ
تَأْوِيلُهُ...
</p>

***“Nay, but they denied that the knowledge where of they could not
compass, and whereof the interpretation hath not yet come unto them***
....”***(10:39)***

The purport of the first verse is that any speech, affirmation or
acceptance of anything on theological matters must be based off\`\` and
certain knowledge. The purport of the second verse is*that\`* denial of
validity of something must always be based on reason knowledge.

Therefore, if man is to live a rational existence, all his affirmations
and negations must be based on faultless reasoning and certain
knowledge. Such statements as these are clear witnesses of categorical
backing of reason and rational certitude by Divine Revelation.

### Second Example

###

The seventh Imam, Musa ibn Ja'far al-Kazim (as) has been as saying that
God has given good tidings to the wise and the intelligent. He went on
to mention some of the verses of the Qur'an that invite the faithful to
reason and rationality.6 Then he said:

<p dir="rtl">
قال موسى بن جعفر (ع):
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
إنَّ للهِ عَلى النَّاسِ حُجَّتَيْنِ: حُجَّةً ظاهِرَةً وَ حُجَّةً
باطِنَةً. فَأَمَّا الظَّاهِرَةُ فَالْرُّسُلُ وَ الأَئِمَّه (ع)، وَ
أَمَّا الْباطِنَةُ فَالْعُقُوْلُ.
</p>

God has two proofs against mankind the “apparent proof” and the “hidden
one”. The “apparent proof” consists of the messengers, the prophets,
\`and the imams (as), while the “hidden proof” is reason.

***In this statement, \`aql qat'iis given the same weight as Divine
Revelation and is considered to be equally reliable.***

### Third Example

###

The eight Imam, '‘Ali ibn Musa al-Rida (as), in response to a question
by Ibn al-Sikkit as to what is the proof*(hujjah)* of God against people
of every age, is reported to have said7

<p dir="rtl">
قال علي بن موسى (ع):
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
اْلْعَقْلُ يُعْرَفُ بِهِ الصَّادِقُ عَلَى اللهِ فَيُصَدِّقُهُ وَ
الْكَاذِبُ عَلَى اللهِ فَيُكَذِبُهُ.
</p>

Through the use of one's intellect one can recognize the true preacher
of God and affirm him, (just as) one can recognize the man who falsely
claims to preach for God, and deny him.

The purport of the statement mentioned above is that reason is the
source of definitive proof needed for final affirmation or denial of any
proposition and it is the criterion against which all propositions and
views must be gauged. Upon hearing this answer, Ibn al-Sikkit said

<p dir="rtl">
فَقالَ اْبنُ السِكِيت: هَذَا وَ اللهِ هُوَ الْجَوابُ.
</p>

By God, that is the only complete answer.

Reason is the criterion for judging what is true and what is false, what
must be affirmed and what must be denied. Furthermore, the fact that ibn
al-Sikkit's statement was made in front of an infallible Imam, and he,
with his silence, affirmed it, is another proof of the ultimate and
absolute authority of reason.

### Fourth Example

###

Arguing with the idolators of the Hijaz of those days and with the
non-monotheists throughout history, the Holy Qur'an tells them Your
statements should either be backed by definitive rational evidence, or
be confirmed by Divine Revelation.

A statement which is neither proved by certain reason nor backed by
quotations from sources known to have been: Divinely revealed, lacks all

validity, and any claim that is not backed by one of these two sources
of definitive evidence is merely baseless talk, which cannot serve as
basis for any metaphysical or religious beliefs.

<p dir="rtl">
وَقَالُوا لَوْ شَاءَ الرَّحْمَـٰنُ مَا عَبَدْنَاهُم مَّا لَهُم بِذَٰلِكَ
مِنْ عِلْمٍ إِنْ هُمْ إِلَّا يَخْرُصُونَ أَمْ آتَيْنَاهُمْ كِتَابًا مِّن
قَبْلِهِ فَهُم بِهِ مُسْتَمْسِكُونَ بَلْ قَالُوا إِنَّا وَجَدْنَا
آبَاءَنَا عَلَىٰ أُمَّةٍ وَإِنَّا عَلَىٰ آثَارِهِم مُّهْتَدُونَ
</p>

***“And they say, \`Had the All-Merciful so willed, we would not have
worshipped them'. They have no knowledge whatsoever of that; they are
only conjectur­ing. Or did we give them a Book aforetime to which they
hold? Nay, but they say, \`We found our fathers following -a religion,
and we are guided by their footprints.'”*** ***(43:20-22)***

The polytheists accepted God as the Creator of the universe and as the
Lord of totality of existence. However, they also believed that every
region of this vast universe has its own god, who is independent in his
province, and the responsibility for seeing to the welfare of his
sub­jects rests directly on his shoulders. This is the case; although
all these various and

independent gods are under the authority of the “god of gods”, who is
the Lord of the -universe.

Since these people were polytheistic with regard to the Lord­*ship
(rububiyyah)* of God, they were also polytheistic when it came to
worship*(\`ibadah)* and obedience*(ita'ah). As* a result of this belief,
they denied .revelation and prophethood. In principle besides, they
believed the attainment of such a high station to be impossible for any
human being.

Their denial of the principles of prophethood and revelation based on
their belief that God did not have any direct jurisdiction over human
societies and, therefore would not set any course for them to follow or
give them any commands. The argument of their thinkers was' stated in
the above-mentioned verse put in the form of an “exceptional syllogism”.

The argument went like this If God had wanted us not to worship the
idols we would not have worshipped them, and since we do worship them it
follows that God is not opposed to our worshipping them.

Because, if this were the wish of God, we would have had no choice but
to do things the way He wanted them done, since His will is superior to
ours. It follows, then, that worship of God is not necessary and one
should only worship the idols. The same kind of fallacious reasoning is
mentioned in Surat al-'An \`am:

<p dir="rtl">
سَيَقُولُ الَّذِينَ أَشْرَكُوا لَوْ شَاءَ اللَّـهُ مَا أَشْرَكْنَا وَلَا
آبَاؤُنَا وَلَا حَرَّمْنَا مِن شَيْءٍ كَذَٰلِكَ كَذَّبَ الَّذِينَ مِن
قَبْلِهِمْ حَتَّىٰ ذَاقُوا بَأْسَنَا قُلْ هَلْ عِندَكُم مِّنْ عِلْمٍ
فَتُخْرِجُوهُ لَنَا إِن تَتَّبِعُونَ إِلَّا الظَّنَّ وَإِنْ أَنتُمْ
إِلَّا تَخْرُصُونَ قُلْ فَلِلَّـهِ الْحُجَّةُ الْبَالِغَةُ فَلَوْ شَاءَ
لَهَدَاكُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ
</p>

***The idolaters will say, 'Had God willed, we would not have ascribed
[unto Him] partners, neither our fathers, nor would we have forbidden
aught. Thus did those who were before them cry lies [to God's
messengers] until they tasted of our might. Say: 'Have you any knowledge
that you can bring forth for us? You follow only surmise, thereby***

***conjecturing.' Say: 'To God belongs the argument conclusive; for had
He willed, He would have guided you all.' (6:148-149)***

In Surat*al Nahl* we read:

<p dir="rtl">
وَقَالَ الَّذِينَ أَشْرَكُوا لَوْ شَاءَ اللَّـهُ مَا عَبَدْنَا مِن
دُونِهِ مِن شَيْءٍ نَّحْنُ وَلَا آبَاؤُنَا وَلَا حَرَّمْنَا مِن دُونِهِ
مِن شَيْءٍ كَذَٰلِكَ فَعَلَ الَّذِينَ مِن قَبْلِهِمْ فَهَلْ عَلَى
الرُّسُلِ إِلَّا الْبَلَاغُ الْمُبِينُ
</p>

***“And the idolaters say: 'Had God willed, we would not have worshipped
any­thing beside Him, neither we nor our fathers, nor would we have
forbidden aught without [command from] Him.' So did those before them
argue. Are the messengers charged with aught save the delivery of the
manifest Message?”*** ***(16:35)***

These groundless arguments of” the polytheists were put forward
sometimes to deny the Unity of God, and at other times used to deny the
reality of Revelation and the mission of the prophets of God. Their line
of reasoning about the prophets went like this If such a thing as
prophethood did exist and had there been messengers from God, it would
follow that the polytheists did not have any authority to forbid certain
things in the name of law.

And since whey have forbidden certain things and passed laws regarding
them, it follows that no such things, either Revelation or prophethood,
exist.

In short, their argument, both in proving polytheism and denying the
Unity of God, or in proving the validity of independence and autonomy in
religious matters and denying the reality of Divine Revela­tion and
prophethood, was like this \`If God had wished to direct our vital
affairs Himself, and had He, by sending prophets and Messengers and
formulation of Divine laws, wanted to guide our individual and social
lives, we shouldn't have ever become polytheists and worshipped the
idols, just as we would never have banned or prohibited anything in the
name of law.

However, since we do worship idols and do prohibit certain things in the
name of law, it is clear that God did not want us to be monotheists, and
He did not wish to send us any prophets, Books or Revelation. It
follows, therefore, that polytheism is the correct and the righteous
path, and that there is no such thing as Revelation and Prophethood.'

This was the essence of what the thinkers amongst the polytheists set
forth as justification of their beliefs. What their fol­lowers said was:
\`Since our ancestors, generation after generation, have been
worshipping and honouring these idols, we shall remain loyal to their
customs, beliefs and traditions inherited from them.'

Since the Holy Qur'an is the Book of truth, its call is always for
rational investigation. The recommendation it makes to humanity is that
every individual should - either investigate himself or follow someone
who does. Such an imitation is tantamount to investigation.

The Qur'an does not permit blind imitation, because it considers the
views of those who are not men of research and investigation as
worthless. Thus, the fact that the ancestors of a certain individual
held a certain set of beliefs or worshipped in a particular manner, does
not justify imitation. Such following would be nothing but blind
imitation.

Then the Qur'an goes on to make a critique of the arguments set forth by
the thinkers amongst the idolaters. In a number of places in its
critique it states that an acceptable opinion is one which is either
founded on reason and knowledge or is based on Divine Revelation.

A position which is backed neither by definitive Revelation nor by
definitive reason is groundless and should not be trusted:

<p dir="rtl">
… مَّا لَهُم بِذَٰلِكَ مِنْ عِلْمٍ إِنْ هُمْ إِلَّا يَخْرُصُونَ
</p>

***“....They have no knowledge whatsoever of that. They do but
guess.”*** ***(43:20)***

That is, their statement is not based on certain knowledge and is
founded on nothing except surmise and conjecture: They have not made a
'scientific investigation into this matter

<p dir="rtl">
أَمْ آتَيْنَاهُمْ كِتَابًا مِّن قَبْلِهِ فَهُم بِهِ مُسْتَمْسِكُونَ
</p>

***“Or have we given them any Scripture before (this Qur'an) so that'
holding fast thereto?”*** ***(43:21)***

That is, the argument set forth by them is not backed by, Revelation
either, because they have not been given a Divine*Book* which polytheism
and idolatry are justified and recommended and the Unity of the Creator
is

denied. This restriction of valid reasons to those based either on
*\`aql qat\`i* or on *wahy qat'i* can also be found in of verses of the
Qur'an. One such example is in Surat *al-'Ahqaf:*

<p dir="rtl">
قُلْ أَرَأَيْتُم مَّا تَدْعُونَ مِن دُونِ اللَّـهِ أَرُونِي مَاذَا
خَلَقُوا مِنَ الْأَرْضِ أَمْ لَهُمْ شِرْكٌ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ ائْتُونِي
بِكِتَابٍ مِّن قَبْلِ هَـٰذَا أَوْ أَثَارَةٍ مِّنْ عِلْمٍ إِن كُنتُمْ
صَادِقِينَ
</p>

***“Say (unto them, O Muhammad]: \`Have you thought on all that you
invoke beside God? Show me what they have created of the earth. Or have
they a partnership in the heavens? Bring me a Book before this, or some
vestige of' knowledge (in support of what you say), if you are
truthful.'*** “***(46:4)***

In other words, the worship of the idols could be justified only when
they have independently created something in this world or have, had a
hand in the creation of the heavens. Moreover, since such a thing has
been neither affirmed neither by Divine Revelation nor proven by reason,
it must follow that idolatry is nothing more than a deviation and a
delusion. Much the same purport can be seen in Surat*al-Fatir* , a verse
of which reads:

<p dir="rtl">
قُلْ أَرَأَيْتُمْ شُرَكَاءَكُمُ الَّذِينَ تَدْعُونَ مِن دُونِ اللَّـهِ
أَرُونِي مَاذَا خَلَقُوا مِنَ الْأَرْضِ أَمْ لَهُمْ شِرْكٌ فِي
السَّمَاوَاتِ أَمْ آتَيْنَاهُمْ كِتَابًا فَهُمْ عَلَىٰ بَيِّنَتٍ مِّنْهُ
بَلْ إِن يَعِدُ الظَّالِمُونَ بَعْضُهُم بَعْضًا إِلَّا غُرُورًا
</p>

***“Say: \`Have you considered your associates to whom you pray beside
God? Show me what they created of the earth; or have they any
partnership in the heavens?' Or have we given them a Book, so that they
act on clear proof therefrom? Nay, the evildoers promise one another
naught but delusion.”*** ***(35:40)***

In this verse, polytheism and worship of idols is considered to be an
intellectual and cultural fraud based on empty promises, because it is
backed neither by rational evidence nor is based on Revelation.

Since worthiness of worship is based on creating or being a partner in
the act of creation, and since the idols have no role whatsoever in
either of these, there is no rational evidence for their worship. On the
other hand, there is no evidence that Divine Revelation affirms them
either. Since polytheism or idolatry is backed neither by definitive
reason nor by definitive Revelation, it must have its origins in nothing
except surmise, conjecture, fancy, and self-centered desire (*hawa* ).

Because, if an opinion is not based on science and knowledge, it is
conjectural if it is not in harmony with the guidance of Revelation, it
must have originated from selfish interests and desires. Accordingly,
the Holy Qur'an considers all deviated and misguided schools of thought
'opposed to monotheism (*al-tawhid* ) as creatures of fancy and
conjec­ture, which rely for their existence on the selfish desires of
their followers:

<p dir="rtl">
إِن يَتَّبِعُونَ إِلَّا الظَّنَّ وَمَا تَهْوَى الْأَنفُسُ وَلَقَدْ
جَاءَهُم مِّن رَّبِّهِمُ الْهُدَىٰ وَمَا لَهُم بِهِ مِنْ عِلْمٍ إِن
يَتَّبِعُونَ إِلَّا الظَّنَّ وَإِنَّ الظَّنَّ لَا يُغْنِي مِنَ الْحَقِّ
شَيْئًا
</p>

***“....They*** follow***only surmise, and what their selves desire. And
now the guidance has come to them from their Lord.... They have no
knowledge thereof they*** follow***only surmise, and surmise can never
take the place of truth.” (53:23, 28)***

And:

<p dir="rtl">
... إِن يَتَّبِعُونَ إِلَّا الظَّنَّ وَإِنْ هُمْ إِلَّا يَخْرُصُونَ
</p>

***“....They follow only a conjecture, and they do but guess.”
(10:66)***

And:

<p dir="rtl">
... وَمَا لَهُم بِذَٰلِكَ مِنْ عِلْمٍ إِنْ هُمْ إِلَّا يَظُنُّونَ
</p>

***“....they have no knowledge whatsoever of (all) that; they do but
guess.” (45:24)***

Moreover, the Holy Qur'an instructs humanity not to adopt beliefs, in
general, beliefs the truth and the validity of which is not absolutely
certain

<p dir="rtl">
وَلَا تَقْفُ مَا لَيْسَ لَكَ بِهِ عِلْمٌ إِنَّ السَّمْعَ وَالْبَصَرَ
وَالْفُؤَادَ كُلُّ أُولَـٰئِكَ كَانَ عَنْهُ مَسْئُولًا
</p>

***“[O man] follow not that whereof thou hast no knowledge. Lo, the
hearing and the sight and heart-all of those shall be questioned of.”
(17:36)***

#### Invalidity of the Syllogism Used by the Polytheists

####

At the end of this section it would be useful to briefly point out the
reason for the falsity of the exceptional syllogism used by the
polytheists and quoted in*Surat al-\`An\`am, Surat al Nahl,* and*Surat
al-Zuhkruf* of the Qur'an. The reason for the falsity of the exceptional
syllogism in question is that it does not distinguish between God's
creative will*(al-'iradah al-takwiniyyah),* and His legislative will
(*al 'iradah al-tashri'iyyah).*

The “creative will” of God is irresistible, to it belongs the law of
causality which determines processes and phenomena. His “legislative
will” consists of commands, instructions and advices, which although
obligatory do not compel or determine human behaviour. Therefore, the
will of God which man has no choice but to obey is*al-\`iradah
al-takwiniyyah,* while*al-'iradah al-tashri'iyyah* of God is related to
human action by virtue of the human being's freedom and free will.

The whole cosmic system was created by God through His “creative will”
and is governed by Him on the basis of His*qada\` (* Divine Destiny)
and*qadar* (Providence), irrespective of whether someone is a polytheist
or not. Schools of thought and points of view have no bearing on this
aspect of the Divine will and are irrelevant to its function.

However, the legislative will of God ordains*al-tawhid* as the right
faith for the human being. Here man has a choice; he can obey or
\`rebel. He can either follow the instruction and the guidance given to
him by God or he can ignore it and worship the idols. In both of these
cases, however, his action is not incompatible with the will of God.

That is why it is not possible to say that if it were Divine will that
men should worship the One God and abstain from idolatry, men would not
have practised polytheism and would not have forbidden things in the
name of

law. In short, the major and the minor premises do not mutually
necessitate each other in this exceptional syllogism.

With the absence of mutual necessity between the minor and the major
premises, the syllogism does not lead to the fallacious conclusion drawn
from it. This*is* why the Holy Qur'an has considered polytheism to be a
product of ignorance and has mentioned it as something unjustifiable by
either science or reason.

<p dir="rtl">
... وَإِن جَاهَدَاكَ لِتُشْرِكَ بِي مَا لَيْسَ لَكَ بِهِ عِلْمٌ فَلَا
تُطِعْهُمَا...
</p>

***“....But if they strive to make thee associate with Me something of
which thou hast no knowledge, then obey them not ....” (29:8)***

And:

<p dir="rtl">
وَإِن جَاهَدَاكَ عَلَىٰ أَن تُشْرِكَ بِي مَا لَيْسَ لَكَ بِهِ عِلْمٌ
فَلَا تُطِعْهُمَا...
</p>

***“But \`if they [the parents; obedience to whom is emphasized by the
Qur'an] strive with thee to make thee ascribe unto Me as partner that***
of***which thou host no knowledge, then obey them not ....”***
***(31:15)***

The reason for the fact that the Qur'an considers polytheism and
'similar other schools of thought merely to be by-products of ignorance
and as being scientifically unjustifiable, is that they cling to things
which have no objective existence; what is non-existent is devoid of
reality and has no place in knowledge and science. This idea is
expres­sed in*Surat Yunus* in the following manner:

<p dir="rtl">
... قُلْ أَتُنَبِّئُونَ اللَّـهَ بِمَا لَا يَعْلَمُ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ
وَلَا فِي الْأَرْضِ ...
</p>

***“....Would you inform Allah of (something) that He knoweth not in the
heavens or in the earth? ....*** ”***(10:18)***

What God, the All-knowing, does not know must surely be non-existent.
Then in Surat*al-Mu'min* the Qur'an quotes a prophet as asking the
idolaters:

<p dir="rtl">
وَأُشْرِكَ بِهِ مَا لَيْسَ لِي بِهِ عِلْمٌ...
</p>

***“....and [shall I[ ascribe unto Him as partners that whereof I have
no knowledge? ....”*** ***(40:42)***

Polytheism, in this verse, is alluded to as a pretension to know what is
basically non-existent.

### Fifth Example

###

The Holy Qur'an recognizes no other standard for either imitation or
reason than definitive reason and definitive Revelation, and considers
legitimate only that which is either proved by definitive reason or
defi­nitive Revelation. Following and imitation or leadership and
guidance that are based on neither of these two, are considered by the
Qur'an to be nothing but empty and fruitless opposition to truth, the
end result of which is following the devil into deviation, misguidance
and decep­tion.

The Qur'an encharges the human being to investigate and reason about his
actions. He should either investigate the matter himself, or, if he is
not able to do this must follow those who carry out research and
investigation in a particular field. Such an imitation is itself a form
of investigation because it is a judgement of definitive reason that if
a man is, unable to investigate,

something which requires action on his part, he must follow the
judgement of those who do investigate such matters.

If he, does not follow the judgement of those investigators, but his own
inclinations, or Imitates the views of non-investigators, his judgement
would be of no value; because it is neither, directly or indirectly
supported by research and investigation.

Moreover, a judgement not based on investigation lacks firm foundations,
and is shaky. Because of this shakiness, such judgements, in the
vocabulary of the Qur'an, are referred to as “rumours” in
Surat*al-'A\`raf* :

<p dir="rtl">
... وَالْمُرْجِفُونَ فِي الْمَدِينَةِ ...
</p>

***“....Those who spread rumours in the city*** ....” ***(33:60)***

As far as leaders in matters of belief and opinion are concerts their
leadership must be based either on scientific and rational investigation
or on Divine Revelation. The fact that these two are mention side by
side is another indication of their mutual supportive role and
harmonious relationship. The Qur'an stresses the necessity for
investigation and wholesome imitation in these wards:

<p dir="rtl">
وَمِنَ النَّاسِ مَن يُجَادِلُ فِي اللَّـهِ بِغَيْرِ عِلْمٍ وَيَتَّبِعُ
كُلَّ شَيْطَانٍ مَّرِيدٍ
</p>

***“And among mankind there is such a one who disputes concerning God
without knowledge, and*** follows***every rebellious Satan.” (22:3)***

It stresses investigation and inquiry as being necessary for opinion
leaders:

<p dir="rtl">
وَمِنَ النَّاسِ مَن يُجَادِلُ فِي اللَّـهِ بِغَيْرِ عِلْمٍ وَلَا هُدًى
وَلَا كِتَابٍ مُّنِيرٍ ثَانِيَ عِطْفِهِ لِيُضِلَّ عَن سَبِيلِ اللَّـهِ
لَهُ فِي الدُّنْيَا خِزْيٌ وَنُذِيقُهُ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ عَذَابَ
الْحَرِيقِ
</p>

***“And among mankind there is such a one who disputes concerning God
without knowledge or guidance or an illuminating Book, turning***

***away in pride to lead astray (men) from the way of God; for him is
degradation in this world, and on the Day of Resurrection We shall let
him taste the chastisement of fire.” (22:8-9)***

In dealing with the question of imitation, the Holy Qur'an considers
blind imitation to be following the lead of the devil. Since this kind
of blind following has no foundations, it changes according to the
circumstances of the moment, following one devil today, and another
devil tomorrow. Therefore, the 4lind imitator is the follower of
numerous devils.

This is. Why the Qur'an says, “Disputes without knowledge, and follows
every rebellions devil.” As to intellectual and ideological leadership,
the Qur'anic viewpoint is that if leadership is not based on certain
acquired knowledge, or logical and definitive reasoning, or valid
mystical experience of the \`*arif* , or on self-purification and
sincere and devout action performed for the sake of God, or on Divine
Revelation.

Its investigation and inquiry is false and deceptive, bringing for the
opinion leaders disrepute in this world and burning fire in the next
one. This is why it says, “....without knowledge or guidance or an
illuminating Book.” By “knowledge” it is apparently referring to
definitive rational evidence, and by “guidance” it means the direct
perception of the truth available to the

purified soul of an \`*arif* which is attained as the result of great
effort and which leads to reception of Divine guidance. 8 This is what
is implied in yet another verse:

<p dir="rtl">
وَالَّذِينَ جَاهَدُوا فِينَا لَنَهْدِيَنَّهُمْ سُبُلَنَا وَإِنَّ
اللَّـهَ لَمَعَ الْمُحْسِنِينَ
</p>

***“As for those who strive in Us, We surety guide them to Our paths;
and God is with the good-doers.”*** ***(29:69)***

The phrase, “an illuminating Book”, refers to Revelation and
prophethood. Thus, if intellectual leadership is not in agreement with
rational evidence, or correct mystical insight, or the Holy Qur'an, it
would be nothing more than a futile and misleading exercise. It is here
that the coherence and unity of Revelation and definitive reason becomes
evident.

If the only source of acquisition of knowledge were Revelation, the Holy
Qur'an would not have set forth numerous sources and ways, and would not
have mentioned “knowledge” and “guid­ance” alongside the “illuminating
Book”.

Moreover, this also calls attention to the. fact that the proof of the
necessity of Revelation, its distinction from other sources which are
not Divinely revealed, and its comprehensiveness in coverage of reality,
can not be attested by Revelation itself, since that would be begging
the question. That the proof of these things has been left to definitive
reason, implies the validity of the authority of reason.9

In short, by paying close attention to the verses of*Surat al Hajj* ,
*Surat Luqman* (verse 20) and certain other Qur'anic Surahs, the
independent authority of reason and the validity of definitive rational
evidence become clearly evident and the mutual supportive and harmonious
relationship between reason and Revelation becomes fully established.

### Sixth Example

###

The Holy Qur'an considers rational evidence and definitive knowledge to
be evidence of the truth of Divine Revelation. It says that correct
rational reasoning invariably affirms the authentic validity of
Revelation and that definitive knowledge leads to acceptance of Divine
Revelation.

<p dir="rtl">
وَيَرَى الَّذِينَ أُوتُوا الْعِلْمَ الَّذِي أُنزِلَ إِلَيْكَ مِن
رَّبِّكَ هُوَ الْحَقَّ وَيَهْدِي إِلَىٰ صِرَاطِ الْعَزِيزِ الْحَمِيدِ
</p>

***“Those who have been given knowledge see that what has been Revealed
to thee from thy Lord is the Truth, and guides to the path of the
All-mighty, the All Laudable” (34:6)***

What this verse means is that all those who are knowledgeable about
Divine matters and who make judgements based on definitive evidence
believe in the authenticity and validity of Revelation and the\` Qur'an.
They believe that the Qur'an guides men to the path leading toy God, to
whom belongs all power and praise.

This interpretation implies that denial of Revelation is caused by a
lack of definitive knowledge. In other words, it is ignorance which
causes one to deny the validity and the legitimacy of the Qur'an. This
is also the case in the problems practical philosophy*(al-hikmah
al-\`amaliyyah);* it is rational and systematic knowledge that
determines the ethical values and it is

ignorance that denies absolute moral standards and criteria explaining
them on false and hollow foundations:

<p dir="rtl">
خَرَجَ عَلَىٰ قَوْمِهِ فِي زِينَتِهِ قَالَ الَّذِينَ يُرِيدُونَ
الْحَيَاةَ الدُّنْيَا يَا لَيْتَ لَنَا مِثْلَ مَا أُوتِيَ قَارُونُ
إِنَّهُ لَذُو حَظٍّ عَظِيمٍ وَقَالَ الَّذِينَ أُوتُوا الْعِلْمَ
وَيْلَكُمْ ثَوَابُ اللَّـهِ خَيْرٌ لِّمَنْ آمَنَ وَعَمِلَ صَالِحًا وَلَا
يُلَقَّاهَا إِلَّا الصَّابِرُونَ
</p>

***“Then went he forth before his people in his pomp ,Those who were
desirous of the life of the world said: \`Ah, would that we possessed
the like of that Koran has been given. Surely he is a man of mighty
fortune.’but those who, had been given knowledge said: \`Woe unto you,
the reward of God is better, for him who believes and works
righteousness; and none shall receive it except the steadfast.'”***
***(28:79-80)***

Thus, the standard by which a system of values is determined and arrived
at is through reason and certain knowledge; just as real knowledge is
only arrived at through definitive evidence. That learning which does
not take into consideration Divine truths and fails to discover the real
system of values, is imperfect and unreliable. Such learning is
considered to have little value by the Qur'an.

<p dir="rtl">
فَأَعْرِضْ عَن مَّن تَوَلَّىٰ عَن ذِكْرِنَا وَلَمْ يُرِدْ إِلَّا
الْحَيَاةَ الدُّنْيَا ذَٰلِكَ مَبْلَغُهُم مِّنَ الْعِلْمِ...
</p>

***“So turn thou [O Muhammad] from him whom turns away from Our
Remembrance and desires only the life of the world. That is their sum of
knowledge ...” (53:29-30)***

Revelation and Resurrection of the Human Sciences
-------------------------------------------------

Although Revelation and reason are complementary and not contradictory
in the sense that demonstrative reason is relatively sufficient, or even
perfect, for the perception and the understanding of realities. Divine
Revelation is necessary and more complete than demonstrative reason for
perfect and definitive understanding, of the totality of existence.

Therefore, what is' discovered by demonstrative reason is supported and
confirmed by Revelation, and what is inaccessible to reason is revealed
to it by Revelation. Revelation stimulates reason and, guides it so that
it can discover things through investigation and inference. What reason
is potentially capable of knowing becomes actualized for it through the
guidance and inspiration of Divine Revelation.

What reason perceives but dimly is made clear and precise for it by
Revelation. In short, \`Revelation completes reason and compensates for
its shortcomings and weaknesses. Amir al-Mu'minin ‘Ali (as), has spoken
of the role of prophets in relation to thought and culture in the
following terms:

<p dir="rtl">
... وَ يُثِيرُوا لَهُمْ دَفَائِنَ اَلْعُقُولِ وَيُرُوهُمْ آيَاتِ
الْمَقْدِرَةِ...
</p>

To stimulate and active the dormant deposits of reason and to reveal it
to the manifestations of his Omnipotence.10

It is therefore, in the light of Revelation that reason realizes its
complete role and function, grows under its nourishment, and obtains far
reaching vision. This is because Revelation is the Word of God, Who
encompasses the entire universe, and His Word is as universal as His
knowledge.

Thus when God speaks of any part of the universe, He so describes it
that its relationship with the totality of existence, is also described,
and it is also made clear that the totality of existence, too, has a
direct link with its Ultimate Source, so that one can clearly comprehend
the relationship of a part with the First Cause.

In the same way, when God speaks of something, He does not limit His
description to its matter and form, its genus, differentia or species,
its history, or its various material transformations; His description of
objects is not a circular and tautological definition. In other words,
His descriptions are not confined to a single plane, the place of the
physical world.

This is to remind that some of the experimental sciences merely deal
with description of the past history and present state of a particular
material phenomenon, its possible future transformations in time space,
its constitution, movement and other such characteristics. All such
descriptions and observations are confined to a single plane.

In other words, their investigation is confined to the inner mechanics
of a closed system. For example, in biology, medicine, geology,
astronomy and other branches of the experimental sciences, and also some
of the social sciences, discussion is limited to describing the past,
the present, and the predictable future of a phenomenon and is confined
to the closed system of “internal structure” of an object, without any
reference being made to its relationship with the rest of the universe.

For instance, when certain mineral deposits are studied in geology and a
discussion is made about the professes by which the deposits are formed

underground, the various stages in the history of their development
their present state, and their future course of change, nothing is said
about the “efficient cause” that created such deposits.

Nor is it ever asked whether this cause is itself a phenomenon caused by
some other phenomenon, which relates by a series of causes and effects
to a Source which is the Necessary Being*(wajib al-wujud),* whose
Existence is the same as its Essence, which is completely
self-sufficient and can fulfill the needs of all other things, which are
incomplete.

Nothing is said about the*purpose* of the existence of this phenomenon,
whether the purpose is itself another phenomenon with yet another
purpose, whether the chain of such purposes must end with an aim which
is the Necessary which is infinitely perfect and whose perfection and
purpose of being are not separate from Its Essence, which is the
Ultimate Purpose of all those things that have a purpose. In short,
nothing is said about the ultimate end of a thing and no attempt is made
to place it in a universal perspective of purpose (telic and
teleological perspectives).

The experimental sciences and some of the human sciences concern
themselves with only the internal structure of phenomena, leaving the
question of their ultimate purpose and efficient cause to the field of
metaphysics.

Therefore, all things are viewed in isolation and separation from their
ultimate origin and end*(al-mabda' wa al-ma\`ad).* Obviously, even
though all researches carried out in these fields of study enrich our
knowledge about

the internal structure of the object being studied; they tell us nothing
about its origin and purpose.

Limiting the study of natural phenomena to their internal structure and
ignoring the ultimate origin and purpose of things, result in deficient
description and interpretation of these phenomena. This is the cause of
innumerable difficulties and shortcomings in our understanding of the
nature of reality, whose unfortunate signs and consequences can be
observed in today's world of reason without Revelation and knowledge
without vision.

Revelation, however, considers all things to be 'signs' (*ayat* )
pointing to the ultimate origin of the world besides describing the
internal structure of an object, its history; present state and future
course of development, it also discusses its place in a perspective of
origination and ultimate end that is, it makes a vertical movement that
cuts across the horizontal physical plane.

Thus the systems of “efficient cause”*(al-illah al-fa\`iliyyah)* and
“final cause” *(al-\`illah'al gha'iyyah)* act as two wings attached to
the body of the experimental science (study of internal structure)
helping it to break out of a static earth bound state and enabling it to
fly in the infinite skies of the Divine world outlook. It encourages it
to rise to ever higher altitudes and guides it on the best course of
ascent. For example, the following Qur'anic verse alludes to all the
three aspects of the natural phenomena mentioned above:

<p dir="rtl">
... رَبُّنَا الَّذِي أَعْطَىٰ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ خَلْقَهُ ثُمَّ هَدَىٰ
</p>

***....Our Lord is He who gave unto everything its nature, then guided
it aright. (20:50)***

That is, our Lord has given everything its inner structure, equipped it
with its means of attaining perfection, and then guided it towards its
real goal.

The same sort of approach towards the phenomena of this world can be
seen throughout the Qur'an. In this manner the two wings of
origination*(al-\`illah al-fa\`iliyyah)* and ultimate
purpose*(al-\`illah al­gha'iyyah)* are revived and rejuvenated in all
the research being earned out about these phenomena.

In this way, the Holy Qur'an turns knowledge into reason, reason into
wisdom, and mental conceptions into verities. This is the fashion in
which the Qur'an coordinates the findings of theoretical reason with the
effort of practical reason, and objectifies what were intellectual and
subjective conceptions.

Finally, it is by these means that the Qur'an turns a specialist into a
man of religion, a scientific researcher into a practical investigator,
a scientific “authority” into a devotee of the Truth, a technical
inventor into a committed believer, an industrial entrepreneur into a
man of faith, thus transforming raw mind into a seasoned intellect.

Below are given few examples of the blossoming of sciences in the light
of Divine Revelation.

### First Example

###

Explaining the creation of the heavens and their stability without
reliance on any visible columns and the orderly system of the moon the
Qur'an says:

<p dir="rtl">
اللَّـهُ الَّذِي رَفَعَ السَّمَاوَاتِ بِغَيْرِ عَمَدٍ تَرَوْنَهَا ثُمَّ
اسْتَوَىٰ عَلَى الْعَرْشِ وَسَخَّرَ الشَّمْسَ وَالْقَمَرَ كُلٌّ يَجْرِي
لِأَجَلٍ مُّسَمًّى يُدَبِّرُ الْأَمْرَ يُفَصِّلُ الْآيَاتِ لَعَلَّكُم
بِلِقَاءِ رَبِّكُمْ تُوقِنُونَ
</p>

***“God is He who raised up the heavens without visible supports then
mounted the Throne. He subjected the sun and the moon each one running
to a term stated. He directs the affair; He distinguishes the signs;
haply you will have faith in the encounter with your Lord.”***
***(13:2)***

In this verse, besides describing the inner structure of the heavens and
the planets, the system of efficient causes and the system of final
cause is also pointed to. In other words, both monotheism and the Day of
Resurrection (*al-tawhid* and *al-ma'ad)* are spoken of.

### Second Example

###

In explaining the genesis of the earth and the emergence of the
mountains, and the way various trees and fruits grow and mature deriving
nourishment from the same substances by their roots; it says,

<p dir="rtl">
وَهُوَ الَّذِي مَدَّ الْأَرْضَ وَجَعَلَ فِيهَا رَوَاسِيَ وَأَنْهَارًا
وَمِن كُلِّ الثَّمَرَاتِ جَعَلَ فِيهَا زَوْجَيْنِ اثْنَيْنِ يُغْشِي
اللَّيْلَ النَّهَارَ إِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَاتٍ لِّقَوْمٍ يَتَفَكَّرُونَ
وَفِي الْأَرْضِ قِطَعٌ مُّتَجَاوِرَاتٌ وَجَنَّاتٌ مِّنْ أَعْنَابٍ
وَزَرْعٌ وَنَخِيلٌ صِنْوَانٌ وَغَيْرُ صِنْوَانٍ يُسْقَىٰ بِمَاءٍ وَاحِدٍ
وَنُفَضِّلُ بَعْضَهَا عَلَىٰ
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
بَعْضٍ فِي الْأُكُلِ إِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَاتٍ لِّقَوْمٍ يَعْقِلُونَ
وَإِن تَعْجَبْ فَعَجَبٌ قَوْلُهُمْ أَإِذَا كُنَّا تُرَابًا أَإِنَّا
لَفِي خَلْقٍ جَدِيدٍ ...
</p>

***“It is He who spread out the earth and set therein firm mountains and
ricers; and of every fruit he placed therein two Pairs. He covereth the
night with the day. Surely, in that are signs for people who reflect.
And in the earth are neighbouring tracts, vineyards and fields sown, and
palms in pairs, and palms single, which are watered with one water. And
some of them We prefer in produce above others. Surely in that are signs
for a people who understand. If thou wouldst wonder, surely wonderful is
their saying, \`What, when we are dust, shall we indeed then be raised
up again in new creation?' ....*** ”***(13:3-5)***

Thus we see that, in this chapter, the Qur'an not only describes the
inner structure of the earth, mountains and rivers, the world of
vegeta­tion, etc., but it also mentions them in a perspective of
efficient cause and of final cause. That is, both unity of creation
(*al-tawhid* ) and the ultimate end ( *al ma\`ad* ) are fully taken into
account.

The way; however, that the causal perspective is described in the first
and the second verses is not the same. In the first verse the chain of
causation is described moving from unity to multiplicity it was the One
God who stretched out the earth and caused the mountains to emerge and
the rivers to flow etc.

But in the second verse the description moves from multiplicity to
unity; here we have an earth which is divided into many adjacent tracts
and in each tract there is a particular garden in which grow trees
bearing particular fruits; the gardens and the tracts resemble one
another and the trees derive nourishment from one vital fluid: water.

This movement from multiplicity to unity in nature guides the
intelligent observer towards the realization of the One Source. After
this, the Qur'an describes resurrection and the problem of re-creation
after death.

### Third Example

###

Describing the coming into being of cattle, the way that they should be
taken care of, the way that domesticated animals are to be used, and the
beauty of scenes of the herds going to pasture and return­ing from it,
and other problems relating to domesticated animals and related,
matters, it says:

<p dir="rtl">
وَالْأَنْعَامَ خَلَقَهَا لَكُمْ فِيهَا دِفْءٌ وَمَنَافِعُ وَمِنْهَا
تَأْكُلُونَ وَلَكُمْ فِيهَا جَمَالٌ حِينَ تُرِيحُونَ وَحِينَ تَسْرَحُونَ
﴿٦﴾وَتَحْمِلُ أَثْقَالَكُمْ إِلَىٰ بَلَدٍ لَّمْ تَكُونُوا بَالِغِيهِ
إِلَّا بِشِقِّ الْأَنفُسِ إِنَّ رَبَّكُمْ لَرَءُوفٌ رَّحِيمٌ وَالْخَيْلَ
وَالْبِغَالَ وَالْحَمِيرَ لِتَرْكَبُوهَا وَزِينَةً وَيَخْلُقُ مَا لَا
تَعْلَمُونَ
</p>

***“....And the cattle He created them for you; in them is warmth, and
uses various, and of them you eat, and there is beauty in them for you,
when you bring them home to rest and when you take, them out to pasture
and they bear your loads for you unto a land you could not reach save
with great trouble to yourselves. Surely, your Lord is All-clement, all
compassionate. And horses, and mules, and asses (He has created) for
you***

***to ride; and as an adornment; and He creates what you know not.”
(16:5-8)***

In the verse just mentioned, besides describing the inner structure of
the emergence and development of herds, their system of efficient cause
(which is the same as*al-tawhid* ) is also pointed out. Then after these
verses, the Holy Qur'an refers to the system of final cause of all these
things:

<p dir="rtl">
إِلَـٰهُكُمْ إِلَـٰهٌ وَاحِدٌ فَالَّذِينَ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ بِالْآخِرَةِ
قُلُوبُهُم مُّنكِرَةٌ وَهُم مُّسْتَكْبِرُونَ
</p>

***“Your God is One*** God.***But as for those who believe not in the
Hereafter their hearts deny, and they have waxed*** proud.”
***(16:22)***

### Fourth Example

###

Explaining the appearance of clouds, their concentration, the dropping
of rain from their midst, their formation in the sky, so that they
resemble heavenly mountains, the pouring of hail from the way lightning
strikes, other problems in regard to the order of night day, and
describing the genesis of various animals, the Qur'an says:

<p dir="rtl">
أَلَمْ تَرَ أَنَّ اللَّـهَ يُزْجِي سَحَابًا ثُمَّ يُؤَلِّفُ بَيْنَهُ
ثُمَّ يَجْعَلُهُ رُكَامًا فَتَرَى الْوَدْقَ يَخْرُجُ مِنْ خِلَالِهِ
وَيُنَزِّلُ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ مِن جِبَالٍ فِيهَا مِن بَرَدٍ فَيُصِيبُ بِهِ
مَن يَشَاءُ وَيَصْرِفُهُ عَن مَّن يَشَاءُ يَكَادُ سَنَا بَرْقِهِ
يَذْهَبُ بِالْأَبْصَارِ يُقَلِّبُ اللَّـهُ اللَّيْلَ وَالنَّهَارَ إِنَّ
فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَعِبْرَةً لِّأُولِي الْأَبْصَارِ وَاللَّـهُ خَلَقَ كُلَّ
دَابَّةٍ مِّن مَّاءٍ فَمِنْهُم مَّن يَمْشِي عَلَىٰ بَطْنِهِ وَمِنْهُم
مَّن يَمْشِي عَلَىٰ رِجْلَيْنِ وَمِنْهُم مَّن يَمْشِي عَلَىٰ أَرْبَعٍ
يَخْلُقُ اللَّـهُ مَا يَشَاءُ إِنَّ اللَّـهَ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ
لَّقَدْ أَنزَلْنَا آيَاتٍ مُّبَيِّنَاتٍ وَاللَّـهُ يَهْدِي مَن يَشَاءُ
إِلَىٰ صِرَاطٍ مُّسْتَقِيمٍ
</p>

***“Hast thou not seen how God drives the clouds, then composes them,;
then makes them layers, and thou seest the rain come forth from
between***

***them? He sends down from the Heaven Mountains (of clouds) wherein is
hail, and He smites therewith whom He will, and turns it aside from whom
He will; well nigh the gleam of His lightning snatches away the sight.
God turns about the day and the night; surely in that is a lesson for
those who have eyes.***

***God has created every animal of water, and some of them go upon their
bellies and some of them go upon two feet, and some of them go upon
four. God creates whatever He will God is powerful over everything.
Verily we have sent down revelations and explained them; God guides
whomsoever He will to a straight path.” (24:43-46)***

Thus we see that in the verses just quoted, the causal structure and the
ultimate destiny and end of all the things under consideration are
described. That is, while describing the inner structure of these
natural phenomena, the formation of clouds, the pouring down of rain,
the, hail, the lightning, etc., it is pointed out that the chain of
efficient n causes behind their emergence leads to God, who is the
Creator, the Nourisher of all things.

The natural phenomena are referred to as*ayat* (signs); reference is
also made to guidance towards the straight path that leads to the
ultimate purpose of all life, which is nothing other than God. All the
three perspectives are

thus taken into account; the causal perspective, the inner structure,
and the perspective of goal and purpose.

In short, in explaining the things of this world, while the Holy Qur'an
gives us a brief but useful description of their inner structure, it so
considers their causal background and their ultimate destiny.

**In fact, the emphasis of the Qur'an is on explaining the starting
point and the ending point in the vertical ascent of a thing that is,
the starting point of all things in the view of the Qur'an is the One
God, and their ending point is the Hereafter. The Qur'an does not
consider the description and explanation of the inner structure of a
thing to be by itself a full and complete explanation of that thing.**

Sciences and the Guiding Role of Revelation:
--------------------------------------------

In conclusion I would like to mention some examples of the flowering of
human knowledge in the light of Divine Revelation,. in order to show the
effect of the heavenly teachings on man's thought and knowledge.

### First Example

###

What man gains through intellectual effort is power over the natural
phenomena. His intellect, however, does not provide him with the
adequate guidelines of use of this power. This is the task of Divine
Revelation. It sets before man the proper goals for attainment of which
human powers must be channeled. For example, it states the following as
a general rule:

<p dir="rtl">
... أَشِدَّاءُ عَلَى الْكُفَّارِ رُحَمَاءُ بَيْنَهُمْ ...
</p>

***.... (The believers) are hard against the unbelievers and merciful
among them­selves.... (48:29)***

With this general guidance the manner in which all the energies of the
community-material and spiritual-are to be used, is indicated.

### Second Example

###

When, through a Divine miracle, hard and cold iron was made soft and
forgeable in the hands of Prophet David (A), Divine Revelation instructs
him that iron must be used in making defensive weapons and not
destructive ones:

<p dir="rtl">
... وَأَلَنَّا لَهُ الْحَدِيدَ أَنِ اعْمَلْ سَابِغَاتٍ وَقَدِّرْ فِي
السَّرْدِ وَاعْمَلُوا صَالِحًا إِنِّي بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ بَصِيرٌ
</p>

***“...And we made the iron supple unto him; saying: 'Make' thou long
coats of mail and measure the links (thereof). And do ye righteousness,
for surely I see the things you do.”*** ***(34:10-11)***

The important point here is that a hard metal such as iron is to be
turned not into a destructive weapon, but into the best defensive tool,
and that what could have been a powerful offensive weapon must be turned
into the most delicate instrument of defense. In short, two aspects are
taken into consideration strength of iron and its use interest of the
people.

<p dir="rtl">
... وَأَنزَلْنَا الْحَدِيدَ فِيهِ بَأْسٌ شَدِيدٌ وَمَنَافِعُ
لِلنَّاسِ...
</p>

***“....And we sent down iron, wherein is great might, and uses for
mankind…” (57:25)***

Thus, the aspect of iron which is emphasized is its usefulness to man
and not its possible use in killing and destroying.

### Third Example

###

Whenever war breaks out between two unrighteous, or, two non Muslim
adversaries and there is a big demand for weapons, all those human
crafts and techniques which are at the disposal and service of worldly
and short-term profits are activated to make weapons and sell them.

Divine Revelation, however, clearly delineates the path that one should
take in response to such events. It instructs man to put into the hands
of two adversaries only defensive equipment, even though both of them
may be unrighteous Muslims or unbelievers.

Hisham quotes Muhammad ibn Qays as saying “I asked Imam al Sadiq (as)
\`If two groups of unbelievers go to war against each other,' should I
sell arms to them or, not?' He answered \`Sell defensive weapons
to*both* of them.'

<p dir="rtl">
سَأَلتُ أَبَا عَبْدِ اللهِ (ع) عَنِ الْفِئَتَيْنِ تَلْتَقِيانِ مِنْ
أَهلِ ألْباطِلِ أَبِيعُهُمَا السِّلاحَ. فَقَالَ بِعْهُمَا مَا
يَكَنَّهُمَا الدِّرْعَ وَ الْخَفَّيْنِ وَ نَحْوَ هَذَا.
</p>

I asked Abu \`Abd Allah (as) whether I could sell weapons to two
unrighteous groups at war. He said: “Sell to both of them protective
gear such as shields, greaves, and so on.11

This is a humane and an Islamic command which does not allow anyone to
profit from a human tragedy such as war by selling offensive and
destructive weapons to warring factions, thus encouraging blood­shed and
destruction, or by taking the side of one party against the other make
it possible for one particular group to gain hegemony and establish its
domination over others.

The duty of the man who has been liberated from bondage of greed and
myriads of desires, rivalries, jealousies and corruptions, is to take an
even handed approach towards warring parties and to sell defensive
weapons and equipment to*both* of them. His motivation for doing so
should be to help save lives and to prevent destruction and blood-shed
by selling to warring parties things at protect human beings from injury
and death.

### Fourth Example

###

The model and the proper form of Islamic government was explained by
Amir al-Mu'minin '‘Ali (as) in a directive given 'to Malik al-Ashtar. In
this order, Amir al-Mu'minin '‘Ali (as) clearly delineates the nature of
the commitments of his government and the way political power is to be
used. He also states that the power of the government should never be
used outside the boundaries set by justice and fairness:

<p dir="rtl">
... ولَاَ تَكُوْنَنَّ عَلَيْهِمْ سَبُعَاً ضَارِياً تَغْتَنِمُ
أَكْلُهُمْ، فَإِنَهُمْ صِنْفَانِ إِمَّا أَخٌ لَكَ فِي الدِّينِ وَ إمِّا
نَظِيٌر لَكَ فِي الْخَلْقِ،...
</p>

(O Malik) do not rule (the people of Egypt) like a predatory beast who
is always looking for chance to devour them. (Do not trespass the sacred
boundaries of justice) because they are either your brethren in faith,
or follow men of your own kind.12

In this political directive the flowering and perfection of the art of
government, which comes under the category of “practical philosophy” and
is one of the most important of human sciences, is clearly evident.
Here, Imam '‘Ali (as) has limited the power of the State to that which
falls within the boundaries of justice and the rights of the people.

He does not allow transgression from its sacred tenets even towards the
non-Muslims. This is nothing other than the perfection of the art of
government in the light of Divine Revelation.

In conclusion, we should keep in mind that the mission of the Islamic
Cultural Revolution is to walk on the path that has been described
above, so that the social sciences, humanities, and the experimental
sciences may all attain their highest pinnacle and the highest degree of
flowering and development possible for them.

It is therefore necessary that, while the “inner structure” of the
various specialties is studied, their “causal perspective” and their
“perspective of purpose” the understanding of which brings about
religious com­mitment and obedience-also be taken into account and
entered into the university curricula so that science may flower into
wisdom, and expertise, may be infused by religious commitment.


