4.12.2 John Stuart Mill [1806 1873]
===================================

Mill threads together empiricism and positivism [Mill's philosophy is
significantly positivist even when it is not overtly so]: Later day
British Empiricism [this includes Mill] has much in common with
positivism [and herein lies the weakness of Mill's method of empirical
logic and inductive inference, his law of causation, and rejection of a
priori truthsdespite his great prolificacy and practical influence]

Mill's interest in science, like Saint-Simon's and Comte's, is
motivated by his interest in social reform

**4.12.2.1 The external world and the self**

Mill holds that we can know only phenomena [though he admits the
thing-in-itself]Mill's metaphysics is too limited to hold present
interest

**4.12.2.2 Mental and moral sciences**

For social reform Mill calls for a reform of the mental and moral
sciences

**4.12.2.3 Psychological determinism**

[^1] cause and effect, [^2] humans are free regarding inner desires, [^3]
the will is not always hedonistic

**4.12.2.4 Ethology**

Science of formation of character

**4.12.2.5 Social science**

Mill's method would be complex: more like that of the complex physical
sciences than of geometry: predictions are tendencies rather than
positive statements

Science of government is part of the science of society

History when judiciously examined illustrates the empirical laws of
societywhich can be checked verified by psychological and ethological
laws

Social stasis and stability result from consensusdynamics is
progression


**4.12.2.6 Ethics**

The greatest good of the greatest numberunlike Bentham: the quality of
pleasure is important. Mill vacillates between [^1] the empirical
hedonistic egoistic deterministic, and [^2] the intuitionistic
perfectionistic altruistic free-willistic. This accommodating feature of
Mill's theories made them attractive to many and useful in practice: his
utilitarianism instituted a critical and intelligent conformity to
conventional morality for a blind one

**4.12.2.7 Liberalism**

Mill fought intellectual battles for democracy and the rights of
womenpointed out the "importance to man and society, of a large variety
of types in character, and of giving full freedom to human nature to
expand itself in innumerable and conflicting dimensions."

**4.12.3 Herbert Spencer [1820-1903]**

Subscribed to a synthetic unity of knowledge whose evolution is a
compromise between intuitionism [the a priori] and empiricism His major
work is First Principles 1860 1862. Spencer is sometimes regarded as the
originator of Darwinism as the idea that Darwin's principles of
evolution by natural selection is of universal application. Spencer
published ideas on the evolution of the species before the publication
of the works of Alfred Russell Wallace and Charles Darwin on the same
topic but his theory of evolution was originally Lamarckian. He later
accepted the theory of natural selection and in Principles of Biology,
1864, coined the phrase "survival of the fittest."

His evolutionary philosophy was Lamarckian, passive, mechanistic and
noninteractive. Absolute uniformities of experience generate absolute
uniformities of thoughtexternal uniformities over generations lead over
generations [by evolution] to fixed association of ideas and necessary
forms of thought. He does not tell "how it was possible for connections
to be made at the dawn of knowledge which today are [or seem] impossible
without an a priori synthetic mind."


4.12.3.1 Laws of evolution

Concentration differentiation formation

**4.12.3.2 Biology**

Adaptation of internal to external relations

**4.12.3.3 Psychology**

Consciousness is adaptation of serially ranged inner states to outer
states

**4.12.3.4 External world**

Idealism is a disease of language"realism forced on us by the basal law
of consciousness, the universal law of reason." "Ontological order and
relation are the source of the phenomenal."

**4.12.3.5 Ethics**

Welfare of units and groups, not society, is the end [target] of
morality:

**4.12.3.6 Justice**

The limit of evolution in which all humans achieve ends in harmony

**Beneficence: mutual aid**

**4.12.3.7 Optimism**

Life brings more happiness than misery

**4.12.3.8 Hedonism**

Good is the pleasurable

**4.12.3.9 Politics**

Spencer is against socialism and state interference; he is for
competition and laissez faire in social, economic and political
spheres

**5 THE RECENT PERIOD: LATE 19TH TO 21ST CENTURY**

I think of the recent period as the 20th and 21st centuries but not to
the exclusion of the 19th century. The recent period can be seen this
will be given an intrinsic refinement below as that period in which we
are immersed to the point that it is difficult to have the objectivity
that comes from distance and un-involvement. This is not to imply that
objectivity is otherwise impossible or that there is an absolute value
to distance and un-involvement

Recent tendencies grow out of the developments to this point and the
cultural influences these include the cultural trends of the West
including such main influences as Cartesianism, science and, within
philosophy, the dualism of rationalism vs. empiricism and all its
twists, turns and divisions. Philosophy starts from realism but by
criticism [the conflict of] realism is found to be not absolute but
depends upon the common culture the common paradigms, pictures, symbols
and stories or myths. Cultural influences also include those from other
modern, ancient and native societies and civilizations.

These influences are detailed below


**5.1 INTRODUCTION**

**5.1.1 Influences on recent philosophy** First, I outline some
influences on recent philosophy. The "internal" influences are the
trends arising in the history of philosophy until the recent period.
"External" influences are the ascent of science and analysis, cultural
influences, and the culture of the individual. This system of complex
influences are the sources of influence upon recent philosophy. The
development of a discipline is not deterministic recent philosophy may
be better understood by an inclusion of the influences in the
understanding; however the development of philosophy is not determined
by the influences and contains its own elements of novelty. In order to
continue as a vibrant discipline, philosophy must contain its own
elements of novelty

**5.1.1.1 The history and nature of philosophy: Thales to the modern
period**

What is accepted as philosophy in any age may be subject to the Kuhnian
concept of the paradigm: the paradigm that defines acceptable practice
includes implicit elements that are not fully spelled out that is not to
say that they could not [or could] be spelled out.

**5.1.1.1.1 Paradigms**

There is also an explicit reflection upon practice and ideals that
interact with the implicit attitudes in constituting the paradigm.
However, it is not in the nature of philosophy to approach some
delimitation or definiteness of subject matter in the way that science
does.

The concept of paradigm is also somewhat paradigmatic. Kuhn held that
different paradigms are incommensurable meaning that, while the words
might be the same, the actual differences among alternate paradigms are
so great as to constitute an insurmountable barrier to communication and
understanding. Kuhn also held that the truth of each paradigm was
relative to the culture and that paradigms contained no absolute truth;
this point was emphasized by Paul Feyerabend. Given that each culture
negotiates a world that is not entirely of their own creation and that
different cultures live in worlds that are not completely alien, it
follows that the different paradigms have some measure of truth and that
they may share enough truth for there to be common truth and sharing of
understanding.

Further, paradigms are not flat but multi-layered with elements of but
not full hierarchy. For example, paradigmatic attitudes to truth in
philosophy which are not the same as but not completely different from
truth in philosophy are affected by and affect attitudes to the
possibility of truth in general.

The possibility and nature of disciplines is thus complex and attitudes
to this possibility are affected by realism, the pendulum [pendulums] of
opinion, happenstance and fashion.

**5.1.1.1.2 What is philosophy?**

There is a limitation on defining or specifying the nature of any
discipline. First, that such fields of activity are paradigmatic in the
sense of Thomas Kuhn, i.e., that the definition is through practice and
unwritten or unspoken or, in part, through at most partially explicit
and definite norms. A second difficulty is that a purpose of definition
is not only the understanding of the past but to understand and navigate
the future. What is science? A difficulty of definition is that science
adapts, within a broad framework, to the needs of the discipline or
problem Subsequent

what is found in philosophy is a tailored formalization. As an example,
there is a strong similarity between the transcendental method and what,
in physics, has been called the Anthropic Principle. Argument from
effects to causes, which lies at the heart of the scientific "method" of
theory formulation, is a form of hypothesis-test, is also similar to the
Kantian transcendental analytic.

I will list two candidate approaches to timeless, certain thought. The
first seeks the ideal by balancing loss of information in generalization
by abstraction; the second, the Kantian analytic, seeks the ideal by
seeking the given in the immediate and asking what this must imply for
any depth explanation, rather than seeking the given in the depth which
is the preferred ideal of science. These two approaches are "point and
counterpoint," they balance each other; in many areas of thought they
occur in tandem. An example is Darwin's theory of evolution; in the
direct method we seek a theory as an explanatory principle;
alternatively, the theory is a mere organizing principle. In linguistics
there are the synchronic and the diachronic approaches.

Generalization and abstraction: In formulating and criticizing a
systematic metaphysics, generalization may be balanced by abstraction to
avoid loss of certainty. Further, abstraction may introduce certainty.
Consider, for example, the assertion that the world is equivalent to
nothing[ness.] If that were true, we could deduce that there must be
indeterministic processes. This question of the fundamental problem of
metaphysics has been discussed in On Mind and Metaphysics and related
essays.

The transcendental analytic of Kant: Kant asked, "What are the
necessary conditions of the very possibility of an experience [including
perception, knowledge, certainty] the formal features of which are
space, time and the categories?" Kant's reply was, "Experience is
possible only on the assumption that the formal features formed in
experience are a priori conditions of existence." From this point, Kant
was able to answer the challenge of Hume to show how knowledge was
possible and to give an analysis of the forms of perception and
knowledge. See Immanuel Kant, above.

Wittgenstein employed this idea in Tractacus Logico-Philosophicus.
Wittgenstein argued that language must have an atomic form and from that
to an atomic formulation of the nature of the world. Wittgenstein later
abandoned this argument not as result of a deficiency of the method but
because he abandoned the independence of atomic sentences.

Related to the transcendental analytic is a delineation and study of
the forms of experience: space, time, causation, objecthood [which
implies object constancy,] categoreality.

The transcendental method of Heidegger or the second transcendental
method: see Martin Heidegger

The third transcendental method or transcendental logic


