


Chapter One
The case of Dante provides an excellent opportunity to open up the
question of the Western canon. In one sense, Dante is the perfect
example of a*canonical* author. His name is one of the few certain to
appear on anybody's short list of the truly central authors in the
Western literary tradition. But in another sense Dante can be regarded
as uncanonical. In his own day he was widely suspected of being
heretical in his religious views,1 and a careful reading of his works
does indeed raise serious doubts about his being the pillar of orthodoxy
he is often taken to be today.2 Out of this interplay between
the*canonical* and the noncanonical Dante, I hope to show that the issue
of the Western canon is more complicated than either its defenders or
its attackers generally present it.

In discussing the issue of the canon, it is important to sort out at
the**[End Page 138]** beginning what we do and do not mean by the term.
A*canonical* work may merely be a work that has been accepted into the
literary canon, one that has become a touchstone in the reading and
teaching of literature. But the term*canonical* can suggest something
else, that the work is orthodox and somehow represents a central
authoritative position in Western culture. The word*canonical* is so
loaded with religious connotations that it is difficult to separate the
relatively neutral first meaning of the term from the loaded second
meaning. Dante is a case in point. When people refer to him as
a*canonical* author, they usually do not simply mean that he is widely
read and taught. Most discussions of Dante today treat him as
representing an authoritative cultural moment in the Western tradition,
as the supreme embodiment of the medieval mind. Viewed that way, Dante
becomes an emblem of everything contemporary critics of the Western
canon bitterly hate and reject. The reason they feel that they must
attack authors like Dante and displace them from the center of literary
study is that these authors have come to stand for orthodoxy and thus
seem to enforce the hegemony of Western culture.

Critics who wish to champion various forms of non-Western culture have a
particular axe to grind with*canonical* authors like Dante. The
contemporary debate over the Western canon seems to be premised on a
sharp opposition between Western and non-Western cultures, as if they
were complete and irreconcilable antitheses, and even wholly unrelated.
One of the principal charges against the Western canon is that it is
Eurocentric, that it remains confined within a narrow orbit of European
ideas and beliefs, thus excluding all other views of the world. A
corrolary of the idea of Eurocentrism is the concept of Orientalism,
developed by Edward Said.3 Said argues that throughout its history, the
Occident has defined itself in opposition to the Orient, basing its
elevated self-image on a debased vision of the cultural Other. In Said's
argument, the Occident views itself as rational as opposed to an
irrational Orient, as emotionally disciplined in contrast to an
emotionally uncontrolled Orient, and as masculine over against a
feminine Orient.

In medieval Europe the Orient was chiefly represented by the Muslim
world, and one does not have to look far in medieval literature to find
the kinds of orientalist stereotypes about which Said writes. The French
Song of

Roland contains excellent examples, but even the*Divine Comedy* seems to
provide grist for Said's mill. Consider the portrait of the prophet
Mohammad and his nephew Alì that Dante gives when he places them among
the schismatics in the Eighth Circle of Hell:**[End Page 139]**

No barrel, even though it's lost a hoop

or end-piece, ever gapes as one whom I

saw ripped right from his chin to where we fart:

his bowels hung between his legs, one saw

his vitals and the miserable sack

that makes of what we swallow excrement.

While I was all intent on watching him,

he looked at me, and with his hands he spread

his chest and said: "See how I split myself!

See now how maimed Mohammed is! And he

who walks and weeps before me is Alì,

whose face is opened wide from chin to forlock."

(xxviii, 22­36)4

This viciously unsympathetic treatment of these central figures of the
Islamic religious tradition is exactly what Said's theory of orientalism
would lead us to expect in a bastion of the Western canon such as Dante.

But the portrait of Mohammad in the*Divine Comedy* is an isolated
moment, and wider reading in Dante reveals a surprisingly positive
treatment of figures from the Islamic world. I want to discuss Dante's
debt to Islamic thought in general and to one Islamic philosopher in
particular.5 This may seem like a recondite subject, one that will lead
me away from the center of Dante studies. In many ways it will, but I
hope that I have already suggested its larger importance. The charge
against the Western canon is that it is Eurocentric and works to exclude
all non-Western cultures. No figure is more firmly entrenched than Dante
at the center of the Western canon. What happens if we can show that
Dante displays a secret and even sometimes a not-so-secret sympathy for
and affinity with Islamic thought? Non-Western culture in the very
bastion of Western culture, Dante's Divine Comedy--that is a remarkable
prospect, and one calculated to throw both attackers and defenders of
the canon off balance. Attackers would have to grant that the Western
canon is not as Eurocentric as they have claimed. And defenders of the
canon might have to admit that*canonical* works are not quite as
orthodox as they often maintain.


