


Chapter Two
The role of Islamic thought in Dante is a vast topic and has been
extensively debated. In a brief essay, I cannot explore this
subject**[End Page 140]** systematically and thus will confine myself to
one small facet of it, concentrating on the Limbo episode of
the*Inferno* , one of the most puzzling sections in the entire poem from
a theological perspective. Dante did not invent the notion of Limbo; the
idea emerged in response to a set of theological questions that troubled
many medieval thinkers. Some were disturbed by the thought that people
otherwise virtuous according to Christian standards would end up damned
for all eternity merely because of where or when they were born. In
particular, people born before the coming of Christ were denied access
to the Christian revelation and thus never had the opportunity to
embrace the Christian faith and be saved. Such considerations led to the
development among medieval theologians of the idea of Limbo, a place in
between, neither quite heaven nor hell. In the standard view, Limbo
included two categories: Old Testament worthies who had lived virtuously
and anticipated the coming of Christ, along with children who died
before having been baptized (thereby dealing with another troublesome
issue of salvation).6 Thus Dante inherited a concept of Limbo, but he
developed it in a very unorthodox way, choosing to add to the categories
of people admitted to Limbo and shifting his emphasis away from the
traditional areas.7 Above all, he fills Limbo with figures out of
classical antiquity.8 Conventional medieval opinion would lead us to
expect to find that Abel, Noah, Abraham, Moses, and King David once
occupied Limbo, but not Hector, Aeneas, Junius Brutus, Camilla, and
Lucretia as we see in Dante.

However heretical Dante's treatment of these virtuous pagans might be,
one could argue that he remains within the larger bounds of Christian
orthodoxy because after all he presents Limbo as a form of punishment.
The figures in Limbo are said to suffer because they feel themselves
deprived of the true God, for Whom they yearn. But here one must read
Dante carefully and follow closely the pattern of his presentation of
Limbo. At first sight, being in Limbo seems painful, but as the canto
proceeds, Dante subtly and quietly starts to modify the first impression
we get of Limbo and to mitigate the punishment embodied there.

As Dante enters Limbo, he notes the suffering of the inhabitants:

Here, for as much as hearing could discover,

there was no outcry louder than the sighs

that caused the everlasting air to tremble.

The sighs arose from sorrow without torments,**[End Page 141]**

out of the crowds--the many multitudes--

of infants and of women and of men.

(iv, 25­30)

But when we get to the middle of canto iv, the intensity of suffering in
Limbo has evidently diminished. This is how Dante describes his
encounter with the great poets of antiquity:

I saw four giant shades approaching us;

in aspect, they were neither sad nor joyous.

(iv, 83­84)

From initially appearing as a place of sorrow, Limbo now seems a purely
neutral state ("né trista né lieta").9 In the space of fewer than one
hundred lines, Dante appears to contradict himself, and we want to ask
him: "Which is it? Are the figures in Limbo in pain or merely 'neither
sad nor joyous'?"

This kind of apparent contradiction can be explained as a deliberate
rhetorical strategy on Dante's part, one made necessary by the
intellectually represssive climate in which he was writing. During the
Middle Ages, religious heresy was, to say the least, not well received,
and could be punished severely, with excommunication, imprisonment, and
even death. Dante came under suspicion of heretical views during his
lifetime, and at least one passage in the*Divine Comedy* shows that he
was writing under the shadow of doubts about his piety.10 Under these
circumstances, if Dante was intent on putting forth any form of
heretical views in the Divine Comedy, he could not do so openly but had
to go about the task very circumspectly.11 At the most exposed point in
canto iv, the opening, where his readers are forming their crucial first
impressions of what he is up to, he puts the orthodox among them at ease
by telling them what they want to hear, that he may be offering the
virtuous pagans an alternative to outright hell in Limbo, but they will
still be enduring pain. In the less exposed middle of the canto, Dante
reveals that the great poets of antiquity are not suffering at all in
Limbo, but have achieved a state of emotional equanimity that comports
quite well with the classical idea of greatness of soul they seem to
represent.12

Dante's sympathy with and admiration for the virtuous pagans is even
more evident in his treatment of the ancient philosophers in Limbo, the
last group of inhabitants he presents. We learn nothing about whether
they are suffering, only that Aristotle is being honored by the [End
Page 142] rest of the company. With everyone from Socrates and Plato to
Democritus and Zeno present, the philosophers are positioned for an
eternity of debating the great issues that divided them.13 Now, for
anyone who has ever been stuck in a late afternoon philosophy seminar,
this may seem like precisely the formula for hell at its most horrific.
But from the point of view of the philosophers themselves, it is
difficult to conceive of a situation more perfectly suited to their
wishes than the one Dante grants them in Limbo. In a famous passage in
Plato's Apology, Socrates, faced with the prospect of death, outlines a
view of the afterlife that seems to be a blueprint for Dante's Limbo:

*if death is like a journey from here to another place, and if the
things that are said are true, that in fact all the dead are there, then
what greater good could there be than this, judges? . to associate with
Orpheus and Musaeus and Hesiod and Homer, how much would any of you
give? . To converse and to associate with them and to examine them there
would be inconceivable happiness.* 14

Dante did not read Greek, and it is unlikely that Plato's*Apology* was
available to him in any form of translation. But he frequently displays
knowledge of Plato's works,15 and this passage may be a source for
Dante's conception of Limbo. But whether or not Dante had this passage
in mind,

the fact is that he punishes the ancient philosophers by placing them in
a situation which Plato had Socrates picture as the greatest reward
possible. In that sense, Dante's Limbo points ahead to the portrait of
Hell in a more clearly unorthodox writer, Christopher Marlowe. His
Doctor Faustus tells the devil Mephistopheles:

Nay, and this be hell, I'll willingly be damned here.

What! Sleeping, eating, walking and disputing?16

The portrayal of the ancient philosophers in Limbo seems a very
unorthodox act on Dante's part, as he displays a proto-Renaissance
admiration for a variety of forms of classical virtue. But the situation
seems even odder when we go down the cast of characters in Limbo and
discover that several important Muslim figures are present. Here Dante
is really stretching the idea of virtuous pagans. It is one thing to put
ancient Greeks, Trojans, and Romans in Limbo (though Dante appears to be
the only Christian who did so). All these figures were born before the
coming of Christ, and hence had no opportunity to receive the**[End Page
143]** Christian revelation, be baptized, and hence be saved. But what
are Muslims doing in Dante's Limbo? By any definition of Limbo,
including the one Dante has Virgil offer (iv, 37), Muslims do not
belong. They were born well into the Christian era, and thus had the
opportunity to become Christians. They cannot offer a geographic excuse,
like the man born on the banks of the Indus River Dante mentions in the
Paradiso who simply lives too far removed from Christian teaching (xix,
70­78). Then, as now, Muslims lived in close proximity to Christians,
many of them in the Holy Land itself.17 In the European Middle Ages
Muslims represented the chief enemies of Christianity, an attitude
solidified by Dante's time by many years of Christian-Muslim conflict in
the Crusades. And who of all people should show up in Dante's Limbo but
Saladin, perhaps the greatest of all the Muslim warriors during the era
of the Crusades and the most successful against Christian forces? To be
sure, Saladin was admired for his nobility and greatness as a warrior by
his military opponents from Christian Europe. But this was the
admiration of soldiers for one of their profession. A theologian is
supposed to have different standards for judging people, and it is most
peculiar that Dante chooses to assign as comfortable a berth as possible
in the afterlife to Saladin, the great warrior against Christianity.18

The final two figures named in canto iv are also Muslims, two of the
most famous medieval Islamic philosophers, Avicenna and Averroës.
Although both are fascinating figures, I will concentrate on the more
important of the two, Averroës, or Abu al-Walid Muhammad Ibn Ahmad Ibn
Rushd, to give him his full Arabic name.19 In canto iv, Dante calls him
the man who made "the great Commentary" ("'l gran comento"; iv, 144),
referring to the many commentaries Averroës wrote on the books of
Aristotle. Through these works Averroës exerted a great influence on the
Christian thinkers of Europe such as St. Thomas Aquinas. But the extent
of Averroës's influence on medieval Christian thought does not mean that
he was widely respected or even accepted in the European Christian
intellectual community. On the contrary, Averroës was probably the most
widely condemned thinker in the medieval Christian world. He was
generally

regarded as a free thinker, subversive of all religious orthodoxy, and
the term Averroism became virtually synonymous with atheism in the late
Middle Ages and early Renaissance.20 The charge of Averroism was one of
the most serious accusations that could be made against a medieval
thinker.

Thus one would think that Dante would have placed Averroës among the
heretics in the Inferno or perhaps among the schismatics with**[End Page
144]** Mohammad and Alì.21 Instead he places Averroës with the ancient
philosophers Dante greatly admired, thus giving an honored position to
perhaps the most feared and hated thinker in the Christian Middle Ages.
Averroës could not make the excuse that Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle
could make of having been born before the coming of Christ. Averroës was
in fact born in 1126 ad in C. Averroës could not make the excuse that
Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle could make of having been born before the
coming of Christ. Averroës was in fact born in 1126 onored position to
perhaps the most feared and hated thinker in the Christian Middleen in
our general ignorance of Muslim history we try to imagine how in the
Middle Ages ideas from, say, Baghdad could have made it all the way to
Florence. But in fact the Iberian Peninsula was for several centuries
one of the centers of the Islamic intellectual world, and thus Averroës
was virtually Dante's neighbor.22

Dante was in fact accused of being an Averroist,23 and he refers to
Averroës directly and indirectly several times in his writings.
Sometimes he speaks of Averroës approvingly and even cites him as an
authority he accepts, sometimes he appears to be critical of Averroës,
but even just to mention him by name was a daring act in Dante's day.
Averroës was most famous, or rather infamous, for his understanding of
the human soul, worked out in terms ultimately derived from Aristotle,
the Possible and the Active Intellects. This subject is extremely
complicated and obscure,24 deliberately so because of its dangerously
unorthodox implications. At the risk of oversimplifying the matter, I
will concentrate on Averroës's idea of the unity of the Possible
Intellect, his paradoxical claim that all humanity shares a single
intellect. The reasoning behind this strange idea goes something like
this: when we think a rational truth, such as 2 + 2 = 4, we all think
alike and in that sense participate in the same intellect. The key
corollary of this idea is that insofar as we participate in the unity of
the Possible Intellect, we also participate in its eternity. Thus
Averroës could in effect say that our souls are eternal by virtue of
apprehending eternal truths such as those of mathematics. In short,
Averroës's conception of the Possible Intellect allowed him to speak of
the immortality of the human soul without implying the survival of the
individual soul after death. In talking of the unity of the Possible
Intellect, he was basically coming up with a notion of species
immortality for the human race.

The advantage of this understanding of the soul for Averroës is that it
gave him a way of talking publicly about human immortality to placate
religious authorities, while pointing to an esoteric meaning of**[End
Page 145]** immortality in harmony with his real philosophic position, a
view in which the only true form of immortality is philosophic thinking.
In Averroës's understanding, as individual human beings we die, but our

thoughts may live on. This outcome is especially true for someone who
writes his thoughts down in books, thus making it possible for later
generations to react to them.25 Indeed, in the realm of the written
word, philosophers can in effect converse with each other over the
centuries, as Averroës did with Aristotle when he wrote his commentaries
on the Greek philosopher's works. That is the sense in which for
Averroës philosophers are immortal, living forever in the disputes to
which their works give rise.

I want to stress that I am giving a radically clarified account of what
Averroës meant in his analysis of the soul. To have been as clear
himself about the concept would have defeated his purpose. But despite
its obscurity, the idea of the unity of the Possible Intellect had great
practical and moral implications. If all we have is a form of species
immortality, then the actions or beliefs of individual human beings have
no bearing on whether or not they will achieve eternal life. An anecdote
from an early book on Aquinas shows that as abstruse as Averroës's
doctrine of the Possible Intellect appears to be, somehow it filtered
down to the level of the common man in the European Middle Ages. William
of Tocco reports the case of a French soldier "who was unwilling to
atone for his sins because, as he put it: 'If the soul of the blessed
Peter is saved, I shall also be saved; for if we know by one intellect,
we shall share the same destiny.'"26 Here we see why orthodox
authorities in both the Muslim and the Christian worlds condemned
Averroës, and why both Albertus Magnus and Aquinas specifically attacked
his idea of the unity of the Possible Intellect.27

Given its importance and notoriety, it is therefore highly significant
that the Possible Intellect is one of the ideas Dante picked up from
Averroës.28 He refers to it in a significant, though of course obscure,
passage in his political treatise,*De Monarchia* :

it is clear that man's basic capacity is to have a potentiality or
power for being intellectual. And since this power can not be completely
actualized in a single man or in any of the particular communities of
men above mentioned, there must be a multitude in mankind through whom
this whole power can be actualized. . With this judgment Averroës agrees
in his commentary on [Aristotle's]*De anima* .29 **[End Page 146]**

I cannot overemphasize how daring it was for Dante to refer to Averroës
by name in this passage. In discussing the Possible Intellect he was
dealing with one of the most sensitive and inflammatory subjects in late
medieval thought, and to bring up Averroës explicitly in this context
was to wave a red flag in the face of Church authorities.30 It was in
fact one of the principal reasons why Pope John XXII had De Monarchia
burned in 1329 in Bologna and the Catholic Church officially placed it
on its Index of Forbidden Books in 1554 (it was not removed until the
nineteenth century, when the Averroist scare apparently had blown
over).31 Dante employs the idea of the Possible Intellect precisely in
Averroës's sense, suggesting that philosophers form a community of
thought over the centuries, that the gradual perfection of human thought
grows out of a conversation among philosophers over time. We see now how
profoundly appropriate it is that Averroës be placed in Dante's Limbo.
Limbo is precisely an allegorical representation of Averroës's idea of
the Possible Intellect. The eternal

conversation of the philosophers in Dante's Limbo is a metaphor for what
Averroës meant by the immortality of human thought. How far this
metaphorical conception of immortality can be extended throughout
the*Divine Comedy* is a profound question for the interpretation of
Dante.


