


Chapter Three
I cannot hope to settle the issue of Dante's Averroism, a subject that
has been contentiously debated from his day down to ours. For the record
I should state that the consensus among modern Dante scholars is that he
was not an Averroist.32 I myself believe that he was, but that is not
the issue here. Our topic is Dante and the Western canon, and for what I
want to show it is sufficient to have established Dante's debt to
Averroës. The importance of a central Islamic philosopher to such
a*canonical* European author as Dante in my view puts to rest many of
the arguments typically made against the Western canon and especially
its supposed Eurocentrism. Dante was evidently far more knowledgeable
about non-Western authors than many of their champions today. I wonder
how many of the critics of the Western canon have even heard of
Averroës, let alone read any of his works.

The case of Dante shows that the simplistic opposition between Western
and non-Western cultures often set up today cannot bear careful
scrutiny. The sequence Aristotle-Averroës-Dante may serve as an emblem
of the complex interactions that have taken place over the**[End Page
147]** centuries between Western and non-Western cultures. Islamic
culture is certainly categorized as non-Western in today's debates, but
as shown by the case of Averroës (as well as other Islamic philosophers
such as Alfarabi), Islamic thought was profoundly rooted in the very
Greek world that is at the fountainhead of Western culture. Indeed, in
his so-called Decisive Treatise, Averroës displays a remarkable
tolerance for ancient Greek thought, even though he recognizes that in
Muslim terms it is the work of infidels:

*But if someone other than ourselves has already examined that subject,
it is clear that we ought to seek help toward our goal from what has
been said by such a predecessor on the subject, regardless of whether
this other one shares our religion or not. . By "those who do not share
our religion" I refer to those ancients who studied these matters before
Islam.* 33

With this defense of studying ancient philosophy, Averroës proved to be
one of the central conduits of Greek thought to the European Middle
Ages. The implications of this fact for our understanding of Western
culture are still largely unexamined, but at a minimum it shows that the
roots of European culture in its classical past are fundamentally
intertwined with what we think of as non-Western sources. In short, the
Western culture that is often branded today as Eurocentric in fact
already incorporates a strong Islamic and hence non-Western component,
even in such a*canonical* author as Dante. And Dante's case is by no
means unique. Careful examination of another classic of the Western
canon,*Don Quixote* , would similarly show that Islamic thought played a
great role in shaping Cervantes's vision. Recall that in Cervantes's
fiction the ultimate source of the details of Don Quixote's story is an
earlier text said to be by an Arab narrator, Cide Hamete Benengeli.

To today's opponents of the canon, I would thus say: "Instead of
rejecting the Western canon, study it carefully, and you will find that
it is not exclusively Western after all. The situation is in fact far
more complex than you realize, and studying classics like the*Divine
Comedy* or*Don Quixote* may well introduce you to issues that have been
quite central in what you

yourselves think of as non-Western cultures, issues to the understanding
of which non-Westerners have made major contributions."

But I have a caution to the defenders of the Western canon as well:
[**End Page 148]** do not defend it by reading it canonically. Authors
may be*canonical* in the sense of being essential to the understanding
of our culture without being*canonical* in the sense of being orthodox
proponents of something monolithically designated as the Western
tradition. As I have tried to show, it is only by reading Dante
noncanonically that we become aware of the full richness and complexity
of his thought, especially the way he is open to countercurrents of
ideas within the supposedly rigid orthodoxy of the Middle Ages. We do no
service to the Western tradition when we present its*canonical* authors
as one monument to orthodoxy after another. Such a rigidification of the
canon only invites adventurous students and scholars to search
elsewhere--outside the canon--for the excitement and novelty of
independent and subversive thought. But if we remain open to the
possibility that an author*canonical* in his importance may yet be
uncanonical in his thinking, we will find that the Western tradition
contains enough tensions, contradictions, and conflicts within itself to
keep even the most skeptical scholar occupied for a lifetime. And we
will also find that the Western canon already incorporates non-Western
components--to the point where an Islamic philosopher can find an
honored place among the sages of ancient Greece and Rome in that
most*canonical* and yet uncanonical of all works, Dante's*Divine
Comedy.*

University of Virginia


