


I - General:
Ahmed, Akbar.*Discovering Islam: Making Sense of Muslim History and
Society.* New York: Routledge, revised ed., 2002.

Ahmed, Akbar.*Islam Today: A Short Introduction to the Muslim World.*
London: I.B. Tauris,1999.

Ali, Syed Ameer.*The Spirit of Islam: A History of the Evolution and
Ideals of Islam,* *with a Life of the Prophet* . London: Chatto &
Windus, 1978.

Armstrong, Karen.*Islam: A Short History.* New York: Modern Library,
revised ed., 2002.

Awde, Nicholas, trans. and ed.*Women in Islam: An Anthology from the
Qur’an and* *Hadīths.* New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2000.

Bloom, Jonathan and Sheila Blair.*Islam: A Thousand Years of Faith and
Power.* New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2002.

Bogle, Emory C.*Islam: Origin and Belief.* Austin, TX: University of
Texas Press, 1998.

Bowker, John.*What Muslims Believe.* Oxford, UK: Onewworld, 1999.

Brown, Daniel W.*A New Introduction to Islam.* Malden, MA: Blackwell,
2003.

Calder, Norman, Jawid Mojaddedi and Andrew Rippin, eds.*Classical Islam:
A Sourcebook* *of  of Religious Literature.* New York: Routledge, 2003.

Daniel, Norman.*Islam and the West: The Making of an Image.* Oxford,
England: Oneworld, 2000 (reprint ed.).

Davies, Merryl Wyn and Zia Sardar.*The No-Nonsense Guide to Islam.*
London: Verso, 2004.

Denny, Frederick Mathewson.*An Introduction to Islam* . New York:
Macmillan, 1994.

Elias, Jamal J.*Islam.* Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1999.

Endress, Gerhard.*Islam: An Historical Introduction.* New York: Columbia
University Press, 2nd ed., 2002.

Ernst, Carl W.*Following Muhammad: Rethinking Islam in the Contemporary
World.* Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press, 2003.

Esposito, John L., ed.*The Oxford Dictionary of Islam.* Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press, 2003.

Esposito, John L.*The Oxford Encyclopedia of the Modern Islamic World,*
4 Vols. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1995.

Esposito, John L.*Islam: The Straight Path.* New York: Oxford University
Press, 3rd ed.,1998.

Esposito, John L. and John Obert Voll.*Makers of Contemporary Islam.*
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2001.

Gibb, Hamilton A.R. and J.H. Kramers, eds.*Shorter Encyclopedia of
Islam.* Leiden: E.J. Brill,  1997 (reprint ed.).

Gilsenan, Michael.*Recognising Islam: an anthropologist’s introduction.*
London: Croom Helm, 1982.

Glassé, Cyril.*The New Encyclopedia of Islam.* Lanham, MD: AltaMira
Press, 2003.

Guillaume, Alfred.*The Traditions of Islam: An Introduction to the Study
of Hadīth* *Literature.* Oxford, UK: Clarendon Press, 1924.

Hodgson, Marshall G.S.*The Venture of Islam,* 3 Vols. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press, 1974.

Keller, Nuh Ha Mim, trans.*Al-Nawawi’s Manual of Islam.* Cambridge, UK:
The Islamic Texts Society, 1996.

Lewis, Bernard, ed.*The World of Islam: Faith, People, Culture.* New
York: Thames and Hudson, 1992.

Murata, Sachiko.*The Tao of Islam: A Sourcebook on Gender Relationships
in Islamic* *Thought.* Albany, NY: State University of New York Press,
1992.

Murata, Sachiko and William C. Chittick.*The Vision of Islam.* New York:
Paragon House, 1994.

Murphy, Caryle.*Passion for Islam—Shaping the Modern Middle East: The
Egyptian* *Experience.* New York: Scribner, 2002.

Nasr, Seyyed Hossein.*The Heart of Islam: Enduring Values for Humanity.*
San Francisco, CA:Harper SanFrancisco, 2002.

Nasr, Seyyed Hossein.*Ideals and Realities of Islam.* London: Allen &
Unwin, 1966.

Nasr, Seyyed Hossein.*Islam: Religion, History, and Civilization.* San
Francisco, CA: Harper SanFrancisco, 2002.

Nasr, Seyyed Hossein.*Islamic Life and Thought.* Albany, NY: State
University of New York Press, 1981.

Nasr, Seyyed Hossein.*Islamic Spirituality I: Foundations.* New York:
Crossroad, 1987.

Nasr, Seyyed Hossein.*Islamic Spirituality II: Manifestations.* New
York: Crossroad, 1991.

Netton, Ian Richard.*A Popular Dictionary of Islam.* London: Curzon
Press, 1992.

Newby, Gordon D.*A Concise Encyclopedia of Islam.* Oxford, UK: Oneworld,
2002.

Nigosian, S.A.*Islam: Its History, Teaching, and Practices.*
Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 2003.

Peters, F.E.*A Reader on Classical Islam.* Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 1994.

Rahman, Fazlur.*Islam.* Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2nd
ed., 1979.

Rejwan, Nissim, ed.*The Many Faces of Islam: Perspectives on a Resurgent
Civilization.* Gainesville, FL: University Press of Florida, 2000.

Renard, John.*In the Footsteps of Muhammad: Understanding the Islamic
Experience.* New York: Paulist Press, 1992.

Renard, John.*Responses to 101 Questions on Islam.* Mahwah, NJ: Paulist
Press, 1998.

Renard, John.*Seven Doors to Islam: Spirituality and the Religious Life
of Muslims.* Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1996.

Renard, John, ed.*Windows on the House of Islam: Muslim Sources on
Spirituality.* Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1998.

Riddell, Peter G. and Peter Cotterell.*Islam in Context: Past, Present,
and Future.* Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2003.

Rippin, Andrew.*Muslims: Their Religious Beliefs and Practices.* London:
Routledge, 2nd ed., 2000.

Rippin, Andrew and Jan Knappert, eds.*Textual Sources for the Study of
Islam.* Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1986.

Robinson, Francis.*Atlas of the Islamic World since 1500.* New York:
Facts on File, 1982.

Robinson, Neal.*Islam: A Concise Introduction.* Richmond, Surrey:
Curzon, 1999.

Ruthven, Malise.*Islam: A Very Short Introduction.* New York: Oxford
University Press, 2000.

Ruthven, Malise.*Islam in the World* . New York: Oxford University
Press, 2nd ed., 2000.

Savory, R.M., ed.*Introduction to Islamic Civilization.* Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press, 1976.

Schimmel, Annemarie.*Islam: An Introduction.* Albany, NY: State
University of New York Press, 1992.

Schulze, Reinhard.*A Modern History of the Islamic World.* Washington
Square, NY: New York University Press, 2000.

Schuon, Frithjof.*Islam and the Perennial Philosophy.* London: World of
Islam Festival Publ. Co., 1976.

Schuon, Frithjof (D.M. Matheson, trans.).*Understanding Islam.* London:
George Allen & Unwin, 1963.

Sonn, Tamara.*A Brief History of Islam.* London: Polity Press, 2004.

Tayob, Abdulkader.*Islam: A Short Introduction.* Oxford, England:
Oneworld, 1999.

Waines, David.*An Introduction to Islam.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press, 2nd ed.2003.

Watt, William Montgomery.*Islam: A Short History.* Oxford, UK: Oneworld,
1996.

Watt, William Montgomery.*What is Islam?* London: Longman, 1970.

Williams, John Alden, ed.*The Word of Islam.* Austin, TX: University of
Texas Press, 1994


