


X - Geographic Regions and Nation-States:
Abdo, Geneive and Jonathan Lyons. *Answering Only to God: Faith and
Freedom in Twenty-First Century Iran.* New York: Henry Holt & Co., 2003.

Abdo, Geneive.*No God but God: Egypt and the Triumph of Islam.* Oxford,
UK: Oxford University Press, 2000.

Abir, Mordechai.*Saudi Arabia: Government, Society, and the Gulf
Crisis.* New York: Routledge, 1993.

Abrahamian, Ervand.*Iran Between Two Revolutions.* Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 1982.

Abrahamian, Ervand.*Khomeinism: Essays on the Islamic Republic.*
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1993.

Abrahamian, Ervand.*Tortured Confessions: Prisons and Public
Recantations in Modern* *Iran.* Berkeley, CA: University of California
Press, 1999.

Abu-‘Amr, Ziyad. *Islamic Fundamentalism in the West Bank and Gaza:
Muslim Brotherhood and Islamic Jihad.* Bloomington, IN: Indiana
University Press, 1994.

Abu-Lughod, Ibrahim, ed. *The Transformation of Palestine: Essays on the
Origin and* *Development of the Arab-Israeli Conflict.* Evanston, IL:
Northwestern University Press, 2nd ed., 1987.

Abu-Lughod, Janet.*Cairo: 1001 Years of the City Victorious.* Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press, 1971.

Aburish, Saïd K.*The Rise, Corruption and Coming Fall of the House of
Saud.* New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1996.

Adamson, Kay.*Algeria: A Study in Competing Ideologies.* New York:
Continuum, 1998.

Adelkhah, Fariba*Being Modern in Iran.* New York: Columbia University
Press, 2000.

Afkhami, Mahnaz and Erika Friedl, eds.*In the Eye of the Storm: Women in
Post-Revolutionary Iran.* Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press, 1994.

Ahmad, Aziz.*An Intellectual History of Islam in India.* Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press, 1969.

Ahmad, Aziz.*Islamic Modernism in India and Pakistan.* London: Oxford
University Press, 1967.

Ahmad, Aziz.*Studies in Islamic Culture in the Indian Environment.*
Oxford, UK: Oxford         University Press, 1999.

Ahmad, Aziz and G.E. von Grunebaum, eds.*Muslim Self-Statement in India
and Pakistan,* *1857-1968.* Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1970.

Ahmad, Feroz.*Turkey: The Quest for Identity.* Oxford, UK: Oneworld,
2003.

Ahmida, Ali Abdullatif, ed.*Beyond Colonialism and Nationalism in the
Maghreb: History, Culture and Politics.* New York: Palgrave, 2000.

Akhavi, Shahrough. *Religion and Politics in Contemporary Iran:
Clergy-State Relations in* *the Pahlavi Period.* Albany, NY: State
University of New York Press, 1980.

Akiner, Shirin.*Islamic Peoples of the Soviet Union.* London: Kegan Paul
Int’l, 2nd ed., 1987.

al-‘Amrī, Husayn ‘Abdullāh.*The Yemen in the 18th and 19th Centuries: A
Political and* *Intellectual History.* London: Ithaca Press, 1985.

Algar, Hamid.*The Islamic Revolution in Iran.* London: Open Press, 1980.

Algar, Hamid.*Religion and State in Iran 1785-1906: The Role of the
Ulama in the Qajar* *Period.* Berkeley, CA: University of California
Press, 1969.

Alizadeh, Parvin, ed.*The Economy of Iran: The Dilemma of an Islamic
State.* London: I.B. Tauris, 2000.

Allievi, Stefano, et al., eds.*Muslim Networks and Transnational
Communities in and across Europe.* Leiden: E.J. Brill, 2003.

Allworth, Edward, et al., eds. *Muslim Communities Reemerge: Historical
Perspectives on* *Nationality, Politics, and Opposition in the Former
Soviet Union and Yugoslavia.* Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1994.

Al-Yassini, Ayman.*Religion and State in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.*
Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1985.

Amin, Galal.*Whatever Happened to the Egyptians?* Cairo: American
University in Cairo Press, 2000.

Amin, Qasim.*The Liberation of Women & The New Woman: Two Documents in
the* *History of Egyptian Feminism.* Cairo: American University in Cairo
Press, 2000.

Anderson, Lisa.*The State and Social Transformation in Tunisia and
Libya, 1830-1980.* Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1986.

Ansari, Ali M.*Iran, Islam, and Democracy: The Politics of Managing
Change* . London: Royal Institute of International Affairs, revised ed.,
2003.

Ansari, Ali M.*Modern Iran Since 1921: The Pahlavis and After.* London:
Longman, 2003.

Ansari, Hamied.*Egypt: The Stalled Society.* Albany, NY: State
University of New York Press, 1986.

Antoun, Richard and Donald Quataert, eds.*Syria: Society, Culture, and
Polity.* Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 1991.

Arjomand, Said Amir.*The Turban for the Crown: The Islamic Revolution in
Iran.* Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1988.

Badran, Margot.*Feminists, Islam, and Nation: Gender and the Making of
Modern Egypt.* Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1994.

Baker, Raymond William.*Islam Without Fear: Egypt and the New
Islamists.* Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2003.

Bakhash, Shaul.*The Reign of the Ayatollahs: Iran and the Islamic
Revolution.* New York: Basic Books, 1990.

Barakat, Halim, ed.*Toward a Viable Lebanon.* London/Washington, DC:
Croom Helm/Center for Contemporary Arab Studies, Georgetown University,
1988.

Bargach, Jamila.*Orphans of Islam: Family, Abandonment, and Secret
Adoption in Morocco.* Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 2002.

Barkey, Henri J. and Graham E. Fuller.*Turkey’s Kurdish Question.*
Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 1998.

Baron, Beth.*The Women’s Awakening in Egypt: Culture, Society, and the
Press.* New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1997 (reprint ed.).

Barton, Greg.*Abdurrahman Wahid: Muslim Democrat, Indonesian President.*
Honolulu, HI: University of Hawaii Press, 2002.

Batatu, Hanna.*The Old Social Classes and the Revolutionary Movements of
Iraq: A Study* *of Iraq’s Old Landed and Commercial Classes and of Its
Communists, Ba‘thists, and Free Officers.* Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 1978.

Baxter, Craig and Charles Kennedy, eds.*Pakistan 1997.* Boulder, CO:
Westview Press with the American Institute of Pakistan Studies, 1998.

Bayat, Asef.*Street Politics: Poor People’s Movements in Iran.* New
York: Columbia University Press, 1997.

Behrman, Lucy C.*Muslim Brotherhoods and Politics in Senegal.*
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1970.

Benard, Cheryl.*Veiled Courage: Inside the Afghan Women’s Resistance.*
New York: Broadway Books/Random House, 2002.

Bennigsen, Alexandre A. and Marie Broxup.*The Islamic Threat to the
Soviet State.* New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1983.

Bennison, Amira K.*Jihad and Its Interpretation in Pre-Colonial Morocco:
State-Society Relations during the French Conquest of Algeria.* New
York: RoutledgeCurzon, 2002.

Bennoune, Mahfoud. *The Making of Contemporary Algeria, 1830-1987:
Colonial Upheavals and Post-Independence Development.* Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press, 1988.

Berkes, Niyazi.*Development of Secularism in Turkey.* Montreal: McGill
University Press, 1964.

Bibars, Iman.*Victims and Heroines: Women, Welfare and the Egyptian
State.* London: Zed Books, 2001.

Binder, Leonard.*In a Moment of Enthusiasm: Political Power and the
Second Stratum in* *Egypt.* Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press,
1978.

Blank, Jonah.*Mullahs on the Mainframe: Islam and Modernity among the
Daudi Bohras.* Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2002.

Boland, B.J.*The Struggle of Islam in Modern Indonesia.* The Hague:
Martinus Nijhoff, 1982.

Bonine, Michael E. and Nikki R. Keddie, eds.*Modern Iran: The Dialectics
of Continuity and* *Change.* Albany, NY: State University of New York
Press, 1981.

Bourqia, Rahma and Susan Gilson Miller, eds.*In the Shadow of the
Sultan: Culture, Power,* *and Politics in Morocco.* Cambridge, MA:
Harvard Center for Middle Eastern Studies/Harvard University Press,
1999.

Bowen, John R.*Islam, Law and Equality in Indonesia: An Anthropology of
Public* *Reasoning.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2003.

Boyle, Francis Anthony.*Palestine, Palestinians, and International Law.*
Atlanta, GA: Clarity Press, 2003.

Bozdogan, Sibel and Resat Kasaba, eds.*Rethinking Modernity and National
Identity in* *Turkey.* Seattle, WA: University of Washington Press,
1997.

Bringa, Tone.*Being Muslim the Bosnian Way: Identity and Community in a
Central Bosnian Village.* Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press,
1995.

Browne, Edward G.*The Persian Revolution, 1905-1909* . Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press, 1910.

Brumberg, Daniel.*Reinventing Khomeini: The Struggle for Reform in
Iran.* Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2001.

Bukharaev, Ravil.*Islam in Russia: The Four Seasons.* New York: St.
Martin’s Press, 2000.

Bulloch, John and Harvey Morris.*No Friends But the Mountains: The
Tragic History of the* *Kurds.* Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press,
1992.

Burgat, François and William Dowell.*The Islamic Movement in North
Africa.* Austin, TX: Center for Middle Eastern Studies, University of
Texas, 1997.

Callaway, Barbara and Lucy Creevey.*The Heritage of Islam: Women,
Religion, and Politics in West Africa.* Boulder, CO: Lynne Reinner,
1994.

Carapico, Sheila.*Civil Society in Yemen: The Political Economy of
Activism in Modern* *Arabia.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press,
1998.

Cardini, Franco.*Europe and Islam* . Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2001.

Charrad, Mounira M.*States and Women’s Rights: The Making of
Postcolonial Tunisia,* *Algeria, Morocco.* Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press, 2001.

Cockburn, Andrew and Patrick Cockburn. *Out of the Ashes: The
Resurrection of Saddam* *Hussein.* New York: HarperCollins, 2000.

Cole, Juan. *Roots of North Indian Shi‛ism in Iran and Iraq: Religion
and State in Awadh, 1722-1859.* Berkeley, CA: University of California
Press, 1988.

Connelly, Matthew. *A Diplomatic Revolution: Algeria’s Fight for
Independence and the* *Origins of the Post-Cold War Era.* New York:
Oxford University Press, 2002.

Cooley, John.*Unholy Wars: Afghanistan, America and International
Terrorism.* London: Pluto            Press, 3rd ed., 2002.

Cruise O’Brien, Donal B.*Saints and Politicians: Essays in the
Organization of Senegalese Peasant Society.* London: Cambridge
University Press, 1975.

Cruise O’Brien, Donal B. and Christian Coulon, eds. *Charisma and
Brotherhood in African* *Islam.* Oxford, UK: Clarendon Press, 1988.

Crystal, Jill.*Oil and Politics in the Gulf: Rulers and Merchants in
Kuwait and Qatar.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, revised
ed., 1995.

Dabashi, Hamid.*Theology of Discontent: The Ideological Foundations of
the Islamic Revolution in Iran.* New York: New York University Press,
1993.

Dale, Stephen F.*Islamic Society on the South Asian Frontier.* Oxford,
UK: Oxford University Press, 1994.

Dann, Uriel.*King Hussein and the Challenge of Arab Radicalism: Jordan,
1955-1967.* New York: Oxford University Press, 1989.

Dann, Uriel.*Studies in the History of Transjordan, 1920-1949: The
Making of a State.* Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1984.

Davison, Andrew.*Secularism and Revivalism in Turkey: A Hermeneutic
Reconsideration.* New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1998.

Dawisha, Adee.*Syria and the Lebanese Crisis* . London: Macmillan, 1980.

Deweese, Devin.*Islamization and Native Religion in the Golden Horde:
Baba Tukles and* *Conversion to Islam in Historical and Epic Tradition.*
University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University Press, 1994.

Dhofier, Zamakhsyari. *The Pesantren Tradition: The Role of the Kyai in
the Maintenance of* *Traditional Islam in Java.* Tempe, AZ: Arizona
State University Program for Southeast Asian Studies, 1999.

Dillon, Michael.*China’s Muslims (Images of Asia).* Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press, 1996.

Diouf, Sylviane A.*Servants of Allah: African Muslims Enslaved in the
Americas.* Washington Square, NY: New York University Press, 1998.

Dresch, Paul.*A History of Modern Yemen.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press, 2000.

Dudoignon, Stéphane A. and Komatso Hisao, eds.*Islam in Politics in
Russia and Central* *Asia.* London: Kegan Paul, Int’l., 2002.

Eaton, Richard M., ed.*India’s Islamic Traditions, 711-1750.* Oxford,
UK: Oxford University Press, 2003.

Ehteshami, Anoushiravan.*After Khomeini: The Iranian Second Republic.*
New York: Routledge, 1995.

Eickelman, Dale.*Knowledge and Power in Morocco: The Education of a
Twentieth Century Notable.* Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press,
1985.

Eickelman, Dale.*Moroccan Islam.* Austin, TX: University of Texas Press,
1976.

El-Ghonemy, M. Riad.*Affluence and Poverty in the Middle East* . London:
Routledge, 1998.

d’Encausse, Helene Carrere.*Islam and the Russian Empire: Reform and
Revolution in* *Central Asia.* Berkeley, CA: University of California
Press, 1989.

Entelis, John P., ed.*Islam, Democracy, and the State in North Africa.*
Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1997.

Entessar, Nader.*Kurdish Ethnonationalism.* Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner,
1992.

Esfandiari, Haleh.*Reconstructed Lives: Women & Iran’s Islamic
Revolution.* Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1997.

Fandy, Mamoun.*Saudi Arabia and the Politics of Dissent.* New York:
Palgrave Macmillan, 2001.

Farouk-Sluglett, Marion and Peter Sluglett.*Iraq Since 1958: From
Revolution to Dictatorship.* New York: Palgrave, 2001.

Farsoun, Samih K.*Iran: Political Culture in the Islamic Republic.*
London: Routledge, 1992.

Farsoun, Samih K. (with Christina Zacharia).*Palestine and the
Palestinians.* Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1997.

Federspiel, Howard M.*A Dictionary of Indonesian Islam.* Athens, OH:
Ohio University Press, 1995.

Federspiel, Howard M.*Indonesia in Transition: Muslim Intellectuals and
National* *Development.* Hauppauge, NY: Nova Science Publ., 1998.

Federspiel, Howard M.*Islam and Ideology in the Emerging Indonesian
State: The Persatuan* *Islam (Persis), 1923-1957.* Leiden: E.J. Brill,
2001.

Federspiel, Howard M.*The Usage of Traditions of the Prophet in
Contemporary Indonesia.* Tempe, AZ: Arizona State University Program for
Southeast Asian Studies, 1993.

Fischbach, Michael R.*State, Society and Land in Jordan.* Leiden: E.J.
Brill, 2000.

Fischer, Michael M.J.*Iran: from Religious Dispute to Revolution.*
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1980.

Fisk, Robert.*Pity the Nation: The Abduction of Lebanon.* New York:
Thunder’s Mouth Press/Nation Books, 4th ed., 2002.

Foran, John.*Fragile Resistance: Social Transformation in Iran from 1500
to the Revolution.* Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1993.

Foran, John, ed.*A Century of Revolution: Social Movements in Iran.*
Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 1994.

Freedman, Lawrence and Efraim Karsh.*The Gulf Conflict, 1990-1991:
Diplomacy and War in the New World Order.* Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 1993.

Friedman, Francine.*The Bosnian Muslims: Denial of a Nation.* Boulder,
CO: Westview Press, 1996.

Friend, Theodore.*Indonesian Destinies.* Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of
Harvard University Press, 2003.

Gaffney, Patrick D.*The Prophet’s Pulpit: Islamic Preaching in
Contemporary Egypt.* Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1994.

Gallagher, Nancy Elizabeth.*Medicine and Power in Tunisia, 1780-1900.*
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2002.

Geertz, Clifford.*Islam Observed: Religious Development in Morocco and
Indonesia.* Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1971.

Gelvin, James.*Divided Loyalties: Nationalism and Mass Politics in Syria
at the Close of* *Empire.* Berkeley, CA: University of California Press,
1998.

George, Alan.*Syria: Neither Bread nor Freedom.* London: Zed Books,
2003.

Gershoni, Israel and James P. Jankowski.*Egypt, Islam and the Arabs: The
Search for* *Egyptian Nationhood, 1900-1930.* New York: Oxford
University Press, 1986.

Ghani, Cyrus.*Iran and the Rise of Reza Shah: From Qajar Collapse to
Pahlavi Power.* London: I.B. Tauris, 2000.

Ghani, Cyrus.*Iran and the West: A Critical Bibliography.* London: Kegan
Paul Int’l., 1987.

Ghareeb, Edmund.*The Kurdish Question in Iraq.* Syracuse, NY: Syracuse
University Press, 1981.

Gilsenan, Michael.*Lords of the Lebanese Marches: Violence and Narrative
in an Arab* *Society.*  Berkeley, CA: University of California Press,
1996.

Gohari, M.J.*The Taliban: Ascent to Power.* Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press, 2001.

Goodson, Larry P.*Afghanistan’s Endless War: State Failure, Regional
Politics, and the Rise of the Taliban.* Seattle, WA: University of
Washington Press, 2001.

Gunter, Michael M.*The Kurdish Predicament in Iraq: A Political
Analysis.* London: Palgrave Macmillan, 1999.

Gunter, Michael M.*The Kurds and the Future of Turkey.* London: Palgrave
Macmillan, 1997.

Gunter, Michael M.*The Kurds of Iraq: Tragedy and Hope.* London:
Palgrave Macmillan, 1993.

Hadawi, Sami.*Bitter Harvest: A Modern History of Palestine.*
Northampton, MA: Interlink Publ. Group, 4th ed., 1998.

Hadawi, Sami.*Palestinian Rights and Losses in 1948: A Comprehensive
Study.* London: Saqi  Books, 1998.

Haddad, Yvonne Yazbeck, ed.*The Muslims of America.* New York: Oxford
University Press, 1993.

Haddad, Yvonne Yazbeck, ed.*Muslims in the West: From Sojourners to
Citizens.* New York: Oxford University Press, 2002.

Haghayeghi, Mehrdad.*Islam and Politics in Central Asia.* London:
Palgrave Macmillan, 1996.

Hairi, Abdu’l-Hadi.*Shī‘ism and Constitutionalism in Iran.* Leiden: E.J.
Brill, 1977.

Halawi, Majed.*A Lebanon Defied: Musa al-Sadr and the Shi‘a Community.*
Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1992.

Hale, Sondra.*Gender Politics in Sudan: Islamism, Socialism, and the
State.* Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1996.

Hamidi, Muhammad al-Hashimi.*The Politicization of Islam: A Case Study
of Tunisia.* Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1998.

Hammoudi, Abdellah.*Master and Disciple: The Cultural Foundations of
Moroccan* *Authoritarianism.* Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press,
1997.

Hart, David M.*Tribe and Society in Rural Morocco.* London: Frank Cass,
2000.

Hasan, Mushirul.*Islam in the Subcontinent: Muslims in a Plural
Society.* New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal, 2000.

Hasan, Mushirul.*Legacy of a Divided Nation: India’s Muslims since
Independence.* Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1997.

Hefner, Robert W.*Civil Islam* :*Muslims and Democratization in
Indonesia.* Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2000.

Hefner, Robert W. and Patricia Horvatich, eds.*Islam in an Era of
Nation-States: Politics and Religious Renewal in Muslim Southeast Asia.*
Honolulu, HI: University of Hawaii Press, 1997.

Henry, Clement M. *The Mediterranean Debt Crescent: Money and Power in
Algeria, Egypt,* *Morocco, Tunisia, and Turkey.* Gainesville, FL:
University Press of Florida, 1996.

Hillebrand, Carole, ed.*The Sultan’s Turret: Studies in Persian and
Turkish Culture.* Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1999.

Hinnebusch, Raymond A.*Authoritarian Power and State Formation in
Ba‘thist Syria: Army, Party, and Peasant.* Boulder, CO: Westview Press,
1990.

Hinnebusch, Raymond and Anoushiravan Ehteshami, eds. *The Foreign
Policies of Middle* *East States.* Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner, 2002.

Hiro, Dilip.*Between Marx and Muhammad: The Changing Face of Central
Asia.* London: Harper-Collins, 1995.

Hiro, Dilip.*The Longest War: The Iran-Iraq Military Conflict.* New
York: Routledge, 1991.

Hiro, Dilip.*Neighbors, Not Friends: Iraq and Iran after the Gulf Wars.*
New York: Routledge, 2001.

Hiskett, Mervyn.*The Course of Islam in Africa.* Edinburgh: Edinburgh
University Press, 1994.

Hiskett, Mervyn.*The Development of Islam in West Africa.* London:
Longman, 1984.

Hitchcock, Michael.*Islam and Identity in Eastern Indonesia.* Hull: Hull
University Press, 1996.

Hooglund, Eric, ed.*Twenty Years of Islamic Revolution: Political and
Social Transition in* *Iran            since 1979.* Syracuse, NY:
Syracuse University Press, 2002.

Horne, Alistair.*A Savage War of Peace: Algeria, 1954-1962.* London:
Macmillan, 1977.

Hourani, Albert H.*Syria and Lebanon.* London: Oxford University Press,
1946.

Houston, Christopher.*Islam, Kurds and the Turkish Nation State.*
Oxford, UK: Berg, 2001.

Howe, Marvine.*Turkey Today: A Nation Divided Over Islam’s Revival.*
Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 2000.

Hunter, Shireen T., ed.*Islam, Europe’s Second Religion: The New Social,
Cultural and* *Political          Landscape.* Westport, CT: Praeger,
2002.

Hurewitz, Jacob C., ed. *The Middle East and North Africa in World
Politics: A Documentary Record,* 2 Vols. New Haven, CT: Yale University
Press, 1975-79.

Irfani, Shuroosh.*Revolutionary Islam in Iran: Popular Liberation or
Religious Dictatorship?* London: Zed Books, 1983.

Israeli, Raphael.*Islam in China: A Critical Bibliography.* Westport,
CT: Greenwood Publ., 1994.

Israeli, Raphael.*Islam in China: Religion, Ethnicity, Culture, and
Politics* . Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, 2002.

Jackson, Karl D.*Traditional Authority, Islam, and Rebellion: A Study of
Indonesian Political* *Behavior.* Berkeley, CA: University of California
Press, 1980.

Jahanbakhsh, Forough.*Islam, Democracy and Modernism in Iran, 1953-2000:
From* *Bazargan to Soroush.* Leiden: E.J. Brill, 2001.

Jalal, Ayesha.*Self and Sovereignty: Individual and Community in South
Asian Islam since* *1850.* London: Routledge, 2000.

Jalal, Ayesha.*The Sole Spokesman: Jinnah, The Muslim League and The
Demand for* *Pakistan.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1985.

Jankowski, James.*Egypt: A Short History.* Oxford, UK: Oneworld, 2000.

Jawad, Saad.*Iraq and the Kurdish Question, 1958-1970.* London: Ithaca
Press, 1981.

Jawed, Nasim A.*Islam’s Political Culture: Religion and Politics in
Pre-divided Pakistan.* Austin, TX: University of Texas Press, 1999.

Johnson, Douglas H.*The Root Causes of Sudan’s Civil Wars.* Bloomington,
IN: Indiana University Press, 2003.

Johnson, Nels.*Islam and the Politics of Meaning in Palestinian
Nationalism.* London: Kegan Paul Int’l., 1982.

Jones, Owen Bennett.*Pakistan: Eye of the Storm.* New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press, 2nd ed., 2002.

Kamrava, Mehran.*Revolution in Iran: The Roots of Turmoil.* London:
Routledge, 1990.

Karmi, Ghada and Eugene Cotran, eds.*The Palestinian Exodus: 1948-1998.*
London: Ithaca Press, 2000.

Karpat, Kemal H.*The Politicization of Islam: Reconstructing Identity,
State, Faith and* *Community in the Late Ottoman State.* Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press, 2002.

Kassem, Maye.*Egyptian Politics: The Dynamics of Authoritarian Rule.*
Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner, 2004.

Kayali, Hasan.*A History of Modern Turkey.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press, 2003.

Kazemi, Farhad.*Poverty and Revolution in Iran: The Migrant Poor, Urban
Marginality,* *and Politics.* Washington Square, NY: New York University
Press, 1981.

Keddie, Nikki R.*Iran and the Muslim World: Resistance and Revolution.*
Washington Square, NY: New York University Press, 1995.

Keddie, Nikki R.*Iran: Religion, Politics and Society.* London: Frank
Cass, 1980.

Keddie, Nikki R.*Religion and Rebellion in Iran: The Tobacco Protest of
1891-1892.* London: Frank Cass, 1966.

Keddie, Nikki R.*Roots of Revolution: An Interpretative History of
Modern Iran.* New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1981.

Keddie, Nikki R.*Modern Iran: Roots and Results of Revolution.* New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2003

Keddie, Nikki R., ed.*Religion and Politics in Iran: Shi‘ism from
Quietism to Revolution.* New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1983.

Kelly, J.B.*Sultanate and Imamate in Oman.* London: Chatham House, 1959.

Kennedy, Charles H. and Craig Baxter, eds.*Pakistan 2000.* Lanham, MD:
Lexington Books, 2000.

Kennedy, Charles H., et al., eds.*Pakistan at the Millennium.* Oxford,
UK: Oxford University Press, forthcoming.

Kennedy, Hugh.*Muslim Spain and Portugal: A Political History of
al-Andalus.* Boston, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1997.

Kepel, Gilles.*Muslim Extremism in Egypt: The Prophet and Pharaoh.*
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2003 ed.

Khadduri, Majid.*Republican Iraq.* London: Oxford University Press,
1969.

Khadduri, Majid.*Socialist Iraq: A Study in Iraqi Politics Since 1968* .
Washington, DC: Middle East Institute, 1978.

Khadduri, Majid and Edmund Ghareeb.*War in the Gulf, 1990-91: The
Iraq-Kuwait Conflict* *and Its Implications.* Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press, 2001.

Khalaf, Samir. *Civil and Uncivil Violence: The Internationalization of
Communal Conflict in* *Lebanon.* New York: Columbia University Press,
2002.

Khalid, Adeeb.*The Politics of Muslim Cultural Reform: Jadidism in
Central Asia.* Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1999.

Khalid, Mansour.*War and Peace in Sudan: A Tale of Two Countries.*
London: Kegan Paul Int’l., 2002.

Khalidi, Omar.*Indian Muslims Since Independence.* New Delhi: Vikas,
1995.

Khan, M.A. Muqtedar.*American Muslims: Bridging Faith and Freedom* .
Beltsville, MD: Amana, Publ., 2002.

Khoury, Dina Rizk.*State and Provincial Society in the Ottoman Empire:
Mosul, 1540-1834.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1998.

Khoury, Philip.*Syria and the French Mandate: The Politics of Arab
Nationalism, 1928-1945.* Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press,
1987.

Kienle, Eberhard.*Ba‘th v. Ba‘th: The Conflict Between Syria and Iraq,
1968-1989.* London: I.B. Tauris, 2000.

Kimmerling, Baruch and Joel S. Migdal.*The Palestinian People: A
History.* Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2003.

King, Stephen J.*Liberalization against Democracy: The Local Politics of
Economic Reform* *in Tunisia.* Bloomington, IN: Indiana University
Press, 2003.

Kinzer, Stephen.*Crescent and Star: Turkey Between Two Worlds.* New
York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 2002.

Kirişci, Kemal and Gareth M. Winrow.*The Kurdish Question and Turkey: An
Example of a* *Trans-state Ethnic Conflict.* London: Frank Cass, 1997.

Knezys, Stasys and Romanas Sedlickas.*The War in Chechnya.* College
Station, TX: Texas A&M University Press, 1999.

Kostiner, Joseph, ed.*Middle East Monarchies: The Challenge of
Modernity.* Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner, 2000.

Kucuk, Hulya.*The Role of the Bektashis in Turkey’s National Struggle.*
Leiden: E.J. Brill, 2002.

Kuri Fuad I.*Tribe and State in Bahrain.* Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press, 1980.

Kupferschmidt, Uri M.*The Supreme Muslim Council: Islam under the
British Mandate for Palestine.* Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1987.

Laffan, Michael Francis. *Islamic Nationhood and Colonial Indonesia: The
Umma Below the* *Winds.* New York: RoutledgeCurzon, 2002.

Latifa, with Shékéba Hachemi (Linda Coverdale, trans.). *My Forbidden
Face—Growing Up Under the Taliban:* *One Woman’s Story.* New York:
Miramax/Hyperion, 2002.

Launay, Robert.*Beyond the Stream: Islam and Society in a West African
Town.* Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1992.

Lawrence, Bruce B.*New Faiths, Old Fears: Muslims and Other Asian
Immigrants in* *American Religious Life.* New York: Columbia University
Press, 2002.

Layachi, Azzedine.*State, Society and Democracy in Morocco: The Limits
of Associative* *Life.* Washington, DC: Center for Contemporary Arab
Studies, 1998.

Lebor, Adam.*A Heart Turned East: Among the Muslims of Europe and
America.* New York:St. Martin’s Press, 2001.

Lesch, Ann Mosely.*The Sudan: Contested National Identities.*
Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1998.

Levtzion, Nehemia.*Islam in West Africa: Religion, Society and Politics
to 1800.* Aldershot:Ashgate/Variorum, 1994.

Levtzion, Nehemia and Randall L. Pouwels, eds.*The History of Islam in
Africa.* Athens, OH: Ohio University, Center for Int’l. Studies, 2000.

Lewis, Bernard.*The Emergence of Modern Turkey.* Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press, 3rd ed., 2001.

Lewis, Bernard and Dominique Schnapper, eds.*Muslims in Europe.* London:
Pinter, 1994.

Lewis, Philip.*Islamic Britain: Religion, Politics and Identity among
British Muslims.* London: I.B. Tauris, 1994.

Liel, Alon (Emanuel Lottem, trans.).*Turkey in the Middle East: Oil,
Islam, and Politics.* Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner Publ., 2001.

Lindholm, Charles.*The Islamic Middle East: Tradition and Change.*
Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2nd ed., 2002.

Lipman, Jonathan N.*Familiar Strangers: A History of Muslims in
Northwest China.* Seattle, WA: University of Washington Press, 1998.

Löffler, Rheinhold.*Islam in Practice: Religious Belief in a Persian
Village.* Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 1988.

Logan, Harriet.*Unveiled: Voices of Women in Afghanistan.* New York:
Regan Books, 2002.

Long, David E.*The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.* Gainesville, FL: University
Press of Florida, 1997.

Lynch, Marc.*State Interests and Public Spheres: The International
Politics of Jordan’s* *Identity.* New York: Columbia University Press,
1999.

Mackey, Sandra.*The Iranians: Persia, Islam and the Soul of a Nation.*
New York: Plume/Penguin, 1998 ed.

Mackey, Sandra.*The Reckoning: Iraq and the Legacy of Saddam Hussein.*
New York: W.W. Norton & Co., 2003.

Magnus, Ralph H. and Eden Naby.*Afghanistan: Mullah, Marx, and Mujahid.*
Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 2002.

Majul, Cesar Adib.*The Contemporary Muslim Movement in the Philippines.*
Berkeley, CA: Mizan Press, 1985.

Majul, Cesar Adib.*Muslims in the Philippines.* Quezon City: University
of the Philippines Press, 1999.

Makiya, Kanan.*Republic of Fear: The Politics of Modern Iraq.* Berkeley,
CA: University of California Press, updated ed., 1998.

Maley, William.*The Afghanistan Wars.* New York: Palgrave Macmillan,
2002.

Malley, William.*Fundamentalism Reborn?  Afghanistan and the Taliban* .
Washington Square, NY: New York University Press, 1998.

Malik, Hafeez.*Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan and Muslim Modernism in India and
Pakistan.* New York: Columbia University Press, 1980.

Malik, Hafeez, ed.*Central Asia: Its Strategic Importance and Future
Prospects.* New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1994.

Malik, Hafeez, ed.*Pakistan: Founders’ Aspirations and Today’s
Realities.* Karachi: Oxford University Press, 2000.

Malik, Hafeez, ed.*Russian-American Relations: Islamic and Turkish
Dimensions in the* *Volga-Ural Basin.* New York: Palgrave Macmillan,
2000.

Malik, Iftikhar Haider.*Islam, Nationalism, and the West: Issues of
Identity in Pakistan.* New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 1999.

Malik, Jamal.*Colonialization of Islam: Dissolution of Traditional
Institutions in Pakistan.* New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal, 1998.

Malley, Robert.*The Call from Algeria: Third Worldism, Revolution and
the Turn to Islam.* Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1996.

Mardin, Şerif.*The Genesis of Young Ottoman Thought: A Study in the
Modernization of* *Turkish Political Ideas.* Syracuse, NY: Syracuse
University Press, 2000.

Mardin, Serif.*Religion, Society and Modernity in Turkey.* Syracuse, NY:
Syracuse University Press, 2002.

Maréchal, Brigette, et al., eds.*Muslims in the Enlarged Europe.*
Leiden: E.J. Brill, 2003.

Marr, Phebe.*The Modern History of Iraq.* Boulder, CO: Westview Press,
1985.

Martin, Vanessa.*Creating an Islamic State: Khomeini and the Making of a
New Iran.* London: I.B. Tauris, 2000.

Martinez, Luis.*The Algerian Civil War, 1990-1998.* New York: Columbia
University Press, 2000.

Massad, Joseph A.*Colonial Effects: The Making of National Identity in
Jordan.* New York: Columbia University Press, 2001.

Matinuddin, Kamal.*The Taliban Phenomenon: Afghanistan, 1994-1997.*
Karachi: Oxford University Press, 1999.

McAmis, Robert Day.*Malay Muslims: The History and Challenge of
Resurgent Islam in* *Southeast Asia.* Grand Rapids, MI: William B.
Eerdmans Publ., 2002.

Menashri, David.*Post-Revolutionary Politics in Iran: Religion, Society
and Power.* London: Frank Cass & Co., 2001.

Metcalf, Barbara Daly, ed.*Moral Conduct and Authority: The Place of
Adab in South Asian* *Islam.* Berkeley, CA: University of California
Press, 1984.

Millard, Mike.*Jihad in Paradise: Islam and Politics in Southeast Asia.*
Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe, 2004.

Milton-Edwards, Beverly.*Islamic Politics in Palestine.* London: Tauris
Academic Studies, 1996.

Minault, Gail.*The Khilafat Movement: Religious Symbolism and Political
Mobilization in* *India.* Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2nd ed.,
1999.

Minault, Gail.*Secluded Scholars: Women’s Education and Muslim Social
Reform in Colonial India.* Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1998.

Mir-Hosseini, Ziba.*Islam and Gender: The Religious Debate in
Contemporary Iran.* Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1999.

Mitchell, Timothy.*Colonising Egypt.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press, 1988.

Mitchell , Timothy.*Rule of Experts: Egypt, Technopolitics, Modernity.*
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2002.

Moaddel, Mansoor.*Class, Politics, and Ideology in the Iranian
Revolution.* New York: Columbia University Press, 1992.

Morony, Michael G.*Iraq After the Muslim Conquest.* Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 1984

Moslem, Mehdi.*Factional Politics in Post-Khomeini Iran* . Syracuse, NY:
Syracuse UniversityPress, 2002.

Mottahedeh, Roy.*The Mantle of the Prophet: Religion and Politics in
Iran.* Oxford, UK: Oneworld, 2000.

Mumtaz, Khawar.*Women of Pakistan: Two Steps Forward, One Back?* London:
Zed Books, 1987.

Munson, Henry, Jr.*Islam and Revolution in the Middle East.* New Haven,
CT: Yale University Press, 1989.

Munson, Henry, Jr.*Religion and Power in Morocco.* New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press, 1993.

Murphy, Emma C.*Economic and Political Change in Tunisia: From Bourguiba
to Ben Ali.* New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1999.

Murshid, Tazeen M.*The Sacred and the Secular: Bengal Muslim Discourses,
1871-1977* . Calcutta: Oxford University Press, 1995.

Mutalib, Hussin.*Islam and Ethnicity in Malay Politics.* New York:
Oxford University Press, 1990.

Nabavi, Negin.*Intellectuals and the State in Iran: Politics, Discourse
and the Dilemma of* *Authenticity.* Gainesville, FL: University Press of
Florida, 2003.

Nabavi, Negin, ed.*Intellectual Trends in 20th Century Iran.*
Gainesville, FL: University Press of Florida, 2003.

Najem, Tom Pierre.*Lebanon: The Politics of a Penetrated Society.* New
York: Routledge, 2003.

Nasr, Seyyed Vali Reza.*The Vanguard of the Islamic Revolution: The
Jama‛at-i Islami of* *Pakistan.* Berkeley, CA: University of California
Press, 1994.

Nawid, Senzil K.*Religious Response to Social Change in Afghanistan,
1919-1929: King Aman-Allah and the Afghan Ulama.* Costa Mesa, CA: Mazda
Publ., 2000.

Niblock, Tim.*Saudi Arabia.* New York: Routledge, 2003.

Nielsen, Jørgen S.*Towards a European Islam.* New York: Palgrave
Macmillan, 1999.

Nivet, Anne.*Chienne de Guerre: A Woman Reporter Behind the Lines of the
War in* *Chechnya.* New York: PublicAffaris/Perseus, 2001.

Norton, Augustus Richard.*Amal and the Shi‘a: Struggle for the Soul of
Lebanon.* Austin, TX: University of Texas Press, 1987.

Norris, Harry T.*Islam in the Balkans: Religion and Society between
Europe and the Arab* *World.* Columbia, SC: University of South Carolina
Press, 1994.

Nyang, Sulayman S.*Islam in the United States of America.* Chicago, IL:
ABC Int’l.Group/Kazi Publ., 1999.

O’Ballance, Edgar.*Civil War in Lebanon, 1975-92.* New York: Palgrave
Macmillan, 1999.

Olcott, Martha Brill, ed.*Everyday Islam: Religion and Tradition in
Rural Central Asia.* New York: M.E. Sharpe, 1992.

Olson, Robert W.*The Kurdish Question and Turkish-Iranian Relations:
From World War I* *to 1998.* Costa Mesa, CA: Mazda Publ., 1998.

Olson, Robert W.*Turkey’s Relations with Iran, Syria, Israel, and
Russia, 1991-2000: The* *Kurdish And Islamist Questions. * Costa Mesa,
CA: Mazda Publ., 2001.

Owtram, Francis.*A Modern History of Oman: Formation of the State since
1920.* London: I.B.Tauris, 2003.

Özbudun, Ergun.*Contemporary Turkish Politics: Challenges to Democratic
Consolidation.* Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner, 2000.

Ozdalga, Elisabeth, ed.*Naqshbandis in Western and Central Asia: Change
and Continuity.* Richmond: Curzon Press, 1999.

Özdemir, Adil and Kenneth Frank.*Visible Islam in Modern Turkey.* New
York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2000.

Palumbo, Michael.*The Palestinian Catastrophe: The 1948 Expulsion of a
People from Their Homeland.* New York: Olive Branch Press, 1991.

Pampanini, Andrea H. *Cities from the Arabian Desert: The Building of
Jubail and Yanbu in Saudi Arabia.* Westport, CT: Praeger, 1997.

Peacock, James L.*Purifying the Faith: The Muhammadiyah Movement in
Indonesian Islam.* Menlo

Park, CA: The Benjamin/Cummings Publ. Co., 1978.

Peck, Malcolm C.*Historical Dictionary of the Gulf Arab States.* Lanham,
MD: Scarecrow Press,1996.

Peck, Malcolm C.*The United Arab Emirates: A Venture in Unity.* Boulder,
CO: Westview Press, 1986.

Pennell, C.R.*Morocco: From Empire to Independence.* Oxford, UK:
Oneworld, 2003.

Perry, Glenn E.*The History of Egypt.* Westport, CT: Greenwood, 2004.

Perthes, Volker.*The Political Economy of Syria under Asad* . London:
I.B. Tauris, 1997.

Petterson, Donald.*Inside Sudan: Political Islam, Conflict, and
Catastrophe.* Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1999.

Pilkington, Hilary and Galina M. Yemelianova, eds.*Islam in Post-Soviet
Russia.* New York:RoutledgeCurzon, 2002.

Politkovskaya, Anna.*A Dirty War: A Russian Reporter in Chechnya.*
London: Harvill Press, 2001.

Pope, Hugh and Nicole Pope.*Turkey Unveiled: A History of Modern
Turkey.* Woodstock, NY: Overlook Press, 2000.

Porter, Donald J.*Managing Politics and Islam in Indonesia.* New York:
RoutledgeCurzon, 2002.

Poulton, Hugh and Suha Taji-Farouki, eds.*Muslim Identity and the Balkan
State.* Washington Square, NY: New York University Press, 1997.

Quandt, William B.*Between Ballots and Bullets: Algeria’s Transition
from Authoritarianism.* Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution, 1998.

Quinn, Charlotte A. and Frederick Quinn.*Pride, Faith, and Fear: Islam
in Sub-Saharan* *Africa.* Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2003.

Qureshi, M. Naeem. *Pan-Islam in British Indian Politics: A Study of the
Khilafat Movement, 1918-1924.* Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1999.

Rahman, Tariq. *Language, Ideology and Power: Language-Learning among
the Muslims of* *Pakistan and North India.* Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press, 2002.

Rahman, Tariq.*Language and Politics in Pakistan.* Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press, 1997.

Rajaee, Farhang, ed.*The Iran-Iraq War: The Politics of Aggression.*
Gainesville, FL: University Press of Florida, 1993.

Ramage, Douglas E.*Politics in Indonesia: Democracy, Islam and the
Ideology of Tolerance.* New York: Routledge, 1995.

Rasanayagam, Angelo.*Afghanistan: A Modern History. London:* I.B.
Tauris, 2003.

Rashid, Ahmed.*Jihad:* *The Rise of Militant Islam in Central Asia.* New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2002.

Rashid, Ahmed.*The Resurgence of Central Asia: Islam or Nationalism?*
London: Zed Books, 1994.

Rashid, Ahmed.*Taliban: Militant Islam, Oil and Fundamentalism in
Central Asia* . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2000.

Rath, Jan, ed.*Western Europe and Its Islam* . Leiden: E.J. Brill, 2001.

Reiter, Yitzhak.*Islamic Institutions in Jerusalem: Palestinian Muslim
Organization under Jordanian and Israeli Rule.* Boston, MA: Kluwer Law
Int’l., 1997.

Reynolds, Jonathan T. *The Time of Politics (Zimanin Siyasa): Islam and
the Politics of* *Legitimacy in Northern Nigeria, 1950-1966.* Lanham,
MD: University Press of America, 2nd ed., 2001.

Ricklefs, M.C. *The Seen and Unseen Worlds in Java, 1726-1749: History,
Literature and* *Islam in the Court of Pakubuwana II.* Honolulu, HI:
University of Hawaii Press, 1998.

Riddell, Peter G.*Islam and the Malay-Indonesian World: Transmission and
Responses.* Honolulu, HI: University of Hawaii Press, 2001.

Roberts, Hugh.*The Battlefield: Algeria, 1988-2002—Studies in a Broken
Polity.* London: Verso, 2003.

Robins, Philip.*A History of Jordan.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press, 2002.

Rogan, Eugene L.*Frontiers of the State in the Late Ottoman Empire:
Transjordan, 1850-1921.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press,
2000.

Rogers, Alisdair and Steven Vertovec, eds.*Muslim European Youth:
Reproducing Religion,* *Ethnicity, and Culture.* Aldershot: Ashgate,
1998.

Ro’i, Yaacov.*Islam in the Soviet Union: From World War II to
Perestroika.* New York: Columbia University Press, 2000.

Ro’i, Yaacov, ed.*Democracy and Pluralism in the Muslim Regions of the
Former USSR.* London: Frank Cass, 2002.

Roy, Asim.*The Islamic Syncretistic Tradition in Bengal.* Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 1983.

Roy, Olivier.*Afghanistan: From Holy War to Civil War.* Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 1995.

Roy, Olivier.*Islam and Resistance in Afghanistan.* Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press, 2nd ed., 1990.

Rubin, Barnett R.*The Fragmentation of Afghanistan.* New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press, 2nd ed., 2002.

Rubin, Barry and Kemal Kirişci, eds.*Turkey in World Politics: An
Emerging Multiregional Power.* Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner, 2001.

Ruedy, John, ed.*Islamism and Secularism in North Africa* . New
York/Washington, DC: St.Martin’s Press/Center for Contemporary Arab
Studies, 1994.

Ryan, Curtis R.*Jordan in Transition: From Hussein to Abdullah.*
Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner, 2002.

Sabbagh, Suha, ed.*Palestinian Women of Gaza and the West Bank.*
Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1998.

Sagdeev, Roald and Susan Eisenhower, eds.*Islam and Central Asia: An
Enduring Legacy or* *an Evolving Threat?* Washington, DC: Eisenhower
Institute/The Center for Political and Strategic Studies, 2000.

Saeed, Javaid.*Islam and Modernization: A Comparative Analysis of
Pakistan, Egypt and Turkey.* Westport, CT: Praeger, 1994.

Said, Edward W. *The Politics of Dispossession: The Struggle for
Palestinian Self-Determination, 1969-1994.* New York: Pantheon Books,
1994.

Saikal, Amin and William Maley. *Regime Change in Afghanistan: Foreign
Intervention and* *the Politics of Legitimacy.* Boulder, CO: Westview
Press, 1991.

Salibi, Kamal.*The Modern History of Jordan.* New York: St. Martin’s
Press, 1999.

Sanasarian, Eliz.*The Women’s Rights Movement in Iran: Mutiny,
Appeasement, and* *Repression from 1900 to Khomeini.* New York: Praeger,
1982.

Satlof, Robert.*From Abdullah to Hussein: Jordan in Transition.* New
York: Oxford University Press, 1994.

Savory, Roger M.*Iran under the Safavids.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press, 1980.

Sayari, Sabri and Yilmaz Esmer, eds.*Politics, Parties, and Elections in
Turkey.* Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner, 2002.

Sayigh, Yezid.*Armed Struggle and the Search for State: The Palestinian
National Movement, 1949-1993.* Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press,
1999.

Schirazi, Asghar (John O’Kane, trans.). *The Constitution of Iran:
Politics and the State in the Islamic Republic.* London: I.B. Tauris,
1997.

Seale, Patrick.*The Struggle for Syria: A Study of Post-War Arab
Politics, 1945-1958.* New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1987.

Schimmel, Annemarie.*Islam in the Indian Subcontinent.* Leiden: E.J.
Brill, 1980.

Schulz, Helena Lindholm.*The Reconstruction of Palestinian Nationalism:
Between* *Revolution and Statehood.* Manchester, UK: Manchester
University Press, 1999.

Shahin, Emad Eldin.*Political Ascent: Contemporary Islamic Movements in
North Africa.* Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1998.

Shankland, David.*The Alevis in Turkey: The Emergence of a Secular
Islamic Tradition* . London: Curzon, 2003.

Sharoni, Simona.*Gender and the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict: The
Politics of Women’s* *Resistance.* Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University
Press, 1995.

Shatzmiller, Maya, ed.*Islam and Bosnia: Conflict Resolution and Foreign
Policy in Multi-Ethnic States.* Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University
Press, 2002.

Sidahmed, Abdel Salam.*Politics and Islam in Contemporary Sudan.* New
York: St. Martin’s Press, 1996.

Siegel, James T.*The Rope of God.* Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan
Press, 2000.

Silverfarb, Daniel.*Britain’s Informal Empire in the Middle East: A Case
Study of Iraq,* *1929-1941.* Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1997.

Simon, Reeva S. *Iraq Between the Two World Wars: The Creation and
Implementation of a* *Nationalist Ideology.* New York: Columbia
University Press, 1996.

Sisson, Richard and Leo. E. Rose.*War and Secession: Pakistan, India,
and the Creation of* *Bangladesh.* Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press, 1990.

Skaine, Rosemarie.*The Women of Afghanistan under the Taliban* . London:
McFarland & Co., 2001.

Smith, Jane I.*Islam in America.* New York: Columbia University Press,
1999.

Smith, Jane I. and Yvonne Y. Haddad, eds.*Muslim Communities in North
America.* Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 1994.

Sonbol, Amira Al-Azhary.*The New Mamluks: Egyptian Society and Modern
Feudalism.* Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press, 2000.

Starrett, Gregory.*Putting Islam to Work: Education, Politics, and
Religious Transformation* *in Egypt.* Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press, 1998.

Stone, Martin. *The Agony of Algeria.* New York: Columbia University
Press, 1998.

Sukma, Rizal.*Islam in Indonesian Foreign Policy.* New York:
RoutledgeCurzon, 2003.

Sullivan, Denis J and Sana Abed-Kotob.*Islam in Contemporary Egypt:
Civil Society vs. the State.* Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner, 1999.

Tabari, Azar and Nahid Yeganeh.*In the Shadow of Islam: The Women’s
Movement in Iran.* London: Zen Press, 1982.

Talbott, John E.*The War without a Name: France in Algeria, 1954-1962.*
New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1980.

Tapper, Richard, ed.*Islam in Modern Turkey: Religion, Politics, and
Literature in a* *Secular State.* New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 1994.

Tauber, Eliezer.*The Formation of Modern Syria and Iraq* . London: Frank
Cass & Co., 1995.

Tavakoli-Targhi, Mohamad.*Refashioning Iran: Orientalism, Occidentalism
and* *Historiography.* New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2001.

Tayob, Abdulkader I.*Islam in South Africa: Mosques, Imams, and
Sermons.* Gainesville, FL: University Press of Florida, 1999.

Toprak, Binnaz.*Islam and Political Development in Turkey.* Leiden: E.J.
Brill, 1981.

Trimingham, J.S.*Islam in Ethiopia.* London: Frank Cass & Co., 1965.

Trimingham, J.S.*Islam in West Africa.* Oxford, UK: Clarendon Press,
1959.

Troll, Christian W., ed.*Muslim Shrines in India.* Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press, 2003 ed.

Uwaysi, Abd al-Fattah Muhammad.*The Muslim Brothers and the Palestine
Question,* *1928-1947.* London: Tauris Academic Studies, 1998.

Van Dam, Nikolaos. *The Struggle for Power in Syria: Politics and
Society under Asad and* *the Ba‘th Party.* London: I.B. Tauris, 1996.

van den Bos, Matthijs.*Mystic Regimes: Sufism and the State in Iran,
from the late Qajar* *Era to the* *Islamic Republic.* Leiden: E.J.
Brill, 2002.

Van Dijk, Cornelius.*Rebellion Under the Banner of Islam: The Darul
Islam in Indonesia.* The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1981.

Vassiliev, Alexei.*The History of Saudi Arabia.* Washington Square, NY:
New York University Press, 2000.

Vertovec, Steven and Ceri Peach, eds.*Islam in Europe: The Politics of
Religion and* *Community.* London: Palgrave Macmillan, 1997.

Villalón, Leonardo A. *Islamic Society and State Power in Senegal:
Disciples and Citizens in Fatick.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press, 1995.

Voll, John O., ed. *Sudan: State and Society in Crisis.* Bloomington,
IN: Indiana UniversityPress, 1991.

Volpi, Frederic. Islam and Democracy: The Failure of Dialogue in
Algeria, 1988-2001. London: Pluto Press, 2003.

Von Der Mehden, Fred R. Two Worlds of Islam: Interaction Between
Southeast Asia and the Middle East. Gainesville, FL: University Press of
Florida, 1993.

Wedeen, Lisa. Ambiguities of Domination: Politics, Rhetoric, and Symbols
in Contemporary Syria. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1999.

Westerlund, David and Eva Rosander, eds. African Islam and Islam in
Africa: Encounters Between Sufis and Islamists. Athens, OH: Ohio
University Press, 1997.

White, Jenny B.*Islamist Mobilization in Turkey: A Study in Vernacular
Politics.* Seattle, WA: University of Washington Press, 2003.

Wickham, Carrie Rosefsky.*Mobilizing Islam: Religion, Activism, and
Political Change in* *Egypt.* New York: Columbia University Press, 2002.

Wiktorowicz, Quintan. *The Management of Islamic Activism: Salafis, the
Muslim* *Brotherhood and State Power in Jordan.* Albany, NY: State
University of New York Press, 2001.

Wilkinson, John Craven.*The Imamate Tradition of Oman.* Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press, 1987.

Willis, Michael.*The Islamist Challenge in Algeria: A Political
History.* Washington Square, NY: New York University Press, 1999.

Wing, Adrien K.*Democracy, Constitutionalism and the Future of
Palestine.* Jerusalem: Palestinian Academic Society for the Study of
International Affairs, 1994.

Wirsing, Robert G.*India, Pakistan, and the Kashmir Dispute: On Regional
Conflict and Its Resolution.* New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1994.

Wolpert, Stanley A.*Jinnah of Pakistan.* New York: Oxford University
Press, 1984.

Wolpert, Stanley A.*A New History of India.* New York: Oxford University
Press, 6th ed., 2000.

Wolpert, Stanley A.*Zulfi Bhutto of Pakistan: His Life and Times.* New
York: Oxford University Press, 1993.

Woodward, Mark R., ed.*Toward a New Paradigm: Recent Developments in
Indonesian* *Islamic Thought.* Tempe, AZ: Arizona State University
Program for Southeast Asian Studies, 1996.

Wright, Robin.*The Last Great Revolution: Turmoil and Transformation in
Iran.* New York: Vintage Books, 2001.

Yavuz, M. Hakan.*Islamic Political Identity in Turkey.* Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press, 2003.

Zaheer, Hasan.*The Separation of East Pakistan: The Rise and Realization
of Bengali Muslim Nationalism.* Karachi: Oxford University Press, 1994.

Ziring, Lawrence.*Bangladesh: From Mujib to Ershad—An Interpretive
Study.* Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1996.

Ziring, Lawrence.*Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History.* Oxford, UK:
Oneworld, 2003.

Ziring, Lawrence.*Pakistan in the Twentieth Century: A Political
History.* Karachi: Oxford University Press, 1998.

Zisser, Eyal.*Asad’s Legacy: Syria in Transition.* Washington Square,
NY: New York University Press, 2001.

Zoubir, Yahia, ed.*North Africa in Transition: State, Society, and
Economic Transformation* *in the 1990s.* Gainesville, FL: University
Press of Florida, 1999.

Zürcher, Erik. *Turkey: A Modern History.* London: I.B. Tauris, 1997.


