


XI - Culture, Economics and Politics:
Abaza, Mona.*Debates on Islam and Knowledge in Malaysia and Egypt:
Shifting Worlds.* London: RoutledgeCurzon, 2002.

Abootalebi, Ali Reza.*Islam and Democracy: State-Society Relations in
Developing* *Countries,1980-1994.* London: Garland, 2000.

Abou El Fadl, Khaled. *And God Knows the Soldiers: The Authoritative and
Authoritarian in Islamic Discourses.* Lanham, MD: University Press of
America, 2001.

Abou El Fadl, Khaled, et al.*Islam and the Challenge of Democracy.*
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press (A*Boston Review* Book), 2004.

Abou El Fadl, Khaled, et al.*The Place of Tolerance in Islam.* Boston,
MA: Beacon Press, 2002.

Abu-Lughod, Lila, ed.*Remaking Women: Feminism and Modernity in the
Middle East.* Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1998.

Abu-Nimer, Mohammad.*Nonviolence and Peace Building in Islam.*
Gainesville, FL: University Press of Florida, 2003.

Afkhami, Mahnaz, ed.*Faith and Freedom: Women’s Human Rights in the
Muslim World.* Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press, 1995.

Afkhami, Mahnaz and Erika Friedl, eds.*Muslim Women and the Politics of
Participation: Implementing the Beijing Platform.* Syracuse, NY:
Syracuse University Press, 1997.

Afsaruddin, Asma, ed. *Hermeneutics and Honor: Negotiating Female
“Public” Space in Islamic/ate Societies.* Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 2000.

Ahmad, Hisham H.*Hamas: From Religious Salvation to Political
Transformation.* Jerusalem: Palestinian Academic Society for the Study
of International Affairs, 1994.

Ahmed, Akbar S.*Islam Under Siege: Living Dangerously in a Post-Honour
World.* London: Polity Press, 2003.

Ahmed, Akbar S.*Jinnah, Pakistan and Islamic Identity: The Search for
Saladin.* London: Routledge, 1997.

Ahmed, Akbar S.*Postmodernism and Islam: Predicament and Promise.* New
York: Routledge,

1992.

Ahmed, Leila.*Women and Gender in Islam: Historical Roots of a Modern
Debate.* New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1993.

Ajami, Fouad.*The Arab Predicament: Arab Political Thought and Practice
since 1967.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1992.

Akbar, M.J.*The Shade of Swords: Jihad and the Conflict Between Islam
and Christianity.* New York: Routledge, 2nd ed., 2003.

Akbarzadeh, Shahram and Abdullah Saeed, eds.*Islam and Political
Legitimacy.* London: Routledge Curzon, 2003.

Al-Ali, Najde.*Secularism, Gender, and the State in the Middle East: The
Egyptian Women’s Movement.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press,
2000.

Al-Azmeh, Aziz.*Arabic Thought and Islamic Societies.* London: Routledge
& Kegan Paul, 1986.

Al-Azmeh, Aziz.*Islams and Modernities* . London: Verso, 2nd ed., 1997.

Ali, Tariq.*Clash of Fundamentalisms: Crusades, Jihads, and Modernity.*
London: Verso, 2002.

Allain, Jean.*International Law in the Middle East: Closer to Power Than
Justice.* Aldershot: Ashgate, 2004.

AlSayyad, Nezar and Manuel Castells, eds.*Muslim Europe or Euro-Islam:
Politics, Culture,* *and Citizenship in the Age of Globalization.*
Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, 2002.

Al-Sulami, Mishal.*The West and Islam: Western Liberal Democracy versus
the System of* *Shura.* London: Routledge Curzon, 2004.

Ansari, Ali M.*Iran, Islam and Democracy: The Politics of Managing
Change.* London: Royal Institute of International Affairs, 2000.

Antoun, Richard.*Muslim Preacher in the Modern World: A Jordanian Case
Study in* *Comparative Perspective.* Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press, 1989.

Aruri, Naseer H.*The Obstruction of Peace: The United States, Israel,
and the Palestinians.* Monroe, ME: Common Courage Press, 1995.

Asad, Talal.*Formations of the Secular: Christianity, Islam, Modernity.*
Stanford, CA: Stanfordn University Press, 2003.

Asad, Talal.*Genealogies of Religion: Discipline and Reasons of Power in
Christianity and* *Islam.* Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University
Press, 1993.

Ashrawi, Hanan.*This Side of Peace.* New York: Simon and Schuster, 1996.

Ask, K. and Marit Tjomsland, eds.*Women and Islamization: Contemporary
Dimensions of Discourse on Gender Relations.* Oxford, UK: Berg, 1998.

Aswad, Barbara C. and Barbara Bilge, eds. *Family and Gender among
American Muslims: Issues Facing Middle Eastern Immigrants and their
Descendants.* Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press, 1996.

El-Awaisi, Abd al-Fattah Muhammad. *The Muslim Brothers and the
Palestine Question,* *1928-1947.* London: Tauris Academic Studies, 1998.

Ayalon, David.*Outsiders in the Land of Islam: Mamluks, Mongols, and
Eunichs.* Aldershot: Ashgate/Variorum, 1988.

Ayoub, Mohammed.*The Politics of Islamic Reassertion* . London: Croom
Helm, 1981.

Ayubi, Nazih N.*Political Islam: Religion and Politics in the Arab
World.* London: Routledge, 1991.

Azumah, John.*The Legacy of Arab-Islam in Africa: A Quest for
Inter-religious Dialogue.* Oxford, UK: Oneworld, 2001.

Baaklini, Abdo, Guilain Denoeux and Robert Springborg.*Legislative
Politics in the Arab* *World:* *The Resurgence of Democratic
Institutions.* Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner, 1999.

Bamyeh, Mohammed.*The Social Origins of Islam.* Minneapolis, MN:
University of Minnesota Press, 1999.

Bannerman, Patrick J.*Islam in Perspective: A Guide to Islamic Society,
Politics, and Law.* New York: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1988.

Barakat, Halim.*The Arab World: Society, Culture and State.* Berkeley,
CA: University of California Press, 1993.

Barazangi, Nimat Hafez, M. Raquibuz Zaman and Omar Afzal, eds.*Islamic
Identity and the Struggle for Justice.* Gainesville, FL: University
Press of Florida, 1996.

Barnett, Michael N. *Confronting the Costs of War: Military Power,
State, and Society in* *Egypt and Israel.* Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 1992.

Barnett, Michael N.*Dialogues in Arab Politics: Negotiations in Regional
Order.* New York: Columbia University Press, 2nd ed., 1998.

Beck, Lois Grant and Nikki Keddie, eds.*Women in the Muslim World.*
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1978.

Beeman, William O.*Language, Status, and Power in Iran.* Bloomington,
IN: Indiana University Press, 1986.
Beinin, Joel.*Workers and Peasants in the Modern Middle East.*
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2001.

Beinin, Joel and Joe Stork, eds.*Political Islam: Essays from Middle
East Report.* Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1997.

Bennis, Phyllis, et al., eds.*Beyond the Storm: A Gulf Crisis Reader.*
Northampton, MA: Interlink Publ. Group, 1998.

Bernard, Cheryl.*Veiled Courage: Inside the Afghan’s Women’s
Resistance.* New York: Broadway Books, 2002.

Bill, James A.*The Eagle and the Lion: The Tragedy of American-Iranian
Relations.* New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1988.

Bin Sayeed, Khalid.*Western Dominance and Political Islam.* Albany, NY:
State University of New York Press, 1995.

Binder, Leonard, ed.*Ethnic Conflict and International Politics in the
Middle East.* Gainesville, FL: University Press of Florida, 1999.

Binder, Leonard.*Islamic Liberalism: A Critique of Development
Ideologies.* Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1988.

Blank, Jonah.*Mullahs on the Mainframe: Islam and Modernity among the
Daudi Bohras.* Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2001.

Bodman, Herbert and Nayereh Tohidi, eds.*Women in Muslim Societies:
Diversity within Unity.* Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner, 1998.

Boroujerdi, Mehrzad.*Iranian Intellectuals and the West: The Tormented
Triumph of* *Nativism.* Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press, 1996.

Bowen, Donna Lee and Evelyn A. Early, eds.*Everyday Life in the Muslim
Middle East.* Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 2nd ed., 2002.

Brand, Laurie A.*Women, the State and Political Liberalization: Middle
Eastern and North African Experiences.* New York: Columbia University
Press, 1998.

Brann, Ross, ed.*Languages of Power in Islamic Spain.* Bethesda, MD: CDL
Press, 1997.

Brooks, Geraldine.*Nine Parts of Desire: The Hidden World of Islamic
Women.* New York: Anchor Books, 1996.

Brown, L. Carl.*Diplomacy in the Middle East: The International
Relations of Regional and Outside Powers.* New York: Palgrave, 2001.

Brown, L. Carl.*International Politics and the Middle East: Old Rules,
Dangerous Game.* Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1984.

Brown, L. Carl.*Religion and State: The Muslim Approach to Politics.*
New York: Columbia University Press, 2000.

Brown, Nathan.*The Rule of Law in the Arab World.* Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press, 1997.

Brynen, Rex.*Sanctuary and Survival: The PLO in Lebanon.* Boulder, CO:
Westview Press, 1990.

Brynen, Rex, Bahgat Korany and Paul Noble, eds.*Political Liberalization
and* *Democratization in the Arab World,* 2 Vols. Boulder, CO: Lynne
Rienner, 1995-1998.

Bukhari, Zahid J. et al., eds.*Muslims’ Place in the American Public
Square.* Lanham, MD: AltaMira Press, 2004.

Bulliet, Richard. W.*Islam: The View from the Edge.* New York: Columbia
University Press, 1995.

Bunt, Gary.*Virtually Islamic: Computer-Mediated Communication and
Cyber-Islamic* *Environments.* Cardiff: University of Wales Press, 2000.

Burckhardt, Titus.*Fez, City of Islam* . London: I.B. Tauris, 1999.

Burke, Edmund and Ira M. Lapidus, eds.*Islam, Politics, and Social
Movements.* Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1988.

Butterworth, Charles E. and I. William Zartman, eds.*Between the State
and Islam.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2001.

Charnay, Jean-Paul.*Islamic Culture and Socio-Economic Change.* Leiden:
E.J. Brill, 1981.

Chaudhry, Kiren Aziz.*The Price of Wealth: Economies and Institutions in
the Middle East.* Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1997.

Chelkowski, Peter and Hamid Dabashi.*Staging a Revolution: The Art of
Persuasion in the* *Islamic*  *Republic of Iran* . Washington Square,
NY: New York University Press, 1999.

Cheshin, Amir S., Bill Hutman and Avi Melamed.*Separate and Unequal: The
Inside Story of Israeli Rule in East Jerusalem.* Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 1999.

Chomsky, Noam.*The Fateful Triangle: The United States, Israel and the
Palestinians.* Boston, MA: South End Press, 2nd ed., 1999.

Chomsky, Noam.*Middle East Illusions.* Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield,
2003.

Choueiri, Youssef M.*Arab Nationalism: A History.* Oxford, UK:
Blackwell, 2000.

Citino, Nathan J.*From Arab Nationalism to OPEC: Eisenhower, King Sa‘ūd,
and the Making of U.S.-Saudi Relations.* Bloomington, IN: Indiana
University Press, 2002.

Cleveland, William L. *Islam against the West: Shakīb Arslān and the
Campaign for Islamic Nationalism.* London: Saqi Books, 1985.

Cobban, Helena.*The Palestinian Liberation Organization: people, power
and politics.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1984.

Cohnn-Sherbok, Dan and Dawoud El-Alami.*The Palestine—Israeli Conflict:
A Beginner’s* *Guide* . Oxford, UK: Oneworld, 2001.

Cole, Juan R. I., ed.*Comparing Muslim Societies: Knowledge and the
State in a World* *Civilization.* Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan
Press, 1992.

Cooke, Miriam.*Women Claim Islam: Creating Islamic Feminism through
Literature.* New York: Routledge, 2000.

Cotran, Eugene, Chibli Mallat and David Stott, eds.*The Arab-Israeli
Accords: Legal* *Perspectives.* Boston, MA: Kluwer Law International,
1996.

Crow, Ralph E. and Philip Grant and Saad E. Ibrahim, eds. *Arab
Nonviolent Political* *Struggle in the Middle East* . Boulder, CO: Lynne
Rienner Publ., 1990.

Curtis, Edward E., IV. *Islam in Black America: Identity, Liberation,
and Difference in* *African-American Islamic Thought.* Albany, NY: State
University of New York Press, 2002.

Curtis, Michael, ed.*Religion and Politics in the Middle East.* Boulder,
CO: Westview Press, 1981.

Daniel, Norman.*Islam, Europe, and Empire.* Edinburgh: Edinburgh
University Press, 1966.

Daniel, Norman.*Islam and the West: The Making of an Image.* Oxford, UK:
Oneworld, 1993.

Davies, Merryl Wyn.*Knowing One Another: Shaping an Islamic
Anthropology.* London: Mansell, 1988.

Davies, Merryl Wyn and Adnan Khalil Pasha, eds.*Beyond Frontiers: Islam
and* *Contemporary Needs.* London: Continuum, 1989.

Davis, Joyce M.*Between Jihad and Salaam: Profiles in Islam.* New York:
Palgrave Macmillan, 1997.

Davis, Joyce M.*Martyrs: Innocence, Vengeance and Despair in the Middle
East.* New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2003.

Dawisha, Adeed.*Arab Nationalism in the Twentieth Century: From Triumph
to Despair.* Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2003.

Decasa, George C.*The Qur’anic Concept of Umma and its Function in
Philippine Muslim Society.* Rome: Gregorian University Press, 1999.

Dekmejian, R. Hrair.*Islam in Revolution: Fundamentalism in the Arab
World.* Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press, 2nd ed., 1995.

Diamond, Larry, Marc F. Plattner and Daniel Brumberg, eds.*Islam and
Democracy in the* *Middle East.* Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University
Press, 2003.

Dien, Mawil Izzi.*The Environmental Dimensions of Islam.* Cambridge, UK:
Lutterworth Press, 2000.

Djait, Hichem.*Europe and Islam.* Berkeley, CA: University of California
Press, 1985.

Dodge, Toby and Richard Higgott, eds.*Globalization and the Middle East:
Islam, Economy,* *Society and Politics.* London: Royal Institute of
International Affiars (Chatham House), 2002.

Donaldson, William J.*Sharecropping in the Yemen: A Study in Islamic
Theory, Custom and Pragmatism.* Leiden: E.J. Brill, 2000.

Donnan, Hastings, ed.*Interpreting Islam.* London: Sage (abridged ed.),
2002.

Doumato, Eleanor A. and Marsha Pripstein Posusney, eds.*Women and
Globalization in the  Arab Middle East: Gender, Economy and Society.*
Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner, 2003.

Dumper, Michael.*The Politics of Sacred Space: The Old City of Jerusalem
in the Middle* *East*  *Conflict.* Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner, 2002.

Dwyer, Kevin.*Arab Voices: The Human Rights Debate in the Middle East.*
Berkeley, CA:  University of California Press, 1991.

Eickelman, Dale F. and Jon W. Anderson, eds.*New Media in the Muslim
World: The* *Emerging Public Sphere.* Bloomington, IN: Indiana
University Press, 2nd ed., 2003.

Eickelman, Dale F. and James Piscatori.*Muslim Politics.* Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 1996.

El Guindi, Fadwa.*Veil: Modesty, Privacy, and Resistance.* New York:
Berg, 1999.

El Saadawi, Nawal.*The Hidden Face of Eve: Women in the Arab World.*
Boston, MA: Beacon Press, 1980.

Enayat, Hamid.*Modern Islamic Political Thought.* Austin, TX: University
of Texas Press, 1982.

Erickson, John.*Islam and Postcolonial Narrative.* Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press,1998.

Esack, Farid.*Qur’an, Liberation, and Pluralism* . Oxford, UK: Oneworld,
1997.

Esfandiari, Haleh and A.L. Udovitch, eds.*The Economic Dimensions of
Middle Eastern* *History:* *Essays in Honor of Charles Issawi.*
Princeton, NJ: Darwin Press, 1990.

Esposito, John L.*Islam and Politics.* Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University
Press, 1984.

Esposito, John L.*The Islamic Threat: Myth or Reality?* New York: Oxford
University Press, 3rd ed., 1999.

Esposito, John L.*Unholy War: Terror in the Name of Islam.* New York:
Oxford University Press, 2002.

Esposito, John L., ed.*Islam and Development: Religion and
Sociopolitical Change.* Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press, 1980.

Esposito, John L., ed.*Political Islam: Revolution, Radicalism or
Reform?* Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner Publ., 1997.

Esposito, John L. and François Burgat, eds.*Modernizing Islam: Religion
in the Public* *Sphere in Europe and the Middle East.* New Brunswick,
NJ: Rutgers University Press, 2003.

Esposito, John L. and John O. Voll, eds.*Islam and Democracy.* Oxford,
UK: Oxford University Press, 1996.

Esposito, John L. and John O. Voll.*Makers of Contemporary Islam.* New
York: Oxford University Press, 2001.

Everest, Larry.*Oil, Power and Empire: Iraq and the U.S. Global Agenda.*
Monroe, ME: Common Courage Press, 2003.

Ewing, Katherine Pratt.*Arguing Sainthood: Modernity, Psychoanalysis and
Islam.* Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1997.

Falk, Richard (Jean Allain, ed.).*Unlocking the Middle East: The
Writings of Richard Falk.* Northampton, MA: Olive Branch
Press/Interlink, 2003.

Feldman, Noah.*After Jihad: America and the Struggle for Islamic
Democracy.* New York: Farrar, Straus, Giroux, 2003.

Fernea, Elizabeth Warnock.*Guests of the Sheik: An Ethnography of an
Iraqi Village.* New York: Anchor, 1969 (reissue ed.).

Fernea, Elizabeth Warnock.*In Search of Islamic Feminism: One Woman’s
Global Journey.* New York: Bantam Books, 1998.

Fernea, Elizabeth Warnock.*A Street in Marrakech.* Prospect Heights, IL:
Waveland Press, 1988.

Fernea, Elizabeth Warnock, ed.*Children in the Muslim Middle East.*
Austin, TX: University of Texas Press, 1995.

Fernea, Elizabeth Warnock and Basima Qattan Bezirgan, eds.*Middle
Eastern Muslim* *Women Speak.* Austin, TX: University of Texas Press,
1978.

Finkelstein, Norman G.*Image and Reality of the Israel-Palestine
Conflict.* London: Verso, 1995.

Fischer, Michael M.J. and Mehdi Abedi.*Debating Muslims: Cultural
Dialogues in* *Postmodernity and Tradition.* Madison, WI: University of
Wisconsin Press, 1990.

Firestone, Reuven.*Jihad: The Origin of Holy War in Islam.* Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press, 2002.

Fleischmann, Ellen L.*The Nation and Its “New” Women: The Palestinian
Women’s* *Movement, 1920-1948.* Berkeley, CA: University of California
Press, 2003.

Fluehr-Lobban, Carolyn.*Islamic Societies in Practice.* Gainesville, FL:
University Press of Florida, 2nd ed., 2004.

Friedland, Roger and Richard Hecht.*To Rule Jerusalem.* Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press, 2000.

Friedmann, Yohanan.*Shaykh Ahmad Sirhindi: An Outline of His Thought and
Study of His* *Image in the Eyes of Posterity.* Delhi: Oxford University
Press, 2001 (orig. publ.,1971).

Friedmann, Yohanan. *Tolerance and Coercion in Islam: Interfaith
Relations in the Muslim Tradition.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press, 2003.

Fuller, Graham.*The Future of Political Islam* . New York: Palgrave
Macmillan, 2003.

Fuller, Graham E. and Ian O. Lesser.*The Geopolitics of Islam and the
West.* Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1995.

Garnham, David and Mark Tessler, eds.*Democracy, War and Peace in the
Middle East.* Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1995.

Gasiorowski, Mark.*U.S. Foreign Policy and the Shah: Building a Client
State in Iran.* Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1991.

Gellner, Ernest.*Muslim Society.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press, 1981.

Gendzier, Irene L.*Notes from the Minefield: Unites States Intervention
in Lebanon and the* *Middle East, 1945-1958.* Boulder, CO: Westview
Press, 1998.

Gerber, Haim.*Islam, Guerilla War, and Revolution.* Boulder, CO: Lynne
Rienner, 1988.

Gerber, Haim.*The Social Origins of the Modern Middle East.* Boulder,
CO: Lynne Rienner, 1987.

Gerges, Fawaz A.*America and Political Islam: Clash of Cultures or Clash
of Interests?* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1999.

Gerner, Deborah J. and Jillian Schwedler, eds.*Understanding the
Contemporary Middle East.* Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner, 2nd ed., 2003.

Ghadbian, Najib.*Democratization and the Islamist Challenge in the Arab
World* . Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1997.

Ghanem, As’ad.*The Palestinian Regime: A “Partial Democracy.”* Brighton:
Sussex Academic Press, 2001.

Ghoussoub, Mai and Emma Sinclair-Webb.*Imagined Masculinities: Male
Identity and* *Culture in the Modern Middle East.* London: Saqi Books,
2000.

Giacaman, George, et al., eds.*After Oslo: New Realities, Old Problems.*
London: Pluto Press, 1998.

Gibb, Hamilton A.R.*Studies on the Civilization of Islam.* Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press, 1982.

Gibb, H.A.R. and Harold Bowe, eds.*Islamic Society and the West: A Study
of the Impact of Western Civilization on Moslem Culture in the Near
East.* Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1957.

Gillette, Maris Boyd. *Between Mecca and Beijing: Modernization and
Consumption Among Urban Chinese Muslims.* Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press, 2000.

Goodwin, Jan.*Price of Honor: Muslim Women Lift the Veil of Silence on
the Islamic* *World.* New York: Plume/Penguin, 1995.

Gorny, Josef.*Zionism and the Arabs, 1882-1948: A Study in Ideology* .
New York: Oxford University Press, 1987.

Griffin, Michael.*Reaping the Whirlwind: Afghanistan, Al Qa’ida and the
Holy War.* London: Pluto Press, 2003 ed.

Guazzone, Laura, ed.*The Islamist Dilemma: The Poltical Role of Islamist
Movements in the Contemporary Arab World.* Reading, England: Ithaca
Press, 1995.

Haddad, Yvonne Yazbeck.*Muslims in the West: From Sojourners to
Citizens* . New York: Oxford University Press, 2002.

Haddad, Yvonne Yazbeck and John L. Esposito, eds.*Islam, Gender, and
Social Change.* New York: Oxford University Press, 1997.

Haddad, Yvonne Yazbeck and John L. Esposito, eds.*Muslims on the
Americanization Path?* New York: Oxford University Press, 2000.

Haddad, Yvonne Yazbeck and Jane I. Smith, eds.*Muslim Minorities in the
West: Visible and Invisible.* Lanham, MD: AltaMira Press, 2002.

Haeri, Shahla.*No Shame for the Sun: Lives of Professional Pakistani
Women.* Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press, 2002.

Hafez, Kai, ed.*Islam and the West in Mass Media: Fragmented Images in a
Globalizing* *World.* Mount Waverly: Hampton Press, 2000.

Hafez, Kai, et al., eds.*The Islamic World and the West: An Introduction
to Political* *Cultures and International Relations.* Leiden: E.J.
Brill, 2000.

Hafez, Mohammed M.*Why Muslims Rebel: Repression and Resistance in the
Islamic World.* Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner, 2003.

Halliday, Fred.*Islam and the Myth of Confrontation: Religion and
Politics in the Middle* *East.* London:I.B. Tauris, 1996.

Halliday, Fred.*Nation and Religion in the Middle East.* London: Saqi
Books, 2000.

Halliday, Fred and Hamza Alavi, eds.*State and Ideology in the Middle
East and Pakistan.* New York: Monthly Review Press, 1988.

Hamdi, Mohamed Elhachmi. *The Making of an Islamic Political Leader:
Conversations with Hasan al-Turabi.* Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1999.

Harik, Judith Palmer.*Hezbollah: The Changing Face of Terrorism.*
London, I.B. Tauris, 2004.

Hasan, Mushirul, ed.*Islam, Communities and the Nation: Muslim
Identities in South Asia* *and Beyond.* New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal,
1998.

Hashmi, Sohail H., ed.*Islamic Political Ethics: Civil Society,
Pluralism and Conflict.* Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press,
2002.

Hassan, Riaz.*Faithlines: Muslim Concepts of Islam and Society.* Oxford,
UK: Oxford University Press, 2002.

Hatina, Meir.*Islam and Salvation in Palestine: The Islamic Jihad
Movement.* Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press (The Moshe Dayan
Center for Middle Eastern and African Studies), 2001.

Henry, Clement M. and Robert Springborg.*Globalization and the Politics
of Development* *in the Middle East.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press, 2001.

Herold, Marc.*Blown Away: The Myth and Reality of Precision Bombing In
Afghanistan.* Monroe, ME: Common Courage Press, 2003.

Hijab, Nadia.*Womanpower: The Arab Debate on Women at Work.* Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press, 1988.

Hiltermann, Joost R.*Behind the Intifada: Labor and Women’s Movements in
the Occupied* *Territories.* Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press,
1991.

Hiro, Dilip.*Holy Wars: The Rise of Islamic Fundamentalism.* New York:
Routledge, 1989.

Hiro, Dilip.*War Without End: The Rise of Islamist Terrorism and the
Global Response.* New York: Routledge, 2002.

Hoexter, Miriam, Shmuel N. Eisenstadt and Nehemia Levtzion, eds.*The
Public Sphere in* *Muslim Societies.* Albany, NY: State University of
New York Press, 2002.

Hopkins, Nicholas S. and Saad Eddin Ibrahim, eds.*Arab Society: Class,
Gender, Power and* *Development.* Cairo: American University in Cairo
Press, 3rd ed., 1998.

Hopwood, Derek, ed.*Arab Nation, Arab Nationalism.* New York: St.
Martin’s Press, 2000.

Hourani, Albert H.*Arabic Thought in the Liberal Age, 1798-1939.*
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1983 ed.

Hroub, Khaled.*Hamas:* *Political Thought and Practice.* Washington, DC:
Institute for Palestine Studies, 2000.

Huband, Mark.*Warriors of the Prophet: The Struggle for Islam.* Boulder,
CO: Westview Press, 1998.

Hudson, Michael E.*Arab Politics: The Search for Legitimacy.* New Haven,
CT: Yale University Press, 1977.

Hudson, Michael E.*Middle East Dilemma: The Politics and Economics of
Arab Integration.* New York/Washington, DC: Columbia University
Press/Center for Contemporary Arab Studies, 1999.

Hunter, Shireen T.*The Future of Islam and the West: Clash of
Civilizations or Peaceful* *Coexistence?* Westport, CT: Praeger, 1998.

Ibrahim, Mahmood.*Merchant Capital and Islam.* Austin, TX: University of
Texas Press, 1990.

Ibrahim, Saad Eddin.*Egypt, Islam, and Democracy: Twelve Critical
Essays.* Cairo: American University in Cairo Press, 1996.

Insoll, Timothy.*The Archaeology of Islam.* Oxford, UK: Basil Blackwell,
1999.

Issawi, Charles.*An Economic History of the Middle East and North
Africa.* New York: Columbia University Press, 1982.

Jaber, Hala.*Hezbollah: Born with a Vengeance.* New York: Columbia
University Press, 1997.

Jankowski, James and Israel Gershoni, eds.*Rethinking Nationalism in the
Arab Middle East.* New York: Columbia University Press, 1997.

Jansen, Johannes J.G.*The Neglected Duty: The Creed of Sadat’s Assassins
and Islamic Resurgence in the Middle East.* New York: Macmillan, 1996.

Jawad, Haifaa A.*The Rights of Women in Islam: An Authentic Approach.*
New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1998.

Joseph, Suad, ed.*Gender and Citizenship in the Middle East.* Syracuse,
NY: Syracuse UniversityPress, 2000.

Kahf, Mohja.*Western Representations of the Muslim Woman: From Termagant
to* *Odalisque.* Austin, TX: University of Texas Press, 1999.

Kaiser, Paul J. *Culture, Transnationalism, and Civil Society: Aga Khan
Social Service* *Initiatives in Tanzania.* Westport, CT: Praeger, 1996.

Kamalipour, Yahya R. and Hamid Mowlana, eds. *Mass Media in the Middle
East: A Comprehensive Handbook.* Westport, CT: Greenwood Publ., 1994.

Kamrava, Mehran.*Democracy in the Balance: Culture and Society in the
Middle East.* New York: Chatham House, 1998.

Kapchan, Deborah.*Gender on the Market: Moroccan Women and the Revoicing
of* *Tradition.* Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press,
1996.

Karawan, Ibrahim A.*The Islamist Impasse.* Oxford, UK: Oxford University
Press, 1998.

Kawar, Amal.*Daughters of Palestine: Leading Women in the Palestinian
National* *Movement.* Albany, NT: State University of New York Press,
1997.

Kedar, Mordechai.*Asad in Search of Legitimacy: Messages and Rhetoric in
the Syrian Press,* *1970-2000.* Brighton: Sussex Academic Press, 2003.

Keddie, Nikki R.*An Islamic Response to Imperialism: Political and
Religious Writings of* *Sayyid Jamāl ad-Dīn “al-Afghānī.”* Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press, 1983 ed.

Keddie, Nikki R.*Sayyid Jamāl ad-Dīn “al-Afghānī”: A Political
Biography.* Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1972.

Kedourie, Elie.*Afghani and ‘Abduh: An Essay on Religious Unbelief and
Political Activism* *in Modern Islam.* London: Frank Cass & Co., 1966.

Kedourie, Elie.*Democracy and Arab Culture.* London: Frank Cass & Co.,
2nd ed., 1994.

Kedourie, Elie.*Politics in the Middle East* . Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press, 1992.

Kepel, Gilles.*Jihad: The Trail of Political Islam.* Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 2002.

Kerr, Malcolm.*Islamic Reform: The Political and Legal Theories of
Muhammad ‘Abduh and Rashīd Ridā.* Berkeley, CA: University of California
Press, 1966.

Khalidi, Rashid.*Palestinian Identity: The Construction of Modern
Consciousness.* New York: Columbia University Press, 1998.

Khalidi, Rashid, et al., eds.*The Origins of Arab Nationalism.* New
York: Columbia University Press, 1993.

Khan, Shahnaz.*Muslim Women: Crafting a North American Identity.*
Gainesville, FL: University Press of Florida, 2000.

Khuri, Fuad I.*Imams and Emirs: State, Religion and Sects in Islam* .
London: Saqui Books, 1990.

Kienle, Eberhard.*A Grand Delusion: Democracy and Economic Reform in
Egypt.* London: I.B. Tauris, 2001.

Kimmerling, Baruch.*Politicide: Ariel Sharon’s War Against the
Palestinians.* London: Verso, 2003.

Kipper, Judith and Harold H. Saunders, eds.*The Middle East in Global
Perspective.* Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1991.

Kramer, Martin S.*Arab Awakening & Islamic Revival: The Politics of
Ideas in the Middle East.* New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publ., 1996.

Kramer, Martin, ed.*The Islamism Debate.* Syracuse, NY: Syracuse
University Press, 1997.

Kuran, Timur.*Islam and Mammon: The Economic Predicaments of Islamism.*
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2004.

Kurzman, Charles, ed.*Liberal Islam: A Sourcebook.* Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press, 1998.

Lambton, Ann K.S.*State and Government in Medieval Islam; An
Introduction to the Study of Islamic Political Theory: The Jurists.*
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1981.

Landau, Jacob M.*The Politics of Pan-Islam: Ideology and Organization.*
Oxford, UK: Clarendon Press, 1992.

Laroui, Abdullah.*The Crisis of the Arab Intellectual.* Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press, 1977.

Lawrence, Bruce B.*Shattering the Myth: Islam Beyond Violence* .
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1998.

Lee, Robert D.*Overcoming Tradition and Modernity: The Search for
Islamic Authenticity.* Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1997.

Lesch, Ann Mosely.*Israel, Egypt, and the Palestinians: From Camp David
to Intifada.* Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1989.

Lesch, Ann Mosely.*Transition to Palestinian Self-Government: Practical
Steps Toward Israeli-Palestinian Peace.* Bloomington, IN: Indiana
University Press, 1993.

Lewis, Bernard.*Islam and the West.* Oxford, UK: Oxford University
Press, 1993.

Lewis, Bernard.*The Political Language of Islam.* Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press, 2002.

Lia, Brynjar.*The Society of the Muslim Brothers in Egypt: The Rise of
an Islamic Mass* *Movement, 1928-1942.* Reading: Ithaca Press, 1998.

Lincoln, C. Eric.*The Black Muslims in America.* Boston, MA Beacon
Press, revised ed., 1973.

Little, Douglas.*American Orientalism: The United States and the Middle
East since 1945.* Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press,
2002.

Lockman, Zachary and Joel Beinin, eds.*Intifada: The Palestinian
Uprising against Israeli Occupation.* Boston, MA: South End Press (A
Middle East Research and Information Project/MERIP Book), 1989.

Long, David.*The Hajj Today.* Albany, NY: State University of New York
Press, 1979.

Lustick, Ian.*Arabs in the Jewish State: Israel’s Control of a National
Minority.* Austin, TX: University of Texas Press, 1980.

Mack, Beverly B. and Jean Boyd.*Nana Asma’u, Scholar and Scribe.*
Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 2000.

Majid, Anouar.*Unveiling Traditions: Postcolonial Islam in a Polycentric
World.* Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2000.

Makdisi, George.*The Rise of Colleges: Institutions of Learning in Islam
and the West.* Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1981.

Malik, Hafeez, ed.*Iqbal: Poet-philosopher of Pakistan.* New York:
Columbia University Press, 1971.

Mannan, M.A.*Islamic Economics: Theory and Practice.* Boulder, CO:
Westview Press, 1987.

Marlow, Louise.*Hierarchy and Egalitarianism in Islamic Thought.*
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1997.

Martin, Richard C.*Islam, a Cultural Perspective.* Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall, 1982.

Mayer, Ann Elizabeth.*Islam and Human Rights: Tradition and Politics.*
Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 3rd ed., 1999.

McCloud, Aminah Beverly.*African American Islam.* London: Routledge,
1995.

Meddeb, Abdelwahab.*The Malady of Islam.* New York: Basic Books, 2003.

Mernissi, Fatima.*Beyond the Veil: Male-Female Dynamics in Modern Muslim
Society.* Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, revised ed., 1987.

Mernissi, Fatima.*Doing Daily Battle: Interviews with Moroccan Women* .
New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1989.

Mernissi, Fatima.*The Forgotten Queens of Islam.* Minneapolis, MN:
University of Minnesota Press, 1993.

Mernissi, Fatima.*Islam and Democracy: Fear of the Modern World.*
Cambridge, MA: Perseus, 2nd ed., 2002.

Mernissi, Fatima.*The Veil and the Male Elite: A Feminist Interpretation
of Women’s Rights* *in Islam.* New York: Perseus Books, 1992.

Mernissi, Fatima.*Women’s Rebellion & Islamic Memory.* London: Zed
Books, 1996.

Messaoudi, Khalida (interviews with Elisabeth Schemla).*Unbowed: An
Algerian Woman* *Confronts Islamic Fundamentalism.* Philadelphia, PA:
University of Pennsylvania Press, 1998.

Messick, Brinkley.*The Calligraphic State: Textual Domination and
History in a Muslim* *Society.* Berkeley, CA: University of California
Press, 1993.

Metcalf, Barbara Daly, ed.*Making Muslim Space in North America and
Europe.* Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1996.

Minns, Amina and Nadia Hijab.*Citizens Apart: A Portrait of Palestinians
in Israel.* London: I.B. Tauris, 1991.

Mirsepassi, Ali.*Intellectual Discourse and the Politics of
Modernization: Negotiating* *Modernity in Iran.* Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press, 2000.

Mishal, Shaul and Avraham Sela.*The Palestinian Hamas: Vision, Violence,
and Coexistence.* New York: Columbia University Press, 2000.

Mitchell, Richard P.*The Society of the Muslim Brothers.* Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press, 1969.

Moaddel, Mansoor and Kamran Talattof, eds.*Modernist and Fundamentalist
Debates in* *Islam:* *A Reader.* New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2002.

Moghadam, Valentine M., ed.*Gender and National Identity: Women and
Politics in Muslim* *Society.* London: Zed Press, 1996.

Moghadam, Valentine M. *Modernizing Women: Gender and Social Change in
the Middle* *East.* Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner, 2nd ed., 2003.

Moghissi, Haideh.*Feminism and Islamic Fundamentalism: The Limits of
Postmodern* *Analysis.* London: Zed Books, 1999.

Mohammadi, Ali, ed.*Islam Encountering Globalization.* London:
RoutledgeCurzon, 2002.

Monk, Daniel Bertrand.*An Aesthetic Occupation: The Immediacy of
Architecture and the* *Palestine Conflict.* Durham, NC: Duke University
Press, 2002.

Monshipouri, Mahmood.*Islamism, Secularism, and Human Rights in the
Middle East.* Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner, 1998.

Moussalli, Ahmad S.*The Islamic Quest for Democracy, Pluralism, and
Human Rights.* Gainesville, FL: University Press of Florida, 2001.

Moussalli, Ahmad S.*Moderate and Radical Islamic Fundamentalism: The
Quest for* *Modernity,* *Legitimacy and the Islamic State.* Gainesville,
FL: University Press of Florida, 1999.

Mowlana, Hamid, George Gerbner and Herbert I. Schiller, eds.*Triumph of
the Image: The Media’s War in the Persian Gulf—A Global Perspective.*
Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1992.

Mufti, Malik.*Sovereign Creations: Pan-Arabism and Political Order in
Syria and Iraq.* Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1996.

al-Mughni, Haya.*Women in Kuwait: The Politics of Gender.* London: Saqi
Books, 2001.

Munoz, Gema Martin, ed.*Islam, Modernism and the West: Cultural and
Political Relations* *at the End of the Millenium.* London: I.B. Tauris,
1999.

Murden, Simon W.*Islam, the Middle East, and the New Global Hegemony.*
Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner, 2002.

Musallam, Basim.*Sex and Society in Islam: Birth Control before the
Nineteenth Century.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1983.

Muslih, Muhammad Y.*The Origins of Palestinian Nationalism* . New York:
Columbia University Press, 1988.

An-Na‘im, Abdullahi Ahmed.*Toward an Islamic Reformation: Civil
Liberties, Human* *Rights and International Law.* Syracuse, NY: Syracuse
University Press, 1990.

Nasr, Seyyed Vali Reza.*The Islamic Leviathan: Islam and the Making of
State Power.* Oxford, UK; Oxford University Press, 2001.

Nasr, Seyyed Vali Reza.*Mawdudi and the Making of Islamic Revivalism.*
New York: Oxford University Press, 1996.

Nassar, Jamal Raji.*The Palestine Liberation Organization: From Armed
Struggle to the* *Declaration of Independence.* New York: Praeger, 1991.

Niblock, Tim and Rodney Wilson, eds.*The Political Economy of the Middle
East,* 6 Vols. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar Publ., 2000.

Noorani, A.G.*Islam and Jihad: Prejudice Versus Reality* . London: Zed
Books, 2003.

Norton, Augustus Richard, ed.*Civil Society and the Middle East,* 2
Vols. Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1995-1997.

Noyon, Jennifer.*Islam, Politics, and Pluralism: Turkey, Jordan,
Tunisia, and Algeria.* Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press,
2002.

Nusse, Andrea.*Muslim Palestine: The Ideology of Hamas.* Amsterdam:
Harwood Academic Publ.,1998.

Oren, Michael B.*Six Days of War: June 1967 and the Making of the Modern
Middle East.* Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2002.

Owen, Roger.*State, Power and Politics in the Making of the Modern
Middle East* . New York: Routledge, 2nd ed., 2000.

Ozdalga, Elisabeth.*The Veiling Issue, Official Secularism and Popular
Islam in Modern* *Turkey.* Richmond, Surrey: Curzon Press, 1998.

Ozdalga, Elisabeth and Sune Persson, eds.*Civil Society, Democracy, and
the Muslim World.* Richmond, Surrey: Curzon Press, 1997.

Pedersen, Lars.*Newer Islamic Movements in Western Europe.* Aldershot:
Ashgate, 1999.

Peled, Alisa Rubin.*Debating Islam in the Jewish State: The Development
of Policy toward* *Islamic Institutions in Israel.* Albany, NY: State
University of New York Press, 2001.

Peters, Rudolph.*Islam and Colonialism: The Doctrine of Jihad in Modern
History.*  Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, 1984.

Pirzada, Sayyid A.S.*The Politics of the Jamiat Ulema-I-Islam Pakistan,
1971-1977.* Karachi: Oxford University Press, 2000.

Piscatori, James P.*Islam in a World of Nation-States.* Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press and the Royal Institute of International
Affairs, 1986.

Piscatori, James P., ed.*Islam in the Political Process.* Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press and the Royal Institute of International
Affairs, 1983.

Podeh, Elie.*The Decline of Arab Unity: The Rise and Fall of the United
Arab Republic.* Brighton: Sussex Academic Press, 1999.

Poole, Elizabeth.*Reporting Islam: Media Representations of British
Muslims.* London: I.B. Tauris, 2002.

Potter, Lawrence G. and Gary G. Sick, eds.*Security in the Persian Gulf:
Origins, Obstacles, and the Search for Consensus.* New York: Palgrave,
2002.

Poya, Maryam.*Women, Work and Islamism: Ideology and Resistance.*
London: Zed Books, 1999.

Price, Daniel E.*Islamic Political Culture, Democracy and Human Rights:
A Comparative Study.* Westport, CT: Praeger, 1999.

Quandt, William B.*Camp David: Peacemaking and Politics.* Washington,
DC: The Brookings Institution, 1986.

Quandt, William B.*Peace Process: American Diplomacy and the
Arab-Israeli Conflict since 1967.* Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press, revised ed., 2001.

Rahman, Fazlur (Ebrahim Moosa, ed.). *Revival and Reform in Islam: A
Study of Islamic Fundamentalism.* Oxford, England: Oneworld, 1999.

Rahnema, Ali.*An Islamic Utopian: A Political Biography of Ali
Shari‘ati.* London: I.B. Tauris,  1998.

Rahnema, Ali, ed.*Pioneers of Islamic Revival.* London: Zed Books, 1994.

Rejwan, Nissim.*Arabs Face the Modern World: Religious, Cultural, and
Political Responses to the West.* Gainesville, FL: University Press of
Florida, 1998.

Rejwan, Nissim, ed.*The Many Faces of Islam: Perspectives on a Resurgent
Civilization.* Gainesville,  FL: University Press of Florida, 2000.

Rai, Milan (and Noam Chomsky).*War Plan—Iraq: Ten Reasons against War on
Iraq.* London:, Verso, 2002.

Ramadan, Tariq.*Western Muslims and the Future of Islam.* Oxford, UK:
Oxford University  Press, 2003.

Richards, Alan and John Waterbury.*A Political Economy of the Middle
East* . Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 2nd ed., 1996.

Riddell, Peter G., Tony Street and Anthony H. Johns, eds.*Islam: Essays
on Scripture,* *Thought  and Society—A Festschrift in Honour of Anthony
H. Johns.* Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1997.

Roald, Anne-Sofie.*Women in Islam: The Western Experience.* New York:
Routledge, 2001.

Roberson, B.A.*Shaping the Current Islamic Reformation* . London: Frank
Cass, 2003.

Robinson, Francis.*Islam and Muslin History in South Asia.* Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press, 2000.

Robinson, Francis.*Islam in South Asia.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press, 2003.

Robinson, Glenn E.*Building a Palestinian State: The Incomplete
Revolution.* Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1997.

Rodinson, Maxime.*Europe and the Mystique of Islam.* London: I.B.
Tauris, 2002.

Rodinson, Maxime.*Islam and Capitalism.* Austin, TX: University of Texas
Press, 1978.

Rodinson, Maxime.*Marxism and the Muslim World.* London: Zed Books,
1979.

Rogan, Eugene, ed.*Outside In: On the Margins of the Modern Middle
East.* London: I.B. Tauris, 2002.

Rosen, Lawrence.*Bargaining for Reality: The Construction of Social
Relations in a Muslim* *Community.* Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press, 1984.

Rosen, Lawrence.*The Culture of Islam: Changing Aspects of Contemporary
Muslim Life.* Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2003.

Rosenthal, Erwin.*Political Thought in Medieval Islam.* Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press, 1958.

Roy, Olivier.*The Failure of Political Islam.* Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 1994.

Rubenberg, Cheryl A.*Palestinian Women: Patriarchy and Resistance in the
West Bank.* Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner, 2001.

Rubin, Barry, ed.*Revolutionaries and Reformers: Contemporary Islamist
Movements in the* *Middle East.* Albany, NY: State University of New
York Press, 2003.

Ruggles, D. Fairchild, ed.*Women, Patronage, and Self-Representation in
Islamic Societies.* Albany, NY: State University of New York Press,
2000.

Rugh, William A.*Arab Mass Media: Newspapers, Radio, and Television in
Arab Politics.* Westport,  CT: Praeger, 2004.

Ruthven, Malise.*A Fury for God: The Islamist Attack on America.*
London: Granta Books, 2002.

Saad-Ghorayeb, Amal.*Hizbu‘llah: Politics and Religion.* London: Pluto
Press, 2002.

Sabbagh, Suha, ed.*Arab Women: Between Defiance and Restraint.*
Northampton, MA: Interlink Publ. Group, 2002.

Sabbagh, Suha, ed.*Palestinian Women of Gaza and the West Bank.*
Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1998.

Sachedina, Abdulaziz.*The Islamic Roots of Democratic Pluralism* .
Oxford, UK: Oxford  University Press, 2001.

Sadri, Mahmoud and Ahmad Sadri, trans. and eds.*Reason, Freedom, and
Democracy in Islam: Essential Writings of Abdolkarim Soroush.* Oxford,
UK: Oxford University Press, 2002.

Safi, Omid, ed.*Progressive Muslims: On Gender, Justice, and Pluralism.*
Oxford, UK: Oneworld, 2003.

Said, Abdul Aziz, et al., eds.*Peace and Conflict Resolution in Islam:
Precept and Practice.* Lanham, MD: University Press of America, 2001.

Said, Edward W.*Covering Islam: how the media and the experts determine
how we see the rest of the world.* New York: Vintage, revised ed., 1997.

Said, Edward W.*The End of the Peace Process: Oslo and After.* New York:
Pantheon Books, 2000.

Said, Edward W.*Peace and Its Discontents: Essays on Palestine in the
Middle East Peace* *Process.* New York: Vintage, 1995.

Said, Edward W. and Christopher Hitchens, eds. *Blaming the Victims:
Spurious Scholarship and the Palestinian Question.* London: Verso, 1988.

Saikal, Amin.*Islam and the West: Conflict or Cooperation?* New York:
Palgrave Macmillan, 2003.

Saikal, Amin and Albrecht Schnabel, eds.*Democratization in the Middle
East: Struggles,* *Challenges.* Paris: United Nations Publ., 2003.

Sajoo, Amyn B., ed.*Civil Society in the Muslim World: Contemporary
Perspectives.* London: I.B. Tauris, 2002.

Sakr, Naomi.*Satellite Realms: Transnational Television, Globalization
and the Middle East.* London: I.B. Tauris, 2002.

Salame, Ghassan, ed.*Democracy Without Democrats?: The Renewal of
Politics in the* *Muslim World.* London: I.B. Tauris, 1994.

Saliba, Therese, Carolyn Allen and Judith A. Howard, eds.*Gender,
Politics, and Islam.* Chicago,  IL: University of Chicago Press, 2002.

Salvatore, Armando.*Islam and the Political Discourse of Modernity.*
London: Ithaca Press, 1997.

Salvatore, Armando and Dale F. Eickelman, eds.*Public Islam and the
Common Good.* Leiden: E.J. Brill, 2003.

Sanasarian, Eliz.*Religious Minorities in Iran.* Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press, 2000.

Schwedler, Jillian, ed.*Toward Civil Society in the Middle East?: A
Primer* . Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner, 1995.

Segal, Ronald.*Islam’s Black Slaves: The Other Black Diaspora.* New
York: Hill & Wang, 2002.

Sells, Michael A.*The Bridge Betrayed: Religion and Genocide in Bosnia.*
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1996.

Shadid, Anthony.*Legacy of the Prophet: Despots, Democrats and the New
Politics of* *Islam.* Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 2001.

Shadid, W.A.R. and P.S. van Koningsveld, eds.*Religious Freedom and the
Neutrality of the State: The Position of Islam in the European Union.*
Louvain: Peeters Publ., 2002.

Sharabi, Hisham.*Neopatriarchy: A Theory of Distorted Change in Arab
Society.* Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1988.

Sharabi, Hisham, ed.*Theory, Politics and the Arab World.*
London/Washington, DC: Routledge/Center for Contemporary Arab Studies,
1990.

Shari‘ati, Ali (Hamid Algar, trans.).*On the Sociology of Islam:
Lectures by Ali Shari‘ati.* Berkeley,  CA: Mizan Press, 1979.

Sheikh, Naveed S.*The New Politics of Islam: Pan-Islamic Foreign Policy
in a World of* *States.* New York: RoutledgeCurzon, 2003.

Shepard, William.*Sayyid Qutb and Islamic Activism.* Leiden: E.J. Brill,
1996.

Shirazi, Fagheh.*The Veil Unveiled: The Hijab in Modern Culture.*
Gainesville, FL: University Press of Florida, 2001.

Sidahmed, Abdel Salam and Anoushiravan Ehteshami, eds.*Islamic
Fundamentalism.* Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1996.

Simons, Thomas W., Jr.*Islam in a Globalizing World.* Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press, 2003.

Singerman, Diane.*Avenues of Participation: Family, Politics, and
Networks in Urban* *Quarters of  Cairo.* Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 1996.

Singerman, Diane and Homa Hoodfar, eds. *Development, Change, and Gender
in Cairo:* *A View from the Household.* Bloomington, IN: Indiana
University Press, 1996.

Sivan, Emmanuel.*Radical Islam: Medieval Theology and Modern Politics.*
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1990.

Smith, Charles D.*Palestine and the Arab-Israeli Conflict: A History
with Documents.* New York: Bedford/St. Martin’s Press, 4th ed., 2000.

Sonn, Tamara.*Between Qur’an and Crown: The Challenge of Political
Legitimacy in the* *Arab World.* Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1990.

Sonn, Tamara.*Interpreting Islam: Bandali Jawzi’s Islamic Intellectual
History.* Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1996.

Sonn, Tamara, ed.*Islam and the Question of Minorities.* Lanham, MD:
University Press of America, 1996.

Spaulding, Jay, et al.*The Enigmatic Saint: Ahmad Ibn Idris and the
Idrisi Tradition.* Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, 1994.

Spellberg, Denise A.*Politics, Gender, and the Islamic Past: The Legacy
of ‘A’isha bint Abi Bakr.  * New York: Columbia University Press, 1996.

Stetkevych, Suzanne Pinckney. *The Poetics of Islamic Legitimacy: Myth,
Gender, and* *Ceremony in the Classical Arabic Ode.* Bloomington, IN:
Indiana University Press, 2002.

Stowasser, Barbara Freyer, ed.*The Islamic Impulse.* Washington, DC:
Center for Contemporary Arab Studies, 1989.

Taheri, Amir.*The Spirit of Allah: Khomeini and the Islamic Revolution.*
Bethesda, MD: Adler & Adler, 1986.

Tamadonfar, Mehran.*The Islamic Polity and Political Leadership:
Fundamentalism,* *Sectarianism, and Pragmatism.* Boulder, CO: Westview
Press, 1989.

Tamimi, Azzam S.*Rachid Ghannouchi: A Democrat Within Islamism.* New
York: Oxford University Press, 2001.

Tamimi, Azzam and John L. Esposito, eds.*Islam and Secularism in the
Middle East.* Washington   Square, NY: New York University Press, 2000.

Tauber, Eliezer.*The Emergence of the Arab Movements.* London: Frank
Cass & Co., 1993.

Telhami, Shibley and Michael Barnett, eds.*Identity and Foreign Policy
in the Middle East.* Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2002.

Tessler, Mark A.. (with Jodi Nachtwey and Anne Banda), ed.*Area Studies
and Social* *Science:*  *Strategies for Understanding Middle East
Politics.* Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1999.

Tibi, Bassam.*Arab Nationalism: Between Islam and the Nation-State* .
New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 3rd ed., 1997.

Tibi, Bassam.*The Challenge of Fundamentalism: Political Islam and the
New World* *Disorder.* Berkeley, CA: University of California Press,
updated ed., 2002.

Tibi, Bassam.*The Crisis of Modern Islam.* Salt Lake City, UT:
University of Utah Press, 1988.

Tibi, Bassam.*Islam and the Cultural Accommodation of Social Change.*
Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1990.

Tibi, Bassam.*Islam between Culture and Politics.* New York: Palgrave
Macmillan, 2002.

Turner, Bryan S. and Akbar Ahmed, eds.*Islam: Critical Concepts in
Sociology,* 4 Vols. New York: Routledge, 2003.

Turner, Richard Brent.*Islam in the African-American Experience.*
Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1997.

Vatikiotis, P.J.*Islam and the State.* London: Croom Helm, 1987.

Viorst, Milton.*In the Shadow of the Prophet: The Struggle for the Soul
of Islam.* New York: Anchor Books, 1998.

Waardenburg, Jacques.*Muslims and Others: Relations in Context* .
Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 2003.

Waltz, Susan E.*Human Rights and Reform: Changing the Face of North
African Politics.* Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1995.

Warde, Ibrahim.*Islamic Finance in the Global Economy.* Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press, 2000.

Watson, Andrew W.*Agricultural Innovation in the Early Islamic World.*
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1983.

Watt, William Montgomery.*Islam and the Integration of Society.* London:
Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1961.

Wendell, Charles, trans.*Five Tracts of Hasan al-Banna’, 1906-1949.*
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1978.

Winckler, Onn.*The Political Demography of the Modern Arab World.*
Brighton: Sussex Academic Press, forthcoming.

Wright, Robin B.*Sacred Rage: The Crusade of Modern Islam.* New York:
Simon and Schuster, revised ed., 2001.

Yamani, Mai, ed.*Feminism and Islam: Legal and Literary Perspectives.*
Washington Square, NY: New York University Press, 1996.

Zaman, Muhammad Qasim.*The Ulama in Contemporary Islam: Custodians of
Change.* Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2002.

Zebiri, Kate.*Mahmūd Shaltūt and Islamic Modernism.* Oxford, UK:
Clarendon Press, 1993.

Ziadeh, Nicol A.*Sanusiyah: A Study of a Revivalist Movement in Islam.*
Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1958.

Zubaida, Sami.*Islam, the People and the State: Essays on Political
Ideas and Movements in* *the Middle East.* London: I.B. Tauris, 1993.

Zunes, Stephen. *Tinderbox: U.S. Middle East Policy and the Roots of
Terrorism.* Monroe, ME: Common Courage Press, 2002.


