


XII - Miscellany:
Abbott, Nabia.*Aishah:* *The Beloved of Mohammad* . Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press, 1942.

Abdallah, Anouar, ed.*For Rushdie: Essays by Arab and Muslim Writers in
Defense of Free* *Speech.* New York: George Braziller, 1994.

Abou El Fadel, Khaled.*Conference of the Books: The Search for Beauty in
Islam.* Lanham, MD: University Press of America, 2001.

Abu-Izzeddin, Nejla M.*The Druzes: A New Study of their History, Faith
and Society.* Leiden: E.J. Brill, 2nd ed., 1993.

Ahmad, Barakat.*Muhammad and the Jews: A Re-examination.* Delhi: Vikas,
1979.

al-Hassan, Ahmad Y. and Donald R. Hill.*Islamic Technology: An
Illustrated History.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1986.

Allen, Roger.*The Arabic Literary Heritage: The Development of its
Genres and Criticism.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1998.

Allen, Roger.*The Arabic Novel: An Historical and Critical
Introduction.* Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press, 1995.

Anees, Munawar Ahmad.*Islam and Biological Futures: Ethics, Gender and
Technology.* London: Mansell, 1990.

Arberry, Arthur John.*Aspects of Islamic Civilization.* London: Allen &
Unwin, 1964.

Asad, Mohammad.*The Road to Mecca.* Louisville, KY: Fons Vitae, 2001
reprint ed.

Baljon, Jon M.S.*The Reforms and Religious Ideas of Sayyid Ahmad Khan* .
Lahore: Ashraf, 1953.

Bangura, Ahmed S.*Islam and the West African Novel: The Politics of
Representation.* London: Lynne Rienner, 2000.

Beinin, Joel.*Was the Red Flag Flying There? Marxist Politics and the
Arab-Israeli Conflict in Egypt and Israel, 1948-1965.* Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press, 1990.

Berg, Herbert. *The Development of Exegesis in Early Islam: The
Authenticity of Muslim Literature from The Formative Period.* Richmond,
Surrey: Curzon Press, 2000.

Betts, Robert Brenton.*The Druze.* New Haven, CT: Yale University Press,
1988.

Birkeland, Harris.*The Legend of the Opening of Muhammad’s Breast.*
Oslo: Nordske Videnskaps Academi, 1955.

Bowen, John R.*Muslims through Discourse.* Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 1993.

Bradway, Becky, ed.*In the Middle of the Middle East: Literary
Nonfiction from the* *Heartland.* Bloomington, IN: Indiana University
Press, 2003..

Brass, Paul R.*The Production of Hindu-Muslim Violence in Contemporary
India.* Seattle, WA:University of Washington Press, 2003.

Buck-Morss, Susan.*Thinking Past Terror: Islamism and Critical Theory on
the Left.* London: Verso, 2003.

Bulliet, Richard W.*The Camel and the Wheel.* New York: Columbia
University Press, 1990.

Burton, Richard.*Personal Narrative of a Pilgrimage to El Medinah and
Meccah* . New York: G.P. Putnam and Co., 1853.

Campo, Juan Eduardo.*The Other Sides of Paradise: Explorations into the
Religious* *Meanings of Domestic Space in Islam.* Columbia, SC:
University of South Carolina Press, 1991.

Combs-Schilling, M.E.*Sacred Performances: Islam, Sexuality, and
Sacrifice.* New York: Columbia University Press, 1989.

Corbin, Henry (Leonard Fox, trans.).*Swedenborg and Esoteric Islam.*
West Chester, PA: Swedenborg Foundation, 1995.

Cragg, Kenneth.*The Call of the Minaret.* New York: Oxford University
Press, 1956.

Daniel, Norman.*Islam and the West: The Making of an Image.* Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press, 1958.

Dannin, Robert.*Black Pilgrimage to Islam.* New York: Oxford University
Press, 2002.

Donaldson, William J. and Mashary Abdullah Naim.*Sharecropping in the
Yemen: A Study in Islamic Theory, Custom and Pragmatism.* Leiden: Brill
Academic Publ., 2000.

Doumato, Eleanor Abdella. *Getting God’s Ear: Women, Islam and Healing
in Saudi Arabia and* *the Gulf* . New York: Columbia University Press,
2000.

Dundes, Alan.*Fables of the Ancients?: Folklore in the Qur’an.* Lanham,
MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 2003.

Dunn, Ross E.*The Adventures of Ibn Battuta: A Muslim Traveler of the
Fourteenth* *Century.* Berkeley, CA: University of California Press,
1990.

Easwaran, Eknath.*Nonviolent Soldier of Islam: Badshah Khan, A Man to
Match His* *Mountains.* Tomales, CA: Nilgiri Press, 2nd ed., 2000.

Eickelman, Dale and James Piscatori, eds.*Muslim Travelers: Pilgrimage,
Migration, and the Religious Imagination.* Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press, 1990.

Esack, Farid. *On Being a Muslim.* Oxford, UK: Oneworld, 1999.

*The Encyclopedia of Islam* , new ed. 9 vols., in progress. Leiden: E.J.
Brill, 1954--.

Firro, Kais M.*A History of the Druzes.* Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1997.

Foltz, Richard C. Frederick M. Denny and Azizan Baharuddin, eds.*Islam
and Ecology: A Bestowed Trust.* Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
2003.

Gallagher, Nancy Elizabeth, ed. *Approaches to the History of the Middle
East: Interviews with Leading Middle East Historians.* Reading, UK:
Ithaca, 1997.

Gaudefroy-Demombynes, Maurice.*Muslim Institutions* . Westport, CT:
Greenwood Press, 1984.

Gibb, Hamilton A.R.*Whither Islam?* London: Gollancz, 1932.

Gibb, Hamilton A.R.*Modern Trends in Islam.* New York: Octagon Books,
1972.

Goldschmidt, Arthur, Jr.*Biographical Dictionary of Modern Egypt.*
Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner, 2000.

Grunebaum, Gustave E. von.*Muhammadan Festivals.* Leiden: Brill, 1958.

Hallaq, Wael B. and Donald P. Little, eds.*Islamic Studies Presented to
Charles J. Adams.* Leiden:E.J. Brill, 1991.

Hassan, Hassan.*In the House of Muhammad Ali: A Family Album,
1805-1952.* Cairo: American University in Cairo Press, 2000.

Hawting, Gerald, ed.*The Development of Islamic Ritual.* Aldershot:
Ashgate, 2004.

Hill, Donald R. (David A. King, ed.).*Studies in Medieval Islamic
Technology: From Philo to al-Jazari, from Alexandria to Diyar Bakr.*
Aldershot: Ashgate, 1998.

Hiro, Dilip.*Dictionary of the Middle East* . New York: Palgrave
Macmillan, 1996.

Hogendijk, J.P. and A.I. Sabra, eds.*The Enterprise of Science in Islam:
New Perspectives.* Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2003.

Hoodbhoy, Perez.*Islam and Science: Religious Orthodoxy and the Battle
for Rationality.* London: Zed Books, 1991.

Hourani, Albert.*Islam in European Thought.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press, 1991.

Huff, Toby E.*The Rise of Early Modern Science: Islam, China, and the
West.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1995.

Husain, Ali Akbar.*Scent in the Islamic Garden: A Study of Deccani Urdu
Literary Sources.* Karachi: Oxford University Press, 2000.

Irwin, Robert.*Night and Horses and the Desert: An Anthology of
Classical Arabic* *Literature.* New York: Overlook Press, 2000.

Jaschok, Maria and Shui Jinjin.*The History of Women’s Mosques in
Chinese Islam.* Surrey: Curzon Press, 2000.

Jayyusi, Salma Khadra, ed.*Modern Arabic Poetry: An Anthology.* New
York: Columbia University Press, 1987.

Jayyusi, Salma Khadra and Roger Allen, eds.*Modern Arabic Drama: An
Anthology.* Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1995.

Johnstone, Penelope, trans.*Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziiyya: Medicine of the
Prophet.* Cambridge, UK: The Islamic Texts Society, 1998.

Joseph, Suad, ed.*The Encyclopedia of Women and Islamic Cultures, Vol.
1.* Leiden: Brill Academic, 2003.

Kahera, Akel Ismail.*Deconstructing the American Mosque: Space, Gender
and Aesthetics.* Austin, TX: University of Texas Press, 2002.

Kanaaneh, Rhoda.*Birthing the Nation: Strategies of Palestinian Women in
Israel.* Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2002.

Kassam, Tazim R.*Songs of Wisdom and Circles of Dance: Songs of the
Satpanth Ismā‘īlī Muslim Saint, Pir Shams.* Albany, NY: State University
of New York Press, 1995.

Kennedy, Edward S.*Astronomy and Astrology in the Medieval Islamic
World.* Aldershot: Ashgate/Variorum, 1998.

Khalidi, Tarif, trans. and ed.*The Muslim Jesus: Sayings and Stories in
Islamic Literature.* Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2001.

Khan, Gabriel Mandel.*Arabic Script: Styles, Variants, and Calligraphic
Adaptations.* New York: Abbeville Press Publ., 2001.

Kimball, Michelle and Barbara R. von Schlegell.*Muslim Women Throughout
the World:* *A Bibliography.* Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner, 1997.

King, David A.*Astronomy in the Service of Islam.* Aldershot:
Ashgate/Variorum, 1993.

King, David A.*World Maps for Finding the Direction and Distance to
Mecca: Innovation* *and Tradition in Islamic Science.* Leiden: E.J.
Brill, 1999.

Kritzek, James.*Peter the Venerable and Islam.* Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 1964.

Kueny, Kathryn.*The Rhetoric of Sobriety: Wine in Early Islam.* Albany,
NY: State University of New York Press, 2001.

Lamoreaux, John C.*The Early Muslim Tradition of Dream Interpretation.*
Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 2002.

Lane, E.W.*Arabic-English Lexicon,* 2 Vols. Cambridge, UK: The Islamic
Texts Society, 1984.

Laurance, Robin.*Portrait of Islam A Journey through the Muslim World.*
New York: Thames & Hudson, 2002.

Lorch, Richard.*Arabic Mathematical Sciences: Instruments, Texts and
Transmission.* Aldershot: Ashgate/Variorum, 1995.

Malcolm X.*The Autobiography of Malcolm X (as told to Alex Haley).* New
York: Ballantine, 1992 (reprint ed).

Martin, Richard C., ed.*Approaches to Islam in Religious Studies.*
Oxford, UK: Oneworld, 2001.

Martin, Richard C.*Islamic Studies: A History of Religions Approach.*
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 2nd ed., 1995.

Masri, Al-Hafiz Basheer Ahmad.*Animals in Islam.* Petersfield, England:
Athene Trust, 1989.

Mattar, Philip, ed.*Encyclopedia of the Palestinians.* New York: Facts
on File, 2000.

Macfie, A.L., ed.*Orientalism: A Reader.* Edinburgh: Edinburgh
University Press, 2000.

Nafisi, Azar.*Reading Lolita in Tehran: A Memoir in Books* . New York:
Random House, 2003.

Naipaul, V.S.*Among the Believers: An Islamic Journey.* New York: Alfred
A. Knopf, 1981.

Nasr, Seyyed Hossein.*The Need for a Sacred Science.* Albany, NY: State
University of New York Press, 1993.

Nettler, Ronald L. and Suha Taji-Farouki, eds.*Muslim-Jewish Encounters:
Intellectual* *Traditions and Modern Politics.* New York: Routledge,
1998.

Netton, Ian Richard, ed.*Golden Roads: Migration, Pilgrimage and Travel
in Mediaeval and Modern Islam.* Richmond, England: Curzon Press, 1993.

Nimer, Mohamed.*The North American Muslim Resource Guide.* New York:
Routledge, 2002.

Nimni, Ephraim, ed.*The Challenge of Post-Zionism: Alternatives to
Israeli Fundamentalist Politics.* London: Zed Books, 2003.

Nomachi, Ali Kazuyoshi and Seyyed Hossein Nasr. *Mecca the Blessed,
Medina the Radiant: The Holiest Cities of Islam.* New York: Aperture,
1997.

Peled, Alisa Rubin. *Debating Islam in the Jewish State: The Development
of Policy Toward Islamic Institutions in Israel.* Albany, NY: State
University of New York Press, 2001.

Peters, Francis E.*The Hajj: The Muslim Pilgrimage to Mecca and the Holy
Places.* Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1994.

Peters, Francis E.*Mecca: A Literary History of the Muslim Holy Land.*
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1994.

Piamenta, Moshe.*Islam in Everyday Arabic Speech.* Leiden: E.J. Brill,
1979.

Rahman, Fazlur.*Health and Medicine in the Islamic Tradition: Change and
Identity* . New York: Crossroad, 1987.

Riddell, Peter G. and Tony Street, eds.*Islam: Essays on Scripture,
Thought and Society.* Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1997.

Ridgeon, Lloyd V.J.*Crescents on the Cross: Islamic Vision of
Christianity.* Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2001.

Robinson, Francis, ed.*The Cambridge Illustrated History of the Islamic
World.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1999.

Robinson, Neal.*Christ in Islam and Christianity.* Albany, NY: State
University of New York Press, 1991.

Rosenthal, Franz.*Humour in Early Islam.* Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1956.

Rosenthal, Franz.*Science and Medicine in Islam: A Collection of
Essays.* Aldershot: Ashgate/Variorum, 1991.

Samsó, Julio.*Islamic Astronomy and Medieval Spain.* Aldershot:
Ashgate/Variorum, 1994.

Sardar, Ziauddin.*Explorations in Islamic Science.* London: Mansell,
1989.

Sardar, Ziauddin.*The Future of Muslim Civilization.* London, Mansell,
2nd ed., 1987.

Sardar, Ziauddin.*Science, Technology, and Development in the Muslim
World.* London: Croom Helm, 1977.

Savage-Smith, Emilie, ed.*Magic and Divination in Early Islam* .
Aldershot: Ashgate, 2004.

Shaheen, Jack G.*Reel Bad Arabs: How Hollywood Vilifies a People.* New
York: Olive Branch Press, 2001.

Shariati, Ali (Laleh Bakhtiar, trans.).*Hajj: Reflections on its
Rituals.* Chicago, IL: Kazi Publ., 1993.

Shirazi, Faegheh.*The Veil Unveiled.* Gainesville, FL: University Press
of Florida, 2001.

Simon, Reeva S., Philip Mattar and Richard W. Bulliet, eds.*The
Encyclopedia of the Modern* *Middle East,* 4 Vols. New York: Macmillan,
1996.

Smith, Wilfred Cantwell.*On Understanding Islam: Selected Studies.* The
Hague: Mouton, 1981.

Suleiman, Yasir.*A War of Words: Language and Conflict in the Middle
East.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2004.

Turner, Bryan S.*Marx and the End of Orientalism.* London: George Allen
and Unwin, 1978.

Turner, Bryan S.*Weber and Islam: A Critical Study* . Lo:ndon Routledge
& Kegan Paul, 1974.

Turner, Howard R.*Science in Medieval Islam: An Illustrated
Introduction* . Austin, TX: University of Texas Press, 1997.

Ullmann. Manfred.*Islamic Medicine.* Edinburgh: Edinburgh University
Press, 1997.

van der Veer, Peter.*Religious Nationalism: Hindus and Muslims in
India.* Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1994.

von Grunebaum, G.E.*Islam: Essays in the Nature and Growth of Cultural
Tradition.* London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 2nd ed., 1961.

von Grunebaum, G.E., ed.*Unity and Variety in Muslim Civilization* .
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1955.

Wang, Jianping.*A Glossary of Chinese Islamic Terms.* Richmond, Surrey:
Curzon Press, 2001.

Warraq, Ibn, ed.*Leaving Islam: Apostates Speak Out.* Amherst, NY:
Prometheus Books, 2003.

Webb, Gisela, ed.*Windows of Faith: Muslim Women Scholar-Activists in
North America.* Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press, 2000.

Wheeler, Brannon M.*Moses in the Quran and Islamic Exegesis.* New York:
Routledge, 2002.

Wheeler, Brannon M., ed.*Teaching Islam.* (American Academy of Religion)
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2002.

Wolfe, Michael.*The Hadj: An American’s Pilgrimage to Mecca.* New York:
Grove Press, 1993.

Wolfe, Michael, ed.*One Thousand Roads to Mecca: Ten Centuries of
Travelers Writing* *about the Muslim Pilgrimage.* New York: Grove Press,
1997.

Wolfe, Michael, ed. *Taking Back Islam: American Muslims Reclaim their
Faith* . Emmaus, PA: Rodale Press, 2002.


