


II - Muhammad:
Abbott, Nabia.*Aishah: The Beloved of Mohammad.* London: Al-Saqi, 1998.

Andrae, Tor.*Mohammed: The Man and His Faith.* London: George Allen &
Unwin, 1936.

Armstrong, Karen.*Muhammad: A Biography of the Prophet.* San Francisco,
CA: HarperSanFrancisco, 1993.

Asani, Ali, et al.*Celebrating Muhammad: Images of the Prophet in
Popular Muslim Poetry.* Columbia, SC: University of South Carolina
Press, 1996.

Cook, Michael.*Muhammad.* New York: Oxford University Press, 1983.

Forward, Martin.*Muhammad: A Short Biography.* Oxford, UK: Oneworld,
1997.

Guillaume, Alfred.*The Life of Muhammad: A Translation of Ibn Ishaq’s
Sirat Rasul Allah.* London: Oxford University Press, 1955.

Kahn, Muhammad Zafrulla.*Muhammad, Seal of the Prophets.* New York:
Viking Press, 1981.

Lings, Martin.*Muhammad: his life based on the earliest sources.* New
York: Inner Traditions International, 1983.

Motzki, Harald, ed.*The Biography of Muhammad: The Issue of the
Sources.* Leiden: E.J. Brill, 2000.

Nasr, Seyyed Hossein.*Muhammad: Man of God* . Chicago, IL: Kazi Publ.,
1995.

Newby, Gordon.*The Making of the Last Prophet: A Reconstruction of the
Earliest* *Biography of Muhammad.* Columbia, SC: University of South
Carolina Press, 1989.

Nurbakhsh, Javad.*Traditions of the Prophet: Ahadith* . New York:
Khaniqahi Nimatullahi Publ., 1981.

Peters, Francis E.*Muhammad and the Origins of Islam* . Albany, NY:
State University of New York Press, 1994.

Robinson, Neal.*The Sayings of Muhammad* . London: Duckworth, 1991.

Rodinson, Maxime.*Muhammad.* New York: Pantheon Books, 1980 ed.

Rubin, Uri.*The Eye of the Beholder: The Life of Muhammad as Viewed by
the Early Muslims.* Princeton, NJ: Darwin Press, 1995.

Rubin, Uri, ed.*The Life of Muhammad* . Aldershot: Ashgate, 1998.

Schimmel, Annemarie.*And Muhammad is His Messenger: The Veneration of
the Prophet in* *Islamic Piety.* Chapel Hill, NC: University of North
Carolina Press, 1985.

Warraq, Ibn, ed. and trans.*The Quest for the Historical Muhammad.*
Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2000.

Watt, William Montgomery.*Muhammad at Mecca.* Oxford, UK: Clarendon
Press, 1953.

Watt, William Montgomery.*Muhammad at Medina.* Oxford, UK: Clarendon
Press, 1956.

Watt, William Montgomery.*Muhammad: Prophet and Statesman.* London:
Oxford University Press, 1961.


