


III - The Qur’an (Translations, Commentaries, Studies):
Abu-Hamdiyyah, Mohammad.*The Qur’an: An Introduction.* New York:
Routledge, 2000.

Ali, Abdullah Yusuf.*The Holy Qur’an: Text, Translation and Commentary.*
Washington, DC: Amanah, 1989.

Ali, Ahmed.*Al-Qur’an: A Contemporary Translation.* Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 1988.

Asad, Muhammad.*The Message of the Qur’an.* Gibraltar: Dar al-Andalus,
1980.

Ayoub, Mahmoud.*The Qur’an and Its Interpreters,* Vols. 1-2. Albany, NY:
State University of New York Press, 1984.

Baljon, Jon M.S.*Modern Muslim Koran Interpretation (1880-1960).*
Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1961.

Barlas, Asma.*“Believing Women” in Islam: Unreading Patriarchal
Interpretations of the* *Qur’an.* Austin, TX: University of Texas Press,
2002.

Bell, Richard.*Introduction to the Qur’an.* Edinburgh: Edinburgh
University Press, 1963.

Bell, Richard.*The Qur’an Translated,* 2 Vols. Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark,
1960.

Burton, John.*The Collection of the Quran.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press, 1977.

Cook, Michael.*The Koran: A Very Short Introduction.* Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press, 2000.

Cragg, Kenneth.*The Event of the Quran: Islam in its Scripture.* London:
George Allen & Unwin, 1971.

Cragg, Kenneth.*The Mind of the Quran: Chapters in Reflection.* London:
George Allen & Unwin, 1973.

Dawood, N.J.*The Koran* . Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1956.

*English Translation of the Meaning of Al-Qur’an: The Guidance for
Mankind* (Muhammad Farooq-i-Azam Malik, trans.). Houston, TX: The
Institute of Islamic Knowledge, 1997.

Esack, Farid.*Qur’ān, Liberation and Pluralism.* Oxford, England:
Oneworld, 1997.

Esack, Farid.*The Qur’an: A Short Introduction.* Oxford, England:
Oneworld, 2002.

Fakhry, Majid, trans.*An Interpretation of the Qur’an.* New York: New
York University Press, 2002.

Gätje, Helmut (Alford T. Welch, trans. and ed.).*The Quran and Its
Exegesis.* Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1976.

Hawting, G.R. et al., eds.*Approaches to the Quran.* London: Routledge,
1993.

*The Holy Qur’an: Arabic Text with English Translation and Short
Commentary* (Maulavi Sher Ali, trans. and Malik Ghulam Farid, ed.).
Tilford, Surrey, England: Islam International Publ., 1994.

Izutsu, Toshihiko.*Ethico-Religious Concepts in the Quran.* Montreal:
McGill-Queens University Press, 2002.

Izutsu, Toshihiko.*God and Man in the Koran.* Salem, NH: Ayer Co. Publ.,
1980.

Jansen, J.J.G.*The Interpretation of the Koran in Modern Egypt* .
Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1974.

Kassis, Hanna E.*A Concordance of the Qur’an.* Berkeley, CA: University
of California Press,1998.

Khalifa, Rashad.*Quran, Hadith, and Islam.* Fremont, CA: Universal
Unity, 2000.

al-Khu’i, ‛Abu’l Qasim al-Musawu.*The Prolegomena to the Qur’an.*
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1998.

*The Koran.* J.M. Rodwell, trans. London: J.M. Dent & Sons, 1909
(reprint ed., 1974).

*The Koran Interpreted.* Arthur J. Arberry, trans. New York: Macmillan,
1955.

Madigan, Daniel A.*The Qur’an’s Self-Image: Writing and Authority in
Islamic Scripture.* Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2001.

McAuliffe, Jane Dammen, ed.*The Encyclopedia of the Qur’an,* Vol. 1.
Leiden: E.J. Brill, 2001.

Mir, Mustansir.*Dictionary of Qur’anic Terms and Concepts.* New York:
Garland, 1987.

Nelson, Kristina.*The Art of Reciting the Qur’ān.* Austin, TX:
University of Texas Press, 1985.

*The Qur’an* (Muhammad Zafrulla Khan, trans., with Arabic text).
Northampton, MA: Olive Branch Press, 1997.

*The Qur’an Translated, With a Critical Rearrangement of the Surahs.*
Richard Bell, trans. Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 1939.

Rahman, Fazlur.*Major Themes of the Qur’an.* Minneapolis, MN:
Bibliotheca Islamica, 1980.

Rippin, Andrew.*The Qur’an and Its Interpretive Tradition.* Aldershot,
UK: Ashgate, 2002.

Rippin, Andrew, ed.*Approaches to the History of the Interpretation of
the Qur’an.* Oxford, UK: Clarendon Press, 1988.

Rippin, Andrew, ed.*The Qur’an: Formative Interpretation.* Aldershot,
UK: Ashgate/Variorum, 2000.

Rippin, Andrew, ed.*The Qur’an: Style and Contents* . Aldershot, UK:
Ashgate, 2001.

Robinson, Neal.*Discovering the Qur’an: A Contemporary Approach to a
Veiled Text.* London: SCM Press, 1996.

Sells, Michael.*Approaching the Qur’an: The Early Revelations.* Ashland,
OR: White Cloud Press, 1999.

Stowasser, Barbara Freyer.*Women in the Qur’an: Traditions and
Interpretations.* New York: Oxford University Press, 1994.

Turner, Colin, trans. (Mohammad Baqir Behbudi, textual exegesis).*The
Quran: A New Interpretation.* Richmond, Surrey: Curzon Press, 1998.

Wadud-Muhsin, Amina. *Qur’an and Woman: Reading the Sacred Text from a
Woman’s Perspective.* New York, Oxford University Press, 1999 reprint
ed.

Wansbrough, John.*Qur’anic Studies: Sources and Methods of Scriptural
Interpretation.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1977.

Wansbrough, John and Andrew Rippin.*Quranic Studies: Sources and Methods
of Scriptural Interpretaion.* Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2004.

Warraq, Ibn, ed.*The Origins of the Koran: Classic Essays on Islam’s
Holy Book.* Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1998.

Warraq, Ibn, ed.*What the Koran Really Says: Language, Text, and
Commentary* . Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2002.

Watt, William Montgomery.*Companion to the Qur’an.* Oxford, UK:
Oneworld, 1994.

Watt, William Montgomery and Richard Bell.*Introduction to the Qur’an.*
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1970.

Wild, S., ed.*The Qur’an as Text: Islamic Philosophy, Theology, and
Science.* Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1997.


