


IV - Shi‘i Islam:
Abdul-Jabar, Faleh, ed.*Ayatollahs, Sufis, and Ideologues: State,
Religion and Social Movements* *in Iraq.* London: Saqi, 2002.

Amir-Moezzi, Mohammad Ali.*The Divine Guide in Early Shi‘ism: The
Sources of* *Esotericism in Islam.* Albany, NY: State University of New
York Press, 1994.

Arjomand, Said Amir.*The Shadow of God and the Hidden Imam.* Chicago,
IL: University of Chicago Press, 1984.

Arjomand, Said Amir, ed.*Authority and Political Culture in Shi‘ism.*
Albany, NY: State

University of New York Press, 1988.

Ayoub, Mahmoud.*Redemptive Suffering in Islam.* The Hague: Mouton, 1978.

Bill, James A. and John Alden Williams.*Roman Catholics and Shi‘i
Muslims: Prayer, Passion, and Politics.* Chapel Hill, NC: University of
North Carolina Press, 2003.

Blichfeldt, Jan-Olaf.*Early Mahdism: Politics and Religion in the
Formative Period of Islam.* Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1985.

Brunner, Ranier and Werner Ende, eds.*The Twelver Shia in Modern Times:
Religious* *Culture and Political History.* Leiden: E.J. Brill, 2001.

Chelkowski, Peter J., ed.*Ta‘ziyah: Ritual and Drama in Iran.*
Washington Square, NY: New York University Press, 1979.

Chittick, William.*A Shi‘ite Anthology.* London: Muhammadi Trust of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, 1980.

Cole, Juan.*Sacred Space and Holy War: The Politics, Culture and History
of Shi‘ite Islam.* London: I.B. Tauris, 2002.

Cole, Juan R.I. and Nikki R. Keddie.*Shi‘ism and Social Protest.* New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1986.

Corbin, Henry.*Cyclical Time and Ismaili Gnosis.* London: The Institute
of Ismaili Studies Ltd./Kegan Paul Int’l. with Islamic Publications,
1985 ed.

Corbin, Henry.*Spiritual Body and Celestial Earth: From Mazdean Iran to
Shī‘ite Iran.* Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1977.

Daftary, Farhad.*The Assassin Legends: Myth of the Ismā‘īlīs.* London:
I.B. Tauris, 1994.

Daftary, Farhad.*The Ismā‘īlīs: Their History and Doctrines.* Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press, 1990.

Daftary, Farhad, ed.*Mediaeval Ismā‘īlī History and Thought.* Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press, 1996.

Fuller, Graham E. and Rend Rahim Francke.*The Arab Shi‘a: The Forgotten
Muslims.* New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2001.

Halm, Heinz.*The Fatimids and their Traditions of Learning.* London:
I.B. Tauris and Co., 2001.

Halm, Heinz.*Shiism.* Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1992.

Halm, Heinz.*Shi‘a Islam: From Religion to Revolution* . Princeton, NJ:
Markus Wiener, 1997.

Hollister, John N.*The Shi‘a of India.* London: Luzac & Co., 1953.

Jabar, Faleh A.*The Shi‘ite Movement in Iraq.* London: Saqi, 2003.

Jafri, S. Husain M.*The* *Origins and Early Development of Shi‘a Islam.*
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2002.

Kholberg, Etan.*Belief and Law in Imami Shi‘ism.* Aldershot:
Variorum/Ashgate, 1991.

Kholberg, Etan, ed.*Shi‛ism.* Aldershot: Ashgate, 2003.

Khumaynī, Ayatu’llah Seyyid Ruhu’llāh (Hamid Algar, trans. and
ed.).*Islam and Revolution: Writings and Declarations of Imam Khomeini.*
Berkeley, CA: Mizan Press, 1981.

Kramer, Martin S., ed.*Shi‘ism, Resistance, and Revolution.* Boulder,
CO: Westview Press, 1987.

Litvak, Meir.*Shi‘i Scholars of Nineteenth-Century Iraq.* Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press, 2002.

Mallat, Chibli.*Shi‘i Thought from the South of Lebanon.* Oxford, UK:
Centre for Lebanese Studies, 1988.

Modarressi, Hossein.*Tradition and Survival: A Bibliographical Survey of
Early Shi‘ite* *Literature, Vol.1.* Oxford, UK: Oneworld, 2003.

Momen, Moojan. *An Introduction to Shi‘i Islam: The History and
Doctrines of Twelver Shi‘ism.* New Haven, CT: Yale University Press,
1985.

Nakash, Yitzhak.*The Shi‘is of Iraq.* Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 2003.

Nasr, Seyyed Hossein, Hamid Dabashi and Seyyed Vali Reza Nasr,
eds.*Expectation of the Millennium: Shi‘ism in History.* Albany, NY:
State University of New York Press, 1989.

Nasr, Seyyed Hossein, Hamid Dabashi and Seyyed Vali Reza Nasr, eds.
*Shi‘ism: Doctrines, Thought and Spirituality.* Albany, NY: State
University of New York Press, 1988.

Newman, Andrew J. *The Formative Period of Twelver Shi‘ism: Hadīth as
Discourse Between Qum and Baghdad.* Richmond: Curzon Press, 2001.

Pinault, David.*The Shiites: Ritual and Popular Piety in a Muslim
Community.* New York: Palgrave, 1993.

Sachedina, Abdulaziz A.*Islamic Messianism: The Idea of the Mahdi in
Twelver Shi‘ism.* Albany, NY:State University of New York Press, 1981.

Tabataba’i, ‘Allamah Sayyid Muhammad Husain (Seyyed Hoseyn Nasr, trans.
and ed.).*Shi‘ite Islam.* London: George Allen & Unwin, 1975.

Walker, Paul E.*Abu Ya‘qub al-Sijistani: Intellectual Missionary.*
London: I.B. Tauris, 1998.

Walker, Paul E.*Early Philosophical Shiism: The Isma‘ili Neoplatonism of
Abu Ya‘qub al-Sijistani.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press,
1993.

Walker, Paul E.*Hamīd al-Dīn al-Kirmānī: Ismaiili Thought in the Age of
al-Hākim.* London: I.B.Tauris, 1999.

Wiley, Joyce N.*The Islamic Movement of Iraqi Shi‘as.* Boulder, CO:
Lynne Rienner, 1992.


