


V - Sufism:
Abbas, Shemeem Burney. *The Female Voice in Sufi Ritual: Devotional
Practices of* *Pakistan and India.* Austin, TX: University of Texas
Press, 2003.

‘Abd al-Qādir al-Jīlānī (Muhtar Holland, trans.). *The Book of the
Secret of Secrets and the Manifestation of Lights (Kitāb Sirr al-Asrār
wa Mazhar al-Anwār).* Fort Lauderdale, FL:Al-Baz Publ., 2000.

‘Abd al-Qādir al-Jīlānī (Muhtar Holland, trans.). *Fifteen Letters
(Khamsata ‘Ashara* *Maktūban).* Hollywood, FL: Al-Baz Publ., 1997.

‘Abd al-Qādir al-Jīlānī (Muhtar Holland, trans.). *The Sublime
Revelation (Al-Fath ar-Rabbānī).* Fort Lauderdale, FL: Al-Baz Publ., 2nd
ed., 1998.

‘Abd al-Qādir al-Jīlānī (Muhtar Holland, trans.). *Sufficient Provision
for Seekers of the Path* *of the Truth (Al-Ghunya li-Tālibī Tarīq
al-Haqq),* 5 Vols. Hollywood, FL: Al-Baz Publ., 1995-1997.

‘Abd al-Qādir al-Jīlānī (Muhtar Holland, trans.). *Utterances of Shaikh
‘Abd al-Qādir al-Jīlānī (Malfūzāt).* Ft. Lauderdale, FL: Al-Baz Publ.,
2nd ed., 1998.

Abdel-Kader, Ali Hassan. *The Life, Personality and Writings of
al-Junayd: A Study of a* *Third/Ninth Century Mystic with an Edition and
Translation of his Writings.* London: Luzac & Co.,1976.

Abrahamov, Binyamin. *Divine Love in Islamic Mysticism: The Teachings of
al-Ghazālī and al-Dabbāgh.* London: RoutledgeCurzon, 2002.

Abun-Nasr, Jamil M.*The Tijaniyya: A Sufi Order in the Modern World.*
London: Oxford University Press, 1965.

Addas, Claude.*Quest for the Red Sulphur: The Life of Ibn ‘Arabī.*
Cambridge, UK: The Islamic Texts Society, 1993.

Affifi, Abu’l-A‘la.*The Mystical Philosophy of Muhyīd’Dīn Ibnul-‘Arabī.*
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1936.

Andrae, Tor.*In the Garden of Myrtles: Studies in Early Islamic
Mysticism.* Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 1987.

Andreyev, Sergei.*Sufi Illuminati: The Rawshani Movement in Muslim
Mysticism, Society and Politics.* London: Curzon Press, 2000.

Arberry, Arthur John, trans. *The Doctrine of the Sufis* (translation of
Kalābādhī’s *Kitāb al-ta‘arruf* ). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press, 1977.

Arberry, Arthur John.*Discourses of Rumi.* London: John Murray, 1961.

Arberry, Arthur John.*Mystical Poems of Rūmī.* Chicago, IL: University
of Chicago Press, 1968.

Arberry, Arthur John.*Mystical Poems of Rūmī, 2: Second Selection.*
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1979.

Arberry, Arthur John.*A Sufi Martyr: The Apologia of ‘Ain al-Qudāt
al-Hamadhāni.* London:George Allen & Unwin, 1969.

Arberry, Arthur John.*Sufism: An Account of the Mystics of Islam.*
London: Allen and Unwin, 1950.

Arberry, Arthur John.*More Tales from the Masnavi.* London: George Allen
& Unwin, 1963.

Arberry, Arthur John.*Tales from the Masnavi.* London: George Allen &
Unwin, 1961.

Attar, Farid ud-Din (Dick Davis and Afkham Darbandi, trans.).*The
Conference of the* *Birds.* London: Penguin Books, 1984.

Awn, Peter J.*Satan’s Tragedy and Redemption: Iblīs in Sufi Psychology.*
Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1983.

Baldick, Julian.*Mystical Islam: An Introduction to Sufism.* Washington
Square, NY: New York University Press, 1989.

Baldick, Julian.*Imaginary Muslims:* *The Uwaysi Sufis of Central Asia.*
Washington Square, NY: New York University Press, 1993.

Banani, Amin, Richard Hovannisian and George Sabagh, eds.*Poetry and
Mysticism in Islam: The Heritage of Rumi.* New York: Cambridge
University Press, 1994.

Baqli, Ruzbihan (Carl W. Ernst, trans.).*The Unveiling of Secrets: Diary
of a Sufi Master.* Chapel Hill, NC: Parvardigar Press, 1997.

Bashir, Shahzad.*Messianic Hopes and Mystical Visions: The Nūrbakhshīya
between* *Medieval and Modern Islam.* Columbia, SC: University of South
Carolina Press, 2003.

Bennigsen, Alexandre, et al.*Mystics and Commissars: Sufism in the
Soviet Union.* Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1986.

Birge, John K.*The Bektashi Order of Dervishes.* London: Luzac & Co.,
1937.

Böwering, Gerhard.*Mystical Vision of Existence in Classical Islam: The
Qur’anic* *Hermeneutics of the Sufi Sahl al-Tustarī.* Berlin: Walter de
Gruyter, 1980.

Brenner, Louis. *West African Sufi: The Religious Heritage and Spiritual
Search of Cerno* *Bokar Saalif Taal.* London: C, Hurst & Co., 1984.

de Bruijn, J.T.P.*Persian Sufi Poetry.* Surrey: Curzon, 1997.

Buehler, Arthur F.*Sufi Heirs of the Prophet: The Indian Naqshbandiyya
and the Rise of the Mediating Sufi Shaykh.* Columbia, SC: University of
South Carolina Press, 1998.

Burckhardt, Titus.*Introduction to Sufism.* London: Thorsons, 1995.

Burckhardt, Titus.*Mystical Astrology According to Ibn ‘Arabi.*
Louisville, KY: Fons Vitae, 2001.

Chittick, William C.*Imaginal Worlds: Ibn al-‘Arabī and the Problem of
Religious* *Diversity.* Albany, NY: State University of New York Press,
1995.

Chittick, William C. *The Self-Disclosure of God: Principles of Ibn
al-‘Arabī’s* *Cosmology.* Albany, NY: State University of New York
Press, 1997.

Chittick, William C.*The Sufi Path of Knowledge: Ibn al-‘Arabī’s
Metaphysics of* *Imagination.* Albany, NY: State University of New York
Press, 1989.

Chittick, William C.*Sufism: A Short Introduction.* Oxford, England:
Oneworld, 2000.

Chittick, William C., ed.*Faith and Practice of Islam: Three Thirteenth
Century Sufi Texts.* Albany, NY: State University of New York Press,
1992.

Chittick, William C., trans. and ed.*The Sufi Path of Love: The
Spiritual Teachings of Rumi.* Albany, NY: State University of New York
Press, 1983.

Chittick, William C. and Peter Lamborn Wilson, trans.*Fakhruddin
‘Iraqi--Divine Flashes.* Mahwah, NJ: Paulist Press, 1982.

Chodkiewicz, Michel.*An Ocean Without Shore: Ibn ‘Arabi, The Book, and
The Law.* Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 1993.

Chodkiewicz, Michel.*The Seal of the Saints: Prophethood and Sainthood
in the Doctrine of Ibn ‘Arabī.* Cambridge, UK: The Islamic Texts
Society, 1993.

Coates, Peter.*Ibn ‘Arabi and Modern Thought: The History of Taking
Metaphysics* *Seriously.* Oxford, UK: Anqa Publ., 2002.

Corbin, Henry.*Creative Imagination in the Sūfism of Ibn ‘Arabī.*
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1998.

Corbin, Henri (Nancy Pearson, trans.).*The Man of Light in Iranian
Sufism* . Boulder, CO: Shambhala, 1978.

Corbin, Henry (Joseph H. Rowe, trans.).*The Voyage and the Messenger:
Iran and Philosophy.  * Berkeley, CA: North Atlantic Books, 1998.

Cornell, Rkia E. (intro. and trans.). *Early Sufi Women* *(Dhikr
an-niswa al-muta‘ābbidāt as-Sūffiyāt.* Louisville, KY: Fons Vitae, 1999.

Cornell, Vincent J.*Realm of the Saint: Power and Authority in Moroccan
Sufism.* Austin, TX: University of Texas Press, 1998.

Cornell, Vincent J.*The Way of Abu Madyan.* Cambridge, UK: The Islamic
Texts Society, 1996.

Cragg, Kenneth.*The Wisdom of the Sufis.* New York: W.W. Norton, 1976.

Currie, P.M.*The Shrine and Cult of Mu‘īn al-Dīn Chishtī of Ajmer.*
Delhi: Oxford University Press, 1989.

Danner, Victor and Wheeler M. Thackston, trans.*Ibn ‘Ata’ Illah—The Book
of Wisdom/Kwaja Abdullah Ansari—Intimate Conversations.* Mahwah, NJ:
Paulist Press, 1988.

Eaton, Richard M.*Sufis of Bijapur, 1300-1700: Social Roles of Sufis in
Medieval India.* Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1978.

Elias, Jamal J., trans.*The Sufi Poems of Sultan Bahu.* Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press, 1998.

Elmore, Gerald T., ed.*Islamic Sainthood in the Fullness of Time: Ibn
al-‘Arabi’s Book of the Fabulous Gryphon.* Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1999.

Ernst, Carl W. *Eternal Garden: Mysticism, History, and Politics at a
South Asian Sufi* *Center.* Albany, NY: State University of New York
Press, 1992.

Ernst, Carl W. *Ruzbihan Baqli: Mystical Experience and the Rhetoric of
Sainthood in Persian Sufism.* London: Curzon Press, 1996.

Ernst, Carl W.*The Shambhala Guide to Sufism.* Boston, MA: Shambhala,
1997.

Ernst, Carl W.*Words of Ecstasy in Sufism* . Albany, NY: State
University of New York Press, 1984.

Ernst, Carl W. and Bruce B. Lawrence.*Sufi Martyrs of Love: The Chishti
Order in* *South Asia and Beyond.* London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2002.

Farhadi, A.G. Ravan.*Abdullah Ansari of Herat: An Early Sufi Master.*
Surrey: Curzon, 1996.

Friedlander, Shems.*Rumi and the Whirling Dervishes.* New York: Parabola
Books, revised ed., 2003.

Gilsenan, Michael.*Saint and Sufi in Modern Egypt.* Oxford, UK:
Clarendon Press, 1973.

Hammarlund, Anders, et al., eds.*Sufism, Music and Society in Turkey and
the Middle East.* Richmond, Surrey: Curzon Press, 2001.

Heer, Nicholas and Kenneth L. Honerkamp, (intro. and trans.).*Three
Early Sufi Texts.* Louisville, KY: Fons Vitae, 2003.

Helminksi, Camille Adams, ed.*Women of Sufism, A Hidden Treasure:
Writings and Stories of Mystic Poets, Scholars & Saints.* Boston, MA:
Shambhala, 2003.

Hoffman, Valerie.*Sufism, Mystics, and Saints in Modern Egypt.*
Columbia, SC: University of South Carolina Press, 1995.

Homerin, Th. Emil.*From Arab Poet to Muslim Saint: Ibn al-Farid, His
Verse, and His* *Shrine.* Columbia, SC: University of South Carolina
Press, 1994.

Huda, Qumar-ul.*Striving for Divine Union: Spiritual Exercises for
Suhrawardī Sufis.* New York: RoutledgeCurzon, 2003.

Ibn ’Abbad of Ronda (John Renard, trans.).*Letters on the Sufi Path.*
Mahwah, NJ: Paulist Press, 1982.

Ibn al-‘Arabī (R.W.J. Austin, trans.).*Bezels of Wisdom.* New York:
Paulist Press, 1980.

Ibn al-‘Arabī (Cecilia Twinch and Pablo Beneito, trans.).*Contemplation
of the Holy* *Mysteries.* Oxford, UK: Anqa Publ., 2001.

Ibn al-‘Arabī (Rabia Harris, trans.)*Journey to the Lord of Power: A
Sufi Manual on Retreat.* Rochester, VT: Inner Traditions, 1981.

Ibn al-‘Arabī, Muhyiddin (Raghavan Iyer, ed., with introductory essay by
Elton Hall).*TheSeals of Wisdom (ten selections from the Fusus
al-Hikam).* Santa Barbara, CA: Concord Grove Press, 1983.

Ibn al-‘Arabī (Pablo Beneito and Stephen Hertenstein, trans.).*The Seven
Days of the Heart:* *Prayers for the Days and Nights of the Week.*
Oxford, UK: Anqa Publ., 2000.

Ibn al-‘Arabī (R.W.J. Austin, trans.).*Sufis of Andalusia: The Rūh
al-quds and Al-Durrat al-fākhirah.* London: George Allen & Unwin, 1971.

Ibn ‘Ata’ Allah al-Iskandari (Mary Ann Koury-Danner, trans.). *The Key
to Salvation: A Sufi Manual of Invocation.* Cambridge, UK: The Islamic
Texts Society, 1996.

Ibn al-Fārid, ‘Umar (Th. Emil Homerin, trans.).*Sufi Verse, Saintly
Life.* Mahwah, NJ: PaulistPress, 2001.

Ingram, Harold, et al.*Studies in Islamic Mysticism.* New York: Columbia
University Press, 1997.

‘Iraqi, Fakhruddin (William Chittick and Peter Wilson, trans.).*Divine
Flashes.* Mahwah, NJ:Paulist Press, 1982.

Islam, Riazul.*Sufism in South Asia: Impact on Fourteenth Century Muslim
Society.* Karachi:Oxford University Press, 2002.

al-Jīlānī, Hadrat ‘Abd al-Qādir (Shaykh Tosun Bayrak al-Jerrahi
al-Halveti, interpretative trans.).*The Secret of Secrets.* Cambridge,
UK: The Islamic Texts Society, 1992.

Jurji, Edward J.*Illumination in Islamic Mysticism.* Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press,1937.

Karamustafa, Ahmet T.*God’s Unruly Friends: Dervish Groups in the
Islamic Later Middle* *Period,1200-1550.* Salt Lake City, UT: University
of Utah Press, 1994.

Karrar, Ali S.*The Sufi Brotherhoods in the Sudan.* Evanston, IL:
Northwestern University Press,1992.

Keshavarz, Fatemeh (Frederick M. Denny, ed.).*Reading Mystical Lyric:
The Case of Jalal al-Din Rumi.* Columbia, SC: University of South
Carolina Press, 1998.

Knysh, Alexander.*Islamic Mysticism: A Short History.* Leiden: E.J.
Brill, 2000.

Lawrence, Bruce B., ed.*Nizam ad-din Awliya--Morals for the Heart.* New
York: Paulist Press, 1992.

Lawrence, Bruce B.*Notes from a Distant Flute: Sufi Literature in
Pre-Mughal India.* Tehran: Imperial Iranian Academy of Philosophy, 1978.

Lewis, Franklin D.*Rumi: Past and Present, East and West—The Life,
Teachings and Poetry* *of Jalāl al-Din Rumi.* Oxford, UK: Oneworld,
2000.

Lewisohn, Leonard. *Beyond Faith and Infidelity: The Sufi Poetry and
Teachings of* *Mahmud Shabistari.* Surrey: Curzon, 1995.

Lewisohn, Leonard, ed. *The Heritage of Sufism, Vol. I: Classical
Persian Sufism from its* *Origins to Rumi (700-1300).* Oxford, England:
Oneworld, 1999.

Lewisohn, Leonard, ed. *The Heritage of Sufism, Vol. II: The Legacy of
Medieval Persian* *Sufism (1150-1500).* Oxford, England: Oneworld, 1999.

Lewisohn, Leonard and David Morgan, eds. *The Heritage of Sufism, Vol.
III: Late Classical Persianate Sufism (1501-1750).* Oxford, England:
Oneworld, 1999.

Lewisohn, Leonard, ed.*The Wisdom of Sufism.* Oxford, UK: Oneworld,
2001.

Lings, Martin.*A Sufi Saint of the Twentieth Century, Shaikh Ahmad
al-‘Alawī: His Spiritual Heritage and Legacy.* London: George Allen &
Unwin, 2nd ed., 1971.

Lings, Martin.*What is Sufism?* Cambridge, UK: The Islamic Texts
Society, 1993 (reprint ed.).

Maneri, Sharafuddin (Paul Jackson, trans.).*The Hundred Letters.*
Mahwah, NJ: Paulist Press,1980.

Mason, Herbert.*The Death of al-Hallāj: A Dramatic Narrative.* Notre
Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press, 1991 (originally published,
1979).

Mason, Herbert W.*Al-Hallaj.* Richmond, Surrey: Curzon Press, 1995.

Massignon, Louis (Benjamin Clark, trans.).*Essay on the Origins of the
Technical Language* *of Islamic Mysticism.* Notre Dame, IN: University
of Notre Dame Press, 1997.

Massignon, Louis (Herbert Mason, trans.). *The Passion of al-Hallaj,
Mystic and Martyr of Islam,* 4 Vols. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press, 1982.

Meier, Fritz (John O’Kane, trans.).*Essays on Islamic Piety and
Mysticism.* Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1999.

Meisami, Julie.*Medieval Persian Court Poetry.* Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 1987.

Milson, Menahem, trans.*A Sufi Rule for Novices: Kitāb Ādāb al-murīdīn
of Abū Najīb* *al-Suhrawardī.* Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
1973.

Mojaddedi, Jawid A.*The Biographical Tradition in Sufism: The tabaqāt
genre from al-Sulamī* *to Jāmī.* Richmond, Surrey: Curzon, 2001.

Murata, Sachiko.*Chinese Gleams of Sufi Light: Wang Tai-Yü’s Great
Learning of the Pure* *and Real* *and Liu Chih’s Displaying the
Concealment of the Real Realm.* Albany, NY: State University of New York
Press, 2000.

Nasr, Seyyed Hossein.*Sufi Essays.* Albany, NY: State University of New
York Press, 2nd ed.,1991.

Netton, Ian Richard.*Sufi Ritual: The Parallel Universe.* Richmond,
England: Curzon Press, 2000.

Nicholson, Reynold A.*The Idea of Personality in Sufism.* Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press, 1923.

Nicholson, Reynold A., ed. and trans.*A Rumi Anthology.* Oxford, UK:
Oneworld, 2000.

Nicholson, Reynold A.*Studies in Islamic Mysticism.* Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press, 1921.

Nicholson, Reynold A., ed. and trans.*Mathnawi of Jalaluddin Rumi.*
London: E.J.W. Gibb Memorial Trust/Luzac & Co., 1977.

Nizam, ad-Din Awliya’ (Bruce B. Lawrence, trans. and ed.).*Morals for
the Heart.* Mahwah, NJ: Paulist Pess, 1992.

Nurbakhsh, Javad.*Dogs from a Sufi Point of View.* London: Khaniqahi
Nimatullahi Publ., 1989.

Nurbakhsh, Javad.*The Psychology of Sufism.* New York: Khaniqahi
Nimatullahi Publ., 1992.

Nurbakhsh, Javad.*Spiritual Poverty in Sufism* . London: Khaniqahi
Nimatullahi Publ., 1984.

Nurbakhsh, Javad.*Sufism: Meaning, Knowledge and Unity.* New York:
Khaniqahi Nimatullahi Publ., 1981.

Nurbakhsh, Javad.*Sufi Symbolism,* 5 Vols. London: Khaniqahi Nimatullahi
Publ., 1984-1995.

Nurbakhsh, Javad.*Sufi Women.* London: Khaniqahi Nimatullahi Publ., 2nd
ed., 1990.

Nurbakhsh, Javad.*In the Tavern of Ruin: Seven Essays on Sufism.* New
York: Khaniqahi Nimatullahi Publ., 2nd ed., 1992.

O’Fahey, R.S.*Enigmatic Saint: Ahmad Ibn Idris and the Idrisi
Tradition.* Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, 1990.

Özdalga, Elisabeth, ed.*The Naqshbandis in Western and Central Asia* .
London: Curzon Press, 1999.

Pendlebury, David, trans. and ed.*Yusuf and Zulaikha: An Allegorical
Romance, by Hakim* *Abdurrahman Jami.* London: Octagon Press, 1980.

Al-Qushayrī (B.R. von Schlegell, trans.).*Principles of Sufism.*
Berkeley, CA: Mizan Press, 1990.

Radtke, B. and J. O’Kane.*The Concept of Sainthood in Early Islamic
Mysticism.* Surrey: Curzon, 1996.

Radtke, Berndt, et al., trans. and eds.*The Exoteric Ahmad Ibn Idris: a
Sufi’s Critique of the* *Madhahib and the Wahhabis—Four Arabic Texts
with Translation and Commentary.* Leiden:E.J. Brill, 1999.

Ramakrishna, Lajwanti.*Panjabi Sufi Poets.* London: Oxford University
Press, 1938.

Renard, John, S.J., trans.*Ibn ‘Abbād of Ronda: Letters on the Sufi
Path.* New York: Paulist Press, 1988.

Renard, John.*All the King’s Falcons: Rumi on Prophets and Revelation.*
Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 1994.

Renard, John, ed.*Knowledge of God in Classical Sufism.* Mahwah, NJ:
Paulist Press, 2004.

Roberts, Allen F. and Mary Nooter Roberts (with Gassia Armenian and
Ousmane Gueye).*A Saint in the City: Sufi Arts of Urban Senegal.* Los
Angeles: UCLA Fowler Museum of Cultural History, 2003.

el-Sakkakini, Widad.*First Among Sufis: The Life and Thought of Rabia
al-Adawiyya, the Woman Saint of Basra.* London: Octagon Press, 1982.

Sanai, Hakim (D.L. Pendlebury, trans.).*The Walled Garden of Truth.*
London: Octagon Press, (abridged ed.), 1974.

Schimmel, Annemarie.*As Through a Veil: Mystical Poetry in Islam.* New
York: Columbia University Press, 1982.

Schimmel, Annemarie.*I Am Wind, You Are Fire: The Life and Work of
Rumi.* Boston, MA: Shambhala, 1992.

Schimmel, Annemarie.*Mystical Dimensions of Islam.* Chapel Hill, NC:
University of North Carolina Press, 1975.

Schimmel, Annemarie.*The Triumphal Sun: A Study of the Works of
Jalāloddin Rumi.* London: Fine Books, 1978.

Schimmel, Annemarie.*A Two-Colored Brocade: The Imagery of Persian
Poetry.* Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press, 1992.

Schimmel, Annemarie, trans.*Look! This is Love: Poems of Rumi.* Boston,
MA: Shambhala, 1996.

Sedgwick, Mark J.*Sufism: The Essentials.* Cairo: American University in
Cairo Press, 2001.

Sells, Michael A.*Early Islamic Mysticism: Sufi, Qur’an, Mi‘raj, Poetic
and Theological* *Writings.* Mahwah, NJ: Paulist Press, 1996.

Shah, Idries, intro.(various trans.) *Four Sufi Classics: Salaman and
Absal; The Niche for Lights; The Way of the Seeker; The Abode of
Spring.* London: Octagon Press (for The Sufi Trust), 1980.

Sirāj ad-Dīn, Abū Bakr. *The Book of Certainty: The Sufi Doctrine of
Faith, Vision and* *Gnosis.* Cambridge, UK: The Islamic Texts Society,
2002.

Sirriyeh, Elizabeth.*Sufis and Anti-Sufis: The Defence, Rethinking and
Rejection of Sufism in the Modern World* . Richmond, Surrey: Curzon,
1999.

Smith, Grace Martin and Carl W. Ernst, eds.*Manifestations of Sainthood
in Islam.* Istanbul: Isis Press, 1994.

Smith, Margaret.*Muslim Women Mystics: The Life and Work of Rabi‘a and
Other Women Mystics in Islam.* Oxford, England: Oneworld, 2001.

Smith, Margaret.*Rābi‛ah the Mystic and Her Fellow-Saints in Islam.*
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1928.

Smith, Margaret.*Studies in Early Mysticism in the Near and Middle
East.* Oxford, UK: Oneworld, 1995.

ās-Sulamī, Abū ‘Abd ar-Rahmān (Rkia E. Cornell, trans.).*Early Sufi
Women—Dhikr an* - *niswa al-muta ‘abbidāt as sūfiyyāt.* Louisville, KY:
Fons Vitae, 1999.

Thackston, Wheeler M., Jr., trans. *Suhrawardi: The Philosophical
Allegories and Mystical Treatises.* Costa Mesa, CA: Mazda, 1999.

Thackston, W.M., Jr., trans.*Signs of the Unseen: The Discourses of
Jalaluddin Rumi.* Boston, MA: Shambhala, 1999.

Trimingham, J. Spencer.*The Sufi Orders in Islam.* Oxford, UK: Clarendon
Press, 1971.

Trix, Frances.*Spiritual Discourse: Learning with an Islamic Master.*
Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1993.

de Vitray-Meyerovitch, Eva (Simone Fattal, trans.).*Rumi and Sufism* .
Sausalito, CA: Post Apollo, 1987.

Wilson, Peter Lamborn and Nasrollah Pourjavady, trans. and eds.*The
Drunken Universe:  An Anthology of Persian Sufi Poetry.* Grand Rapids,
MI: Phanes Press, 1987.

Wolper, Ethel Sara. *Cities and Saints: Sufism and the Transformation of
Urban Space in* *Medieval Anatolia.* University Park, PA: Pennsylvania
State University Press, 2003.


