


VI - Theology & Philosophy:
Abed, Shukri.*Aristotelian Logic and the Arabic Language in Alfarabi.*
Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 1991.

Abrahamov, Binyamin.*Anthropomorphism and Interpretation of the Qur’an
in the Theology of al-Qasim ibn Ibrahim—Kitab Al-Mustarshid.* Leiden:
E.J. Brill, 1996.

Abrahamov, Binyamin.*Islamic Theology.* Edinburgh: Edinburgh University
Press, 1998.

Abrahamov, Binyamin, ed.*Islamic Theology: Traditionalism and
Rationalism.* Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1998.

Algar, Hamid.*Wahhabism: A Critical Essay.* Oneonta, NY: Islamic Publ.
Int’l., 2002.

Aminrazavi, Mehdi.*Suhrawardi and the School of Illumination* .
Richmond, Surrey: Curzon Press, 1997.

Arberry, Arthur J.*Revelation and Reason in Islam* . London: George
Allen & Unwin, 1977.

Arkoun, Mohammed.*The Unthought in Contemporary Islamic Thought.*
London: Saqi/The Institute of Ismaili Studies, 2002.

Arnaldez, Roger.*Averroes: A Rationalist in Islam.* Notre Dame, IN:
University of Notre Dame Press, 2000.

Averroes (George F. Hourani, trans.).*Averroes: On the Harmony of
Religion and* *Philosophy.* London: Luzac & Co., 1961.

Averroes (Erwin Rosenthal, trans. and ed.).*Commentary on Plato’s
‘Republic’.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1956.

Averroes (Ibrahim Najjar, trans. and ed.).*Faith and Reason in Islam:
Averroes’ Exposition of Religious Arguments.* Oxford, England: Oneworld,
2001.

Bakar, Osman.*The History and Philosophy of Islamic Science.* Cambridge,
UK: The Islamic Texts Society, 1999.

Baljon, J.M.S.*The Reforms and Religious Ideas of Sir Sayyid Ahmad
Khan.* Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1949.

Bayrak (al-Jerrahi al-Halveti), Shaykh Tosun.*The Name and the Named:
The Divine Attributes of God.* Louisville, KY: Fons Vitae, 2001.

Bell, Joseph N.*Love Theory in Later Hanbalite Islam.* Albany, NY: State
University of New York Press, 1978.

Bello, Iysa A.*The Medieval Islamic Controversy between Philosophy and
Orthodoxy: Ijmā‘and Ta’wīl* *in the Conflict between al-Ghazzālī and Ibn
Rushd.* Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1989.

Bravmann. M.M.*The Spiritual Background of Early Islam.* Leiden: E.J.
Brill, 1997.

Brockopp, Jonathan E., ed.*Islamic Ethics of Life: Abortion, War, and
Euthanasia.* Columbia, SC: University of South Carolina Press, 2003.

Brown, Daniel.*Rethinking Tradition in Modern Islamic Thought.*
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1999.

Burrell, David B.*Freedom and Creation in Three Traditions.* Notre Dame,
IN: University of Notre Dame Press, 1993.

Burrell, David B.*Knowing the Unknowable God: Ibn-Sina, Maimonides,
Aquinas.* Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press, 1986.

Butterworth, Charles E., trans.*Alfarabi—The Political Writings:
“Selected Aphorisms” and* *Other Texts.* Ithaca, NY: Cornell University
Press, 2001.

Butterworth, Charles, ed. *Averroes’ Three Commentaries on Aristotle’s
“Topics,”* *“Rhetorics,” and “Poetics.”* Albany, NY: State University of
New York Press, 1971.

Butterworth, Charles E., ed. *The Political Aspects of Islamic
Philosophy: Essays in Honor of Muhsin Mahdi.* Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 1992.

Chittick, William C. *The Heart of Islamic Philosophy: The Quest for
Self-Knowledge in the Teachings of Afdal al-Din Kashani.* Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press, 2001.

Conrad, Lawrence I., ed. *The World of Ibn Tufayl: Interdisciplinary
Perspectives on Hayy* *ibn Yaqzan.* Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1996.

Cook, Michael.*Commanding Right and Forbidding Wrong in Islamic
Thought.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2000.

Cook, Michael.*Early Muslim Dogma.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press, 1981.

Corbin, Henry (W.R. Trask, trans.).*Avicenna and the Visionary Recital.*
New York: Pantheon Books, 1960.

Corbin, Henry (Liadain Sherrard, trans.).*History of Islamic
Philosophy.* London: Kegan Paul, 1993.

Corbin, Henry.*The Man of Light in Iranian Sufism.* New Lebanon, NY:
Omega Publ., 1994 ed.

Corbin, Henry.*Temple and Contemplation (Islamic Texts and Contexts).*
New York: Columbia University Press, 1986.

Craig, William L.*The Kalam Cosmological Argument.* New York: Harper and
Row, 1979.

Crone, Patricia and Fritz Zimmermann, eds.*The Epistle of Salim Ibn
Dhakwan.* Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2001.

Daiber, Hans.*Bibliography of Islamic Philosophy:* Leiden: E.J. Brill,
1999.

Daftary, Farhad.*The Ismā‘īlīs: Their History and Doctrines.* Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press, 1990.

Daftary, Farhad, ed.*Intellectual Traditions in Islam.* London: I.B.
Tauris, 2000.

Davidson, Herbert A.*Alfarabi, Avicenna, and Averroes on Intellect:
Their Cosmologies, Theories of theActive Intellect, and Theories of
Human Intellect.* New York: Oxford University Press, 1992.

Dhanani, Alnoor. *The Physical Theory of Kalam: Atoms, Space, and Void
in Basrian* *Mu‘tazili Cosmology.* Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1994.

Druart, Therese-Anne, ed.*Arabic Philosophy and the West: Continuity and
Interaction.* Washington, DC: Center for Contemporary Arab Studies,
Georgetown University, 1988.

Fakhry, Majid.*Al-Fārābi,* *Founder of Islamic Neoplatonism.* Oxford,
UK: Oneworld, 2002.

Fakhry, Majid.*Averroes: His Life, Works, and Influence.* Oxford, UK:
Oneworld, 2002.

Fakhry, Majid.*Ethical Theories in Islam.* Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1991.

Fakhry, Majid.*A History of Islamic Philosophy.* London: Longman, 2nd
ed., 1983.

Fakhry, Majid.*Islamic Occasionalism and its Critique by Averroes and
Aquinas.* London: George Allen & Unwin, 1958.

Fakhry, Majid.*Philosophy, Dogma, and the Impact of Greek Thought in
Islam.* Aldershot: Ashgate/Variorum, 1994.

Fakhry, Majid.*A Short Introduction to Islamic Philosophy, Theology and
Mysticism.* Oxford, UK: Oneworld, 1997.

al-Fārābī, Abū Nasr (Richard Walzer, trans.).*On the Perfect State
(Mabādi’ ārā’ al-madīnat al-fādilah).* Chicago, IL: Kazi Publ., revised
ed., 1998.

Firestone, Reuven. *Journeys in Holy Lands: The Evolution of the
Abraham-Ishmael Legends in Islamic Exegesis.* Albany, NY: State
University of New York Press, 1990.

Frank, Richard M.*Al-Ghazali and the Ash‘arite School* . Durham, NC:
Duke University  Press, 1994.

Frank, Richard M.*Beings and Their Attributes: The Teaching of the
Basrian School of the Mu‘tazila in the Classical Period.* Albany, NY:
State University of New York Press, 1978.

Galston, Miriam.*Politics and Excellence: The Political Philosophy of
Alfarabi.* Princeton, NJ:Princeton University Press, 1990.

al-Ghazālī, Abū Hāmid Muhammad (Richard Joseph McCarthy,
trans.).*Deliverance from* *Error—Five Key Texts, Including His
Spiritual Autobiography, al-Munqidh min al-Dalal.* Louisville, KY: Fons
Vitae, 2nd ed., 2000.

al-Ghazālī (T.J. Winter, trans.).*Al-Ghazālī on Disciplining the Soul &
on Breaking the Two  Desires: Books XII and XIII of the Revival of the
Religious Sciences.* Cambridge, UK: The Islamic Texts Society, 1995.

al-Ghazālī, Abū Hāmid Muhammad (David B. Burrell, trans.). *On Faith in
Divine Unity and Trust in Divine Providence.* Louisville, KY: Fons
Vitae, 2001.

al-Ghazālī, Abū Hāmid Muhammad (Michael E. Marmura, trans.).*The
Incoherence of the* *Philosophers.* Provo, UT: Brigham Young University
Press, 2000.

al-Ghazālī (Asaad F. Shaker, trans.).*Al-Ghazālī on Intention, Sincerity
and Truthfulness: Book XXXVII of the Revival of the Religious Sciences.*
Cambridge, UK: The Islamic Texts Society, forthcoming.

al-Ghazālī (Kojiro Nakamura, trans.).*Al-Ghazālī on Invocations and
Supplications: Book* *IX of the Revival of the Religious Sciences.*
Cambridge, UK: The Islamic Texts Society, 1990.

al-Ghazālī, Abū Hāmid Muhammad (Muhammad Abul Quasem, trans.).*The
Jewels of the* *Qur’ān.* London: Kegan Paul Int’l., 1984.

al-Ghazālī (Denys Johnson-Davies, trans.).*Al-Ghazālī on the Manners
Relating to Eating: Book XI of the Revival of the Religious Sciences.*
Cambridge, UK: The Islamic Texts Society, 2000.

al-Ghazālī (David B. Burrell and Nazih Daher, trans.). *Al-Ghazālī on
the Ninety-nine* *Beautiful Names of God.* Cambridge, UK: The Islamic
Texts Society, 1992.

al-Ghazālī (Henry T. Littlejohn, trans.).*Al-Ghazālī on Patience and
Thankfulness: Book* *XXXIII of the Revival of the Religious Sciences.*
Cambridge, UK: The Islamic Texts Society, forthcoming.

al-Ghazālī (Asaad F. Shaker, trans.).*Al-Ghazālī on Poverty and
Abstinence: Book XXXIV* *of the Revival of the Religious Sciences.*
Cambridge, UK: The Islamic Texts Society, 2002.

al-Ghazālī (T.J. Winter, trans.).*Al-Ghazālī on the Remembrance of Death
and the Afterlife:  Book XL of the Revival of the Religious Sciences.*
Cambridge, UK: The Islamic Texts Society, 1989.

Gianotti, Timothy J. *Al-Ghazālī’s Unspeakable Doctrine of the Soul:
Unveiling the Esoteric Psychology and Eschatology of the Ihyā.’*
Leiden: E.J. Brill, 2001.

Gohlman, William E., trans. *The Life of Ibn Sina: A Critical Edition
and Annotated* *Translation.* Albany, NY: State University of New York
Press, 1974.

Goldziher, Ignaz.*Introduction to Islamic Theology and Law.* Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University  Press, 1981.

Goldziher, Ignaz (Wolfgang Behn, trans.).*The Zahiris, Their Doctrine
and Their History: A Contribution to the Study of Islamic Theology.*
Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1971.

Goodman, Lenn E.*Avicenna.* New York: Routledge, 1992.

Goodman, Lenn E.*Islamic Humanism.* Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press,
2003.

Goodman, Lenn E.*Jewish and Islamic Philosophy: Crosspollinations in the
Classic Age.* New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1999.

Graham, William A.*Divine Word and Prophetic Word in Early Islam* . The
Hague: Mouton, 1977.

Gutas, Dimitri.*Avicenna and the Aristotelian Tradition.* Leiden: E.J.
Brill, 1988.

Gutas, Dimitri.*Greek Philosophers in the Arabic Tradition.* Aldershot:
Ashgate, 2001.

Gutas, Dimitri.*Greek Thought, Arabic Culture: The Graeco-Arabic
Translation Movement in Baghdad and Early ‘Abbāsid Society.* London:
Routledge, 1998.

Haddad, Yvonne Yazbeck and Jane Idleman Smith.*The Islamic Understanding
of Death* *and* *Resurrection.* Albany, NY: State University of New York
Press, 1981.

Hahn, Lewis Edwin, Randall E. Auxier and Lucian W. Stone, Jr., eds.*The
Philosophy of* *Seyyed Hossein Nasr.* La Salle, IL: Open Court, 2001.

Hallaq, Wael B., trans.*Ibn Taymiyya against the Greek Logicians.*
Oxford, UK: Clarendon Press, 1993.

Hamid, Abdul Ali, ed.*Moral Teachings of Islam: Prophetic Traditions
from Al-Adab al-mufrad by Imam al-Bukhari.* Lanham, MD: Rowman &
Littlefield, 2003.

Hasse, Dag Nikolaus.*Avicenna’s De Anima in the Latin West.* London: The
Warburg Institute, 2000.

Hawting, G.R.*The Idea of Idolatry and the Emergence of Islam: From
Polemic to History.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2002.

Heath, Peter.*Allegory and Philosophy in Avicenna: With a Translation of
the Book of the* *Prophet Muhammad’s Ascent to Heaven.* Philadelphia,
PA: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1992.

Heemskerk, Margaretha T. *Suffering in Mu‘tazilite Theology: ‘Abd
al-Jabbar’s Teaching on* *Pain and Divine Justice.* Leiden: E.J. Brill,
2000.

Hourani, Albert.*Arabic Thought in the Liberal Age: 1798-1939.*
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Cambridge University Press, 1993.

Hourani, George F., ed.*Essays on Islamic Philosophy and Science.*
Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 1975.

Hourani, George F.*Islamic Rationalism: The Ethics of ‛Abd al-Jabbār.*
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1971.

Hourani, George F.*Reason and Tradition in Islamic Ethics.* Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press, 1985.

Fitzgerald, Michael Abdurrahman and Moulat Youssef Slitine, trans.*Ibn
Qayyim al-Jawziyya: The Invocation of God.* Cambridge, UK: The Islamic
Texts Society, 2000.

Ibn Rushd (Imran Ahsan Khan Nyazee, trans.). *The Distinguished Jurist’s
Primer, Vol. I.* Reading: Ithaca Press, 2000.

Ibn Rushd (Imran Ahsan Khan Nyazee, trans.). *The Distinguished Jurist’s
Primer, Vol. II.* Reading: Ithaca Press, 2000.

Inati, Shams Constantine.*Ibn Sina and Mysticism: Remarks and
Admonitions.* London: Kegan Paul, 1996.

Iqbal, Muhammad.*The Reconstruction of Religious Thought in Islam.*
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1932.

Izutsu, Toshihiko.*Concept of Belief in Islamic Theology* . Salem, NH:
Ayer Co. Publ., 1980.

Jackson, Sherman A.*On the Boundaries of Theological Tolerance in Islam:
Abū Hāmid al-Ghazālī’s Faysal al-Tafriqa.* Oxford, UK: Oxford University
Press, 2002.

Kelsay, John.*Islam and War: The Gulf War and Beyond—A Study in
Comparative Ethics.* Louisville, KY: Westminster John Knox Press, 1993.

Kelsay, John and James Turner Johnson, eds.*Just War and Jihad:
Historical and Theoretical* *Perspectives on War and Peace in Western
and Islamic Traditions.* Westport, CT: Greenwood Publ. Group, 1991.

Kemal, Salim.*The Philosophical Poetics of Alfarabi, Avicenna, and
Averroes: The* *Aristotelian Reception.* New York: RoutledgeCurzon,
2003.

Kemal, Salim.*The Poetics of Alfarabi and Avicenna.* Leiden: E.J. Brill,
1991.

Kennedy-Day, Kiki.*Books of Definition in Islamic Philosophy: The Limits
of Words.* London: RoutledgeCurzon, 2003.

Kindī, Abū Yūsuf Ya‘qūb (Alfred Ivry, trans.).*On First Philosophy.*
Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 1974.

Knysh, Alexander D.*Ibn ‘Arabi and the Later Islamic Tradition: The
Making of a Polemical Image in Medieval Islam.* Albany, NY: State
University of New York Press, 1998.

Kogan, Barry S.*Averroes and the Metaphysics of Causation.* Albany, NY:
State University of New York Press, 1985.

Kraemer, Joel L.*Philosophy in the Renaissance of Islam: Abū Sulaymān
al-Sijistānī and his Circle.* Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1986.

Lawrence, Bruce B., ed. *The* *Rose and the Rock: Mystical and Rational
Elements in the Intellectual History of South Asian Islam.* Durham, NC:
Duke University Comparative Program in Comparative Studies on Southern
Asia, 1979.

Leaman, Oliver.*Averroes and His Philosophy.* Oxford, UK: Clarendon
Press, 1997.

Leaman, Oliver*. A Brief Introduction to Islamic Philosophy.* Malden,
MA: Blackwell, 1999.

Leaman, Oliver.*An Introduction to Classical Islamic Philosophy.*
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2nd ed., 2001.

Mahdi, Muhsin.*Alfarabi and the Foundation of Islamic Political
Philosophy.* Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2001.

Marmura, Michael E., ed.*Islamic Theology and Philosophy: Studies in
Honor of George F.* *Hourani.* Albany, NY: State University of New York
Press, 1984.

Martin, Richard C. and Mark R. Woodward (with Dwi S. Atmaja). *Defenders
of Reason in* *Islam: Mu‘tazilism from Medieval School to Modern
Symbol.* Oxford, UK: Oneworld, 1997.

Mashita, Hiroyuki, ed. *Theology, Ethics and Metaphysics: Royal Asiatic
Society Classics of Islam,* 5 Vols. London: RoutledgeCurzon, 2003.

Mitha, Farouk. *Al-Ghazālī and the Ismailis: A Debate on Reason and
Authority in Medieval Islam.* London: I.B. Tauris, 2002.

Morewedge, Parviz.*Essays in Islamic Philosophy, Theology, and
Mysticism.* Binghamton, NY:Global Publ., Binghamton University, State
University of New York, 1997.

Morewedge, Parviz.*The Mystical Philosophy of Avicenna.* Binghamton, NY:
Global Publ.,Binghamton University, State University of New York, 2001.

Morewedge, Parviz, ed.*Islamic Philosophical Theology.* Albany, NY:
State University of New York Press, 1979.

Morewedge, Parviz, ed.*Islamic Philosophy and Mysticism.* New York:
Caravan, 1981.

Morewedge, Parviz, ed.*Neoplatonism and Islamic Thought.* Albany, NY:
State University of New York Press, 1992.

Morris, James W.*The Wisdom of the Throne: An Introduction to the
Philosophy of Mullā Sadrā.* Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press,
1981.

Motzki, Harald, ed.*Hadith: Origins and Developments.* Aldershot:
Ashgate, 2004.

Mullā Sadrā (Parviz Morewedge, trans.).*The Metaphysics of Mullā Sadrā.*
Binghamton, NY:Institute of Global Cultural Studies, 1992.

Nasr, Seyyed Hossein.*An Introduction to Islamic Cosmological
Doctrines.* Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 1993.

Nasr, Seyyed Hossein.*The Islamic Intellectual Tradition in Persia.*
London: Curzon Press, 1997.

Nasr, Seyyed Hossein.*The Philosophy of Mullā Sadrā* . Albany, NY: State
University of New York Press, 1975.

Nasr, Seyyed Hossein, et al., eds.*The Philosophy of Seyyed Hossein
Nasr.* La Salle, IL: Open Court, 2000.

Nasr, Seyyed Hossein.*Religion and the Order of Nature.* Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press, 1996.

Nasr, Seyyed Hossein.*Sadr al-Dīn Shīrāzī and his Transcendent
Theosophy.* Tehran: Imperial Iranian Academy of Philosophy, 1978.

Nasr, Seyyed Hossein.*Three Muslim Sages: Avicenna, Suhrawardi, Ibn
‘Arabi.* Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1964.

Nasr, Seyyed Hossein and Mehdi Amin Razavi, eds.*An Anthology of
Philosophy in Persia.* Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2000.

Nasr, Seyyed Hossein and Oliver Leaman, eds.*History of Islamic
Philosophy.* London:Routledge, 1996.

Netton, Ian Richard.*Allah Transcendent: Studies in the Structure and
Semiotics of Islamic Philosophy, Theology and Cosmology.* New York:
Routledge, 1989.

Netton, Ian Richard.*Al-Fārābī and His School.* London: Routledge, 1992.

Netton, Ian Richard.*Muslim Neoplatonists: An Introduction to the
Thought of the* *Brethren of Purity.* London: Routledge Curzon, 2002.

Netton, Ian Richard.*Seek Knowledge: Thought and Travel in the House of
Islam.* Richmond, England: Curzon Press, 1996.

Ormsby, Eric L.*Theodicy in Islamic Thought: The Dispute Over
al-Ghazālī’s “Best of All Possible Worlds.”* Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 1984.

Padwick, Constance E.*Muslim Devotions: a Study of Prayer-Manuals in
Common Use.* Oxford,UK: Oneworld, 1996.

Parens, Joshua.*Metaphysics as Rhetoric: Alfarabi’s Summary of Plato’s
“Laws.”* Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 1995.

Peters, F.E.*Aristotle and the Arabs: The Aristotelian Tradition in
Islam.* Washington Square, NY:New York University Press, 1968.

Peters, J.R.T.M.*God’s Created Speech: A Study in the Speculative
Theology of…‘Abd al-* Jabbār.*Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1976.*

Peters, Rudolph.*Jihad in Classical and Modern Islam: A Reader.*
Princeton, NJ: Markus Wiener Publ., 1996.

Rahman, Fazlur.*Islam and Modernity: Transformation of an Intellectual
Tradition.* Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1982.

Rahman, Fazlur.*The Philosophy of Mullā Sadrā (Sadr al-Din al-Shirazi).*
Albany, NY: State  University of New York Press, 1975.

Rahman, Fazlur.*Prophecy in Islam.* London: Allen & Unwin, 1958.

Raschid, M.S.*Iqbal’s Concept of God.* London: Kegan Paul Int’l., 1981.

Razavi, Mehdi Amin.*Suhrawardi and the School of Illumination.* Surrey:
Curzon, 1997.

Rescher, Nicholas.*Studies in Arabic Philosophy* . Pittsburgh, PA:
University of Pittsburgh Press, 1967.

Reinhart, A. Kevin.*Before Revelation: The Boundaries of Muslim Moral
Thought* . Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 1995.

Rosenthal, Franz.*Greek Philosophy in the Arab World: A Collection of
Essays.* Aldershot: Ashgate/Variorum, 1990.

Rosenthal, Franz.*Knowledge Triumphant: The Concept of Knowledge in
Medieval Islam.* Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1970.

Rosenthal, Franz.*Sweeter than Hope: Complaint and Hope in Medieval
Islam.* Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1997.

Saleh, Fauzan.*Modern Trends in Islamic Theological Discourse in 20th
Century Indonesia:* *A Critical Study.* Leiden: E.J. Brill, 2001.

Schimmel, Annemarie.*Deciphering the Signs of God: A Phenomenological
Approach to* *Islam.* Albany, NY: State University of New York Press,
1994.

Sherif, M.A.*Ghazali’s Theory of Virtue.* Albany, NY: State University
of New York Press, 1975.

Smith, Jane I. and Yvonne Haddad.*The Islamic Understanding of Death and
Resurrection.* Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 1981.

Street, Tony.*Avicenna: Intuitions of the Truth.* Cambridge, UK: The
Islamic Texts Society, forthcoming.

Stroumsa, Sarah.*Freethinkers of Medieval Islam: Ibn al-Rāwandī, Abu
Bakr al-Rāzī and*  *Their Impact on Islamic Thought.* Leiden: E.J.
Brill, 1999.

Suhrawardī, Shihāb al-Dīn Yahyā (Hossein Ziai, trans.).*The Book of
Radiance: Partaw-Nāma.* Costa Mesa, CA: Mazda Publ., 1998.

Suhrawardī.*The Philosophy of Illumination (Hiqmat al-ishrāq).* John
Walbridge and Hossein Ziai, trans., commentary, etc. Provo, UT: Brigham
Young University Press, 1999.

Thackston, W.M., Jr.*The Mystical and Visionary Treatises of Shihabuddin
Yahya Suhrawardi.* London: Octagon Press, 1982.

Thomas, David, ed. *Early Muslim Polemic against Christianity:* *Abū
‘Īsā al-Warrāq’s ‘Against the Incarnation.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press, 2002.

Troll, Christian W.*Sayyid Ahmad Khan: A Reinterpretation of Muslim
Theology.* New Delhi: Vikas, 1978.

Wahba, Mourad and Mona Abousenna, eds.*Averroës and the Enlightenment.*
Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1996.

Walbridge, John.*The Leaven of the Ancients: Suhrawardī and the Heritage
of the Greeks.* Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 1999.

Walbridge, John.*The Science of Mystic Lights: Qutb al-Dīn Shīrāzī and
the Illuminationist* *Tradition in Islamic Philosophy.* Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 1992.

Walbridge, John.*The Wisdom of the Mystic East: Suhrawardī and Platonic
Orientalism.* Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 2001.

Walker, Paul E.*Abu Ya‘qub al-Sijistani: Intellectual Missionary* .
London: I.B. Tauris, 1998.

Walzer, Richard.*Greek into Arabic: Essays on Islamic Philosophy.*
Oxford, UK: B. Cassirer, 1962.

Watt, William Montgomery, trans.*The Faith and Practice of Al-Ghazālī.*
Oxford, UK: Oneworld, 1995.

Watt, William Montgomery.*The Formative Period of Islamic Thought.*
Oxford, UK: Oneworld, 1998.

Watt, William Montgomery.*Free Will and Predestination in Early Islam.*
London: Luzac, 1948.

Watt, William Montgomery.*Islamic Philosophy and Theology: An Extended
Survey.* Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2nd ed., 1985.

Watt, William Montgomery.*Muslim Intellectual: A Study of al-Ghazālī.*
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1963.

Wheeler, Brannon M.*Applying the Canon in Islam: The Authorization and
Maintenance of* * Interpretive Reasoning in Hanafi Scholarship.* Albany,
NY: State University of New York Press, 1996.

Wheeler, Brannon M.*Moses in the Qur’an and Islamic Exegesis.* London:
RoutledgeCurzon, 2002.

Wisnovsky, Robert.*Avicenna’s Metaphysics in Context.* Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press, 2003.

Wisnovsky, Robert, ed.*Aspects of Avicenna* . Princeton, NJ: Markus
Wiener, 2002.

Wolfson, Harry A.*The Philosophy of the Kalām.* Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press,1976.

Ha’iri Yazdi, Mehdi.*The Principles of Epistemology in Islamic
Philosophy: Knowledge by* *Presence.* Albany, NY: State University of
New York Press, 1992.

Ziai, Hossein. *Knowledge and Illumination: A Study of Suhrawardī’s
“Hikmat al-Ishrāq.”* Atlanta, GA: Scholar’s Press, 1990.


