


VII – Jurisprudence:
Abou El Fadl, Khaled.*Rebellion and Violence in Islamic Law.* Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press, 2002.

Abou El Fadl, Khaled.*Speaking in God’s Name: Islamic Law, Authority and
Women.* Oxford, England: Oneworld, 2001.

Ahmad, Kassim.*Hadith: A Re-evaluation.* Fremont, CA: Universal Unity,
1997.

El-Alami, Dawoud S.*The Marriage Contract in Islamic Law.* London:
Graham & Trotman, 1992.

Algar, Hamid, trans.*Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Iran.*
Berkeley, CA: Mizan Press, 1980.

Anderson, J.N.D.*Law Reform in the Muslim World.* London: Athlone Press,
1976.

An-Na’im, Abdullahi Ahmed.*Toward an Islamic Reformation: Civil
Liberties, Human* *Rights, and International Law.* Syracuse, NY:
Syracuse University Press, 1996.

Arabi, Oussama.*Studies in Modern Islamic Law and Jurisprudence.* The
Hague: Kluwer Law International, 2001.

Asad, Muhammad.*Principles of State and Government in Islam.* London:
Islamic Book Trust, 1980.

Azami, M.M.*On Schacht’s Origins of Muhammadan Jurisprudence.* New York:
John Wiley, 1985.

al-Azmeh, Aziz, ed.*Islamic Law: Social and Historical Contexts.*
London: Routledge, 1988.

Bakhtiar, Laleh, trans. and ed.*Encyclopedia of Islamic Law: A
Compendium of the Major* *Schools.* Chicago, IL: Kazi Publ., 1996.

Bowen, John R. *Islam, Law and Equality in Indonesia: An Anthropology of
Public* *Reasoning.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2003.

Brockopp, Jonathan E.*Early Mālikī Law: Ibn ‘Abd al-Hakam and his Major
Compendium*  *Jurisprudence.* Leiden: E.J. Brill, 2000.

Burton, John.*The Sources of Islamic Law: Islamic Theories of
Abrogation.* Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1990.

Burton, John.*An Introduction to the Hadith.* Edinburgh: Edinburgh
University Press, 1994.

Calder, Norman.*Studies in Early Muslim Jurisprudence.* Oxford, UK:
Clarendon Press, 1993.

Christelow, Alan.*Muslim Law Courts and the French Colonial State in
Algeria.* Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1985.

Cotran, Eugene, ed.*Yearbook of Islamic and Middle Eastern Law:
1999-2000.* The Hague: Kluwer Law International, 2002.

Cotran, Eugene and Adel Omar Sherif, eds.*Democracy: the Rule of Law and
Islam.* London: Kluwer Law International, 1999.

Cotran, Eugene and Mai Yamani, eds.*The Rule of Law in the Middle East
and Islamic* *World: Human Rights and the Judicial Process.* London:
I.B. Tauris, 2000.

Coulson, Noel J.*Conflicts and Tensions in Islamic Jurisprudence.*
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1969.

Coulson, Noel J.*A History of Islamic Law.* Edinburgh: Edinburgh
University Press, 1964.

Coulson, Noel J.*Succession in the Muslim Family.* Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press, 1971.

Crone, Patricia.*Roman, Provincial and Islamic Law: The Origins of the
Islamic Patronate.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2002.

Dahlén, Ashk P.*Islamic Law, Epistemology and Modernity: Legal
Philosophy in Contemporary Iran.* New York: Routledge, 2003.

Dutton, Yasin. *The Origins of Islamic Law: The Qur’an, the Muwatta’ and
Medinan ‘Amal.* Richmond, Surrey: Curzon, 1999.

Eisenman, Robert H.*Islamic Law in Palestine and Israel: A History of
the Survival of* *Tanzimat and* *Shari‘a in the British Mandate and the
Jewish State.* Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1978.

Esposito, John L. with Natana J. DeLong-Bas.*Women in Muslim Family Law*
. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press, 2nd ed., 2002.

Fareed, Muneer Goolam.*Legal Reform in the Muslim World: The Anatomy of
a Scholarly Dispute in the 19th and the Early 20th Centuries on the
Usage of Ijtihād as a Legal Tool.* Bethesda, MD: Austin & Winfield,
1996.

Ferrari, Silvio and Anthony Bradney, eds.*Islam and European Legal
Systems.* Aldershot: Ashgate, 2000.

Fluehr-Lobban, Carolyn.*Islamic Law and Society in the Sudan.* London:
Frank Cass & Co., 1987.

Forte, David F.*Studies in Islamic Law.* Bethesda, MD: Austin &
Winfield, 1999.

Gerber, Haim.*Islamic Law and Culture, 1600-1840.* Leiden: E.J. Brill,
1999.

Gerber, Haim.*State, Society, and Law in Islam: Ottoman Law in
Comparative Perspective.* Albany, NY: State University of New York
Press, 1994.

Gleave, Robert.*Inevitable Doubt: Two Theories of Shī‘ī Jurisprudence.*
Leiden: E.J. Brill, 2000.

Gleave, Robert and Eugenia Kermeli, eds.*Islamic Law: Theory and
Practice.* London: I.B. Tauris, 2001.

Haddad, Yvonne Yazbeck and Barbara Freyer Stowasser, eds.*Islamic Law
and the* *Challenges of Modernity.* Lanham, MD: AltaMira Press, 2004.

Haeri, Shahla.*Law of Desire: Temporary Marriage in Shi‘i Iran.*
Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press, 1989.

Haleem, M. Abdel, et al., eds.*Criminal Justice in Islam: Judicial
Procedure in the Sharī‘ah.* London: I.B. Tauris, 2003.

Hallaq, Wael B.*Authority, Continuity and Change in Islamic Law.*
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2001.

Hallaq, Wael B.*A History of Islamic Legal Theories: an introduction to
Sunnī usūl al-fiqh.*  Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press,
1997.

Hallaq, Wael B.*Law and Legal Theory in Classical and Medieval Islam.*
Aldershot: Ashgate/Variorum, 1995.

Hallaq, Wael B., ed.*The Formation of Islamic Law.* Aldershot: Ashgate,
2004.

Haleem, M. Abdel, Adel Omar Sharif and Ian Edge, eds.*Criminal Justice
in Islam: Judicial Procedure in the Shari‘ah.* London: I.B. Tauris,
2003.

Heer, Nicholas L., ed. *Islamic Law and Jurisprudence: Studies in Honor
of Farhat J. Ziadeh.* Seattle, WA: University of Washington Press, 1990.

Hooker, Michael B.*Islamic Law in Southeast Asia.* Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press,  1991.

Ibrahim, Ezzedin and Denys Johnson-Davies, trans.*An-Nawawi’s Forty
Hadith.* Cambridge, UK: The Islamic Texts Society, 1997.

Ibrahim, Ezzedin and Denys Johnson-Davies, trans.*Forty Hadith Qudsi* .
Cambridge, UK: The Islamic Texts Society, 1997.

Imber, Colin.*Ebu’s-Su‘d: The Islamic Legal Tradition.* Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press, 1997.

Johansen, Baber.*Contingency in a Sacred Law: Legal and Ethical Norms in
Muslim Fiqh.* Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1999.

Johansen, Baber.*The Islamic Law on Land Tax and Rent: The Peasants’
Loss of Property Rights as Interpreted in the Hanafite Legal Literature
of the Mamluk and Ottoman Periods.* London: Croom Helm, 1988.

Juynboll, G.H.A. *Muslim Tradition: Studies in Chronology, Provenance
and Authorship of Early Hadīth.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press, 1983.

Kamali, Mohammad Hashim.*Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence* .
Cambridge, UK: The Islamic Texts Society, revised ed., 2000.

Kelsay, John.*War and the Imperatives of Justice in Islamic Law.*
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, forthcoming.

Khadduri, Majid.*Al-Shāfi‘ī’s Risāla: Treatise on the Foundations of
Islamic Jurisprudence.*  Cambridge, UK: Islamic Texts Society, 1999.

Khadduri, Majid.*The Islamic Conception of Justice.* Baltimore, MD:
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1984.

Khadduri, Majid.*War and Peace in the Law of Islam.* Baltimore, MD:
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1955.

Khadduri, Majid, trans.*The Islamic Law of Nations: Shaybānī’s Siyar.*
Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2002.

Khare, R.S., ed.*Perspectives on Islamic Law, Justice, and Society.*
Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 1999.

Kusha, Hamid Rez.*The Sacred Law of Islam: A Case Study of Women’s
Treatment in the* *Islamic Republic of Iran’s Criminal Justice System.*
Aldershot: Ashgate, 2003.

Lindholm, Tore and Kari Vogt, eds. *Islamic Law Reform and Human Rights:
Challenges and Rejoinders.* Copenhagen: Nordic Human Rights
Publications, 1993.

Makdisi, George.*Religion, Law and Learning in Classical Islam.*
Aldershot: Ashgate/Variorum, 1991.

Mallat, Chibli.*The Renewal of Islamic Law.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press, 2003.

Masud, Muhammad Khalid, Brinkley Messick and David S. Powers,
eds.*Islamic Legal Interpretation: Muftis and their Fatwas.* Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press, 1996.

Mehdi, Rubya.*The Islamization of the Law in Pakistan.* Richmond,
Surrey: Curzon Press, 1994.

Melchert, Christopher.*The Formation of the Sunni Schools of Law,
9th-10th Centuries.* Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1997.

Mir-Hosseini, Ziba.*Marriage on Trial: A Study of Islamic Family Law*
—*Iran and Morocco* *Compared.* London: I.B. Tauris, 2001.

Moors, Annelies.*Women, Property and Islam: Palestinian Experiences,
1920-1990.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1996.

Motzki, Harald.*The Origins of Islamic Jurisprudence: Meccan Fiqh before
the Classical* *Schools.* Leiden: E.J. Brill, 2001.

Omran, Abdel Rahim, ed.*Family Planning in the Legacy of Islam.* New
York: Routledge, 1992.

Peletz, Michael G.*Islamic Modern: Religious Courts and Cultural
Politics in Malaysia* . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2002.

Peters, Rudolph.*Islamic Criminal Law: Theory and Practice from the
Sixteenth to the Twentieth Century.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press, forthcoming.

Peters, Rudolph.*Jihad in Classical and Modern Islam: A Reader.*
Princeton, NJ: Markus Wiener, 1996.

Powers, David S.*Studies in Qur’an and Hadīth: The Formation of the Law
of Inheritance.* Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1986.

Rosen, Lawrence.*The Anthropology of Justice: Law as Culture in Islamic
Society.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1989.

Rosen, Lawrence.*The Justice of Islam: Comparative Perspectives on
Islamic Law and* *Society.* Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2000.

Sachedina, Abdulaziz Abdulhussein.*The Just Ruler in Shi‛ite Islam: The
Comprehensive* *Authority of the Jurist in Imamite Jurisprudence.*
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1998.

as-Sadr, Muhammad Baqir (Roy Mottahedeh, trans.).*Lessons in Islamic
Jurisprudence.* Oxford, UK: Oneworld, 2003.

Saeed, Abdullah.*Islamic Banking and Interest: A Study of the
Prohibition of Ribā and Its* *Contemporary Interpretation.* Leiden: E.J.
Brill, 2nd ed., 1997.

Saeed, Abdullah and Hassan Saeed.*Freedom of Religion, Apostasy and
Islam.* Aldershot: Ashgate, 2004.

Schacht, Joseph.*An Introduction to Islamic Law.* Oxford, UK: Clarendon
Press, 1984 (reprint ed., first published, 1964).

Schacht, Joseph.*The Origins of Muhammadan Jurisprudence.* Oxford, UK:
Clarendon Press, 1950.

Schirazi, Asghar.*The Constitution of Iran: Politics and the State in
the Islamic Republic.* London: I.B. Tauris, 1998.

Serajuddin, Alamgir Muhammad.*Sharī‘a Law and Society: Tradition and
Change in South Asia.* Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2001.

Serjeant, R.B.*Customary and Shari‘ah Law in Arabian Society.*
Aldershot: Ashgate/Variorum, 1991.

Shaham, Ron.*Family and the Courts in Modern Egypt: A Study Based on
Decisions by the* *Sharī‘a Courts, 1900-1955.* Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1997.

Siddīqī, Muhammad Zubayr.*Hadīth Literature: Its Origin, Development &
Special Features.* Cambridge, UK: The Islamic Texts Society, 1993.

Sonbol, Amira El-Azhary.*Women of Jordan: Islam, Labor and the Law.*
Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press, 2003.

Sonbol, Amira El-Azhary, ed.*Women, The Family, and Divorce Laws in
Islamic History.* Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press, 1996.

Starr, June.*Law as Metaphor: From Islamic Courts to the Palace of
Justice.* Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 1992.

Stewart, Devon J.*Islamic Legal Orthodoxy: Twelver Shiite Responses to
the Sunni Legal System.* Salt Lake City, UT: University of Utah Press,
1998.

Tucker, Judith E. *In the House of the Law: Gender and Islamic Law in
Ottoman Syria and Palestine.* Berkeley, CA: University of California
Press, 2000.

Vogel, Frank E.*Islamic Law and Legal Systems: Studies of Saudi Arabia.*
Leiden: E.J. Brill, 2000.

Vogel, Frank E. and Samuel L. Hayes.*Islamic Law and Finance: Religion,
Risk, and Return.* TheHague: Kluwer Law Int’l., 1998.

Weiss, Anita M.*Islamic Reassertion in Pakistan: The Application of
Islamic Laws in a* *Modern State.* Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University
Press, 1986.

Weiss, Bernard G. *The Search for God’s Law: Islamic Jurisprudence in
the Writings of* *Sayf al-Dīn al-Āmidī.* Salt Lake City, UT: University
of Utah Press, 1992.

Weiss, Bernard G.*The Spirit of Islamic Law.* Athens, GA: University of
Georgia Press, 1998.

Weiss, Bernard G., ed.*Studies in Islamic Legal Theory.* Leiden: E.J.
Brill, 2002.

Welchman, Lynn.*Beyond the Code: Muslim Family Law and the Shari‘a
Judiciary in the Palestinian West Bank.* The Hague: Kluwer Law Int’l.,
2000.

Zubaida, Sami. *Law and Power in the Islamic World.* London; I.B.
Tauris, 2003.


