


VIII - The Arts:
Alexander, David. *The Arts of War: Arms and Armour of the 7th to 19th
Centuries* *(The Nasser D.Khalili Collection of Islamic Art, Vol. XXI).*
London: The Nour Foundation, 1992.

Ali, Wijdan.*Modern Islamic Art: Development and Continuity.*
Gainesville, FL: University Press of Florida, 1997.

Ali, Wijdan and S. Bisharat, eds.*Contemporary Art from the Islamic
World* . Northampton, MA: Interlink Publ. Group, 1990.

Allan, James W.*Metalwork from the Early Islamic Period.* New Haven, CT:
Yale University Press, 1981.

Allan, James W., ed.*Islamic Art in the Ashmolean Museum.* Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press, 1995.

Allan, James, et al., eds.*Persian Steel: The Tanavoli Collection*
(Oxford Studies in Islamic Art). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press,
2001.

Amin, Mohamed.*The Beauty of Makkah & Madinah.* Northampton, MA:
Interlink Publ. Group, 2000.

Arberry, A.J.*Islamic Art of Persia.* New Delhi: Goodword Books, 2001.

Ardalan, Nader and Laleh Bakhtiar.*The Sense of Unity: The Sufi
Tradition in Persian* *Architecture.* Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press, 1973.

Arnold, Sir Thomas.*Painting in Islam.* Oxford, UK: Clarendon Press,
1928.

Asani, Ali A. and Kamal Abdel-Malek.*Celebrating Muhammad: Images of the
Prophet in* *Popular Muslim Poetry.* Columbia, SC: University of South
Carolina Press, 1995.

Asher, Catherine B.*Architecture of Mughal India.* Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press, 1992.

Atil, Esin.*Levni and the Surname: The Story of an Eighteenth-Century
Ottoman Festival.* Seattle, WA: University of Washington Press, 2000.

Baer, Eva.*Islamic Ornament.* Washington Square, NY: New York University
Press, 1998.

Baker, Patricia L.*Islam and the Religious Arts.* Continuum Int’l Publ.,
2003.

Barry, Michael.*Figurative Art in Medieval Islam and the Riddle of
Bīzhād of Heart.* New York: Flammarion, 2003.

Bates, Michael and Elizabeth Savage.*Dinars and Dirhams, Coins of the
Islamic Lands: The Early Period.* Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press,
2003.

Bayani, Manijeh, et al.*The Decorated Word: Qur’ans of the 17th to 19th
Centuries (The* *Nasser D. Khalili Collection of Islamic Art, Vol. IV).*
London: The Nour Foundation, 1998.

Beach, Milo Cleveland.*Early Mughal Painting.* Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 1987.

Beach, Milo Cleveland.*Mughal and Rajput Painting.* Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press, 1993.

Beach, Milo Cleveland, Ebba Koch and Wheeler M. Thackston.*The King of
the World—The Padshahnama: An Imperial Mughal Manuscript from the Royal
Library, Windsor Castle.* New York: Thames & Hudson, 1997.

Becker, Judith.*Gamelan Stories: Tantrism, Islam, and Aesthetics in
Central Java.* Tempe, AZ: Arizona State University Program for Southeast
Asian Studies, 1993.

Behrens-Abouseif, Doris.*Islamic Architecture in Cairo: An Introduction*
(Studies in Islamic Art and Architecture, Vol. 3). Leiden, E.J. Brill,
1997 ed.

Bellamy, James A., et al., eds.*Literary Heritage of Classical Islam:
Arabic and Islamic Studies* *in Honor of James A. Bellamy.* Princeton,
NJ: Darwin Press, 1993.

Blair, Shiela S. *A Compendium of Chronicles: Rashid al-Din’s
Illustrated History of the* *World (The Nasser D. Khalili Collection of
Islamic Art, Vol. XXVII).* London: The Nour Foundation, 1995.

Blair, Sheila S.*Islamic Inscriptions.* Washington Square, NY: New York
University Press, 1998.

Blair, Sheila S.*The Monumental Inscriptions from early Islamic Iran and
Transoxiana* (Studies in Islamic Art and Architecture, Vol. 5.). Leiden:
E.J. Brill, 1991.

Blair, Sheila S. and Jonathan M. Bloom.*The Art and Architecture of
Islam, 1250-1800.* New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1994.

Blair, Sheila S. and Jonathan M. Bloom.*Images of Paradise in Islamic
Art.* Austin, TX: University of Texas Press, 1991.

Bloom, Jonathan M., ed.*Early Islamic Art and Architecture.* Aldershot:
Ashgate, 2002.

Bloom, Jonathan and Sheila Blair.*Islamic Arts.* London: Phaidon Press,
1997.

Bravmann, René.*Islam and Tribal Art in West Africa.* New York:
Cambridge University Press, 1994.

Brend, Barbara.*Islamic Art.* London: British Museum of Art, 1991.

Burckhardt, Titus.*The Art of Islam: Language and Meaning.* London:
World of Islam Festival            Publ. Co., 1976.

Bürgel, J.C.*The Feather of Simurgh: The “Licit Magic” of the Arts in
Medieval Islam.* Washington Square, NY: New York University Press, 1988.

Carboni, Stefano.*Glass from Islamic Lands: The Al-Sabah Collection,
Kuwait National* *Museum.* London: Thames & Hudson, 2001.

Carboni, Stefano, et al.*Glass of the Sultans.* New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press, 2001.

Clévenot, Dominique and Gérard Degeorge.*Splendors of Islam:
Architecture, Decoration* *and Design.* New York: The Vendome Press,
2000.

Contadini, Anna.*Fatimid Art at the Victoria and Albert Museum.* London:
Victoria and Albert Museum, 1998.

Creswell, K.A.C.*Early Muslim Architecture,* 2 Vols. Oxford, UK:
Clarendon Press, 1932-1940.

Critchlow, Keith.*Islamic Patterns: An Analytical and Cosmological
Approach.* Rochester, VT: Inner Traditions, 1999.

Degeorge, Gerard and Yves Porter.*The Art of the Islamic Tile.* Paris:
Flammarion, 2002.

Deroche, Francois.*The Abbasid Tradition: Qur’ans of the 8th to 10th
Centuries AD (The Nasser D. Khalili Collection of Islamic Art, Vol. I).*
London: The Nour Foundation, 1992.

Diba, Layla S., Maryam Ekhtiar and B.W. Robinson, eds. *Royal Persian
Paintings: The Qajar  Epoch, 1785-1925.* London: I.B. Tauris, 1998.

El-Said, Issam and Ayse Parman.*Geometric Concepts in Islamic Art.*
London: Scorpio Publ., 1990.

Ettinghausen, Richard, Oleg Grabar, and Marilyn Jenkins-Madina.*The Art
and Architecture* *of Islam, 650-1250.* New Haven, CT: Yale University
Press, 2nd ed., 2001.

Farsi, Hani M.S.*Jeddah, City of Art: The Sculptures and Monuments.*
Boston, MA: Interlink Publ. Group, 1991.

Fehérvári, Géza.*Ceramics of the Islamic World in the Tareq Rajab
Museum.* London: I.B. Tauris, 2000.

Field, Robert.*Geometric Patterns from Islamic Art & Architecture.*
Norfolk, England: Tarquin Publ., 1999.

Flood, Finbarr Barry.*The Great Mosque of Damascus: Studies on the
Making of an* *Umayyad Visual Culture.* Leiden: E.J. Brill, 2001.

Frishman, Martin and Hasan-Uddin Khan, eds.*The Mosque.* New York:
Thames & Hudson, 1994.

Gonzalez, Valerie.*Beauty and Islam: Aesthetics in Islamic Art and
Architecture.* London: I.B. Tauris, 2001.

Goodwin, Godfrey.*A History of Ottoman Architecture.* New York: Thames &
Hudson, 2003.

Grabar, Oleg.*The Formation of Islamic Art.* New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press, 2nd ed., 1987.

Grabar, Oleg.*The Great Mosque of Isfahan.* Washington Square, NY: New
York University Press, 1990.

Grabar, Oleg.*Muqarnas: An Annual on Islamic Art and Architecture.*
Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1988.

Grube, Ernst J.*Cobalt and Lustre: The First Centuries of Islamic
Pottery (The Nasser D. Khalili Collection of Islamic Art, Vol. IX). *
London: The Nour Foundation, 1995.

Grube, Ernst J. and Eleanor G. Sims, eds.*Islamic Art: A Biennial
Dedicated to the Art and* *Culture of the Muslim World, 1990-1991.*
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1997.

Grube, Ernst J. and Eleanor G. Sims, eds.*Islamic Art 5: Studies on the
Art and Culture of* *the Islamic World.* Oxford, UK: Oxford University
Press, 2001.

Helms, Svend*. Early Islamic Architecture of the Desert: A Bedouin
Station in Eastern* *Jordan.* Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press,
1990.

Hillenbrand, Robert.*Islamic Architecture: Form, Function, and Meaning.*
New York: Columbia University Press, 1994.

Hillenbrand, Robert.*Islamic Art and Architecture.* London: Thames &
Hudson, 1998.

Hoag, John D.*Islamic Architecture.* New York: Rizzoli, 1975.
Howard, Deborah. *Venice and the East: The Impact of the Islamic World
on Venetian* *Architecture, 1100-1500.* New Haven, CT: Yale University
Press, 2000.

Hutt, Antony.*North Africa: Islamic Architecture.* Northampton, MA:
Interlink Publishing Group, 1998.

Hutt, Antony and Leonard Harrow.*Islamic Architecture: Iran,* 2 Vols.
Northampton, MA: Interlink Publ. Group, 1990.

Irwin, Robert.*Islamic Art in Context* :*Art, Architecture and the
Literary World.* New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1997.

James, David.*After Timur: Qur’ans of the 15th and 16th Centuries.*
London: The  Nour Foundation (The Nasser D. Khalili Collection of
Islamic Art), 1992.

James, David.*The Master Scribes: Qur’ans of the 11th to 14th Centuries
AD (The Nasser D. Khalili Collection of Islamic Art, Vol. II).* London:
The Nour Foundation, 1992.

Kalter, Johannes.*The Arts and Crafts of Turkestan.* New York: Thames &
Hudson, 1985.

Kasam, Kutub, ed.*Shimmering Light: An Anthology of Ismaili Poetry.*
London: I.B. Tauris with The Institute of Ismaili Studies, 1996.

Khalili, Nasser D.,  B.W. Robinson and Tim Stanley.*Lacquer of the
Islamic Lands, Part One (The Nasser D. Khalili Collection of Islamic
Art, Vol. XXII).* London: The Nour Foundation, 1996.

Khalili, Nasser D., B.W. Robinson and Tim Stanley. *Lacquer of the
Islamic Lands, Part Two (The Nasser D. Khalili Collection of Islamic
Art, Vol. XXII).* London: The Nour Foundation, 1997.

Khatibi, Abdelkebir and Mohammed Sijelmassi.*The Splendor of Islamic
Calligraphy.* London: Thames & Hudson, 1996.

Koch, Ebba.*Mughal Art and Imperial Ideology: Collected Essays.* New
Delhi: Oxford University Press, 2001.

Kritzeck, James, ed.*Anthology of Islamic Literature: From the Rise of
Islam to Modern Times.* New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1964.

Kritzeck, James, ed.*Modern Islamic Literature from 1800 to the
Present.* New York: Holt, Rinehart    and Winston, 1970.

Kröger, Jens. Nishapur:*Glass of the Early Islamic Period.* New Haven,
CT: Yale University Press, 1995.

Leach, Linda.*Paintings from India (The Nasser D. Khalili Collection of
Islamic Art,* *Vol. VIII).* London: The Nour Foundation, 1998.

Lifchez, Raymond, ed.*The Dervish Lodge: Architecture, Art, and Sufism
in Ottoman* *Turkey.* Berkeley, CA: University of California Press,
1992.

Lowry, Glenn D. *An Annotated and Illustrated Checklist of the Vever
Collection, a* *Jeweler’s Eye: Islamic Arts of the Book from the Vever
Collection.* Seattle, WA: University of Washington Press, 1988.

Meinecke, Michael. *Patterns of Stylistic Changes in Islamic
Architecture: Local Traditions* *versus Migrating Artists.* Washington
Square, NY: New York University Press, 1996.

Michell, George and Mark Zebrowski.*Architecture and Art of the Deccan
Sultanates.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1999.

Michell, George, ed.*Architecture of the Islamic World: Its History and
Social Meaning.* New York: Thames & Hudson, 1995.

Michell, George, ed.*The Islamic Heritage of Bengal.* Paris: United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO),
1984.

Mir, Mustansir, trans. and ed.*Tulip in the Desert: A Selection of the
Poetry of Muhammad* *Iqbal.* Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press,
2000.

Moynihan, Elizabeth B.*Paradise as a Garden: In Persia and Mughal
India.* New York: George Braziller, 1980.

Nasr, Seyyed Hossein.*Islamic Art and Spirituality.* Albany, NY: State
University of New York Press, 1987.

Necipoglu, Gülru.*Architecture, Ceremonial, and Power: The Topkapi
Palace in the* *Fifteenth and Sixteenth Centuries.* Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 1992.

Necipoglu, Gülru, ed.*Muqarnas: An Annual on the Visual Culture of the
Islamic World.* Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1997.

Nelson, Kristina.*The Art of Reciting the Qur’an.* Austin, TX:
University of Texas Press, 1986.

Nicholson, R.A.*Studies in Islamic Poetry.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press, 1921.

Parker, Ann and Avon Neal.*Hajj Paintings: Folk Art of the Great
Pilgrimage.* Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1995.

Pedersen, Andrew.*Dictionary of Islamic Architecture* . New York:
Routledge, 1996.

Petruccioli, Attilio, ed.*Gardens in the Time of the Great Muslim
Empires: Theory and Design.* Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1997.

Pickett, Douglas.*Early Persian Tilework: The Medieval Flowering of
Kāshī.* Madison, NJ: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press, 1997.

Prussin, Labelle.*Hatumere: Islamic Design in West Africa.* Berkeley,
CA: University of California Press, 1986.

Renard, John.*Islam and the Heroic Image: Themes in Literature and the
Visual Arts.* Columbia, SC     University of South Carolina Press, 1993.

Rice, David Talbot.*Islamic Art.* London: Thames & Hudson, revised ed.,
1999.

Ruggles, D. Fairchild.*Gardens, Landscapes, & Vision in the Palaces of
Islamic Spain.* University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University
Press, 2003.

Safadi, Yasin Hamid.*Islamic Calligraphy.* London: Thames & Hudson,
1987.

Safwat, Nabil F.*The Art of the Pen: Calligraphy of the 14th to 20th
Centuries (The Nasser D.Khalili Collection of Islamic Art, Vol. V).*
London: The Nour Foundation, 1996.

Safwat, Nabil F.*Golden Pages: Qur’ans and Other Manuscripts from the
Collection of Ghassan I. Shaker.* Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press,
2000.

Salameh, Khader.*The Qur’an Manuscripts in the Al-Haram Al-Sharif
Islamic Museum,* *Jerusalem.*  Paris: United Nations Education,
Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), 2001.

Schimmel, Annemarie.*Calligraphy and Islamic Culture.* Washington
Square, NY: New York University Press, 1984.

Schimmel, Annemarie.*Islam in India and Pakistan.* Leiden: E.J. Brill,
1982.

Sells, Michael A.*Stations of Desire: Love Elegies from Ibn ‘Arabi and
New Poems.* Jerusalem: Ibis Editions, 2000.

Shokoohy, Mehrdad. Bhadresvar:*The Oldest Islamic Monuments in India.*
Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1988.

Simakoff, N.*Islamic Designs in Color.* New York: Dover, 1993 (first
published by the Imperial Society for the Encouragement of the Fine
Arts, St. Petersburg, 1883).

Soucek, P.P., ed.*Content and Context of Visual Arts in the Islamic
World.* University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University Press, 1988.

Soudavar, Abou and Milo Cleveland Beach.*Art of the Persian Courts:
Selections from the* *Art and History Trust Collection.* New York:
Rizzoli, 1993.

Stierlin, Henri and Anne Stierlin. *Islam: Early Architecture from
Baghdad to Jerusalem and Cordoba.* New York: Taschen America, 1996.

Stierlin, Henri and Anne Stierlin (photographers). *Islamic Art and
Architecture: From* *Isfahan to the Taj Mahal.* London: Thames and
Hudson, 2002.

Stierlin, Henri and Anne Stierlin.*Splendors of an Islamic World.* New
York: St. Martin’s Press, 1997.

Stronge, Susan.*Painting for the Mughal Emperor: The Art of the Book,
1560-1660.* London: Victoria and Albert Museum, 2002.

Tabbaa, Yasser.*The Transformation of Islamic Art during the Sunni
Revival.* Seattle, WA: University of Washington Press, 2002.

Vernoit, Stephen, ed.*Discovering Islamic Art: Scholars, Collectors and
Collections.* London: I.B. Tauris, 2000.

Vernoit, Stephen.*Occidentalism: Islamic Art in the 19th Century (The
Nasser D. Khalili*  *Collection of Islamic Art, Vol. XXIII).* London:
The Nour Foundation, 1997.

Ward, Rachel.*Islamic Metalwork.* London: Thames & Hudson, 1993.

Welch, Anthony.*Calligraphy in the Arts of the Muslim World.* Austin,
TX: University of Texas Press, 1979.

Welch, Stuart Cary.*The Islamic World.* New York: The Metropolitan
Museum of Art, 1987.

Wilkinson, Charles K.*Nishapur: Pottery of the Early Islamic Period.*
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1974.


