


IX - History:
Abun-Nasr, Jamil M.*A History of the Maghrib in the Islamic Period.*
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 3rd. ed., 1987.

Afary, Janet.*The Iranian Constitutional Revolution, 1906-1911:
Grassroots Democracy,* *Social Democracy, and the Origins of Feminism.*
New York: Columbia University Press, 1996.

Afsaruddin, Asma. *Excellence and Precedence: Medieval Islamic Discourse
on Legitimate* *Leadership.* Leiden: E.J. Brill, 2002.

Allison, Robert J. *The Crescent Obscured: The United States and the
Muslim World 1776-1815.* Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2000.

Armstrong, Karen.*Islam: A Short History.* New York: Modern Library,
2000.

Austin, Allan D.*African Muslims in Antebellum America: Transatlantic
Stories and Spiritual* *Struggles.* New York: Routledge, revised ed.,
1997.

Ayoub, Mahmoud M.*The Crisis of Muslim History: Religion and Politics in
Early Islam.* Oxford, UK: Oneworld, 2003.

Bailey, Harold, ed.*The Cambridge History of Iran,* 8 Vols. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press, 1993.

Barnes, John Robert.*An Introduction to Religious Foundations in the
Ottoman Empire.* Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1986.

Bayat, Mangol.*Iran’s First Revolution: Shi‘ism and the Constitutional
Revolution of 1905-1909.* Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1997.

Bayat, Mangol.*Mysticism and Dissent: Socioreligious Thought in Qajar
Iran.* Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press, 1982.

Beinin, Joel and Zachary Lockman.*Workers on the Nile: Nationalism,
Communism, Islam,* *and the Egyptian Working Class, 1882-1954.*
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1987.

Bennison, Amira K. *Jihad and its Interpretation in Pre-Colonial
Morocco: State-Society Relations during the French Conquest of Algeria.*
New York: RoutledgeCurzon, 2002.

Berg, Herbert. *The Development of Exegesis in Early Islam: The
Authenticity of Muslim* *Literature  from the Formative Period.*
Richmond, Surrey: Curzon Press, 2000.

Berkey, Jonathan P. *The Formation of Islam: Religion and Society in the
Near East, 600-1800.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2003.

Berkey, Jonathan P. *Popular Preaching and Religious Authority in the
Medieval Islamic Near* *East.* Seattle, WA: University of Washington
Press, 2001.

Berkey, Jonathan P. *The Transmission of Knowledge in Medieval Cairo: A
Social History of Islamic Education.* Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 1992.

Black, Antony.*The History of Islamic Political Thought: From the
Prophet to the Present.* New York: Routledge, 2001.

Blanks, David R. and Michael Frassetto, eds.*Western Views of Islam in
Medieval and Early  Modern Europe.* New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 1999.

Bloom, Jonathan M. *Paper before Print: The History and Impact of Paper
in the Islamic* *World.  * New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2001.

Bosworth, Clifford E. *The Arabs, Byzantium and Iran: Studies in Early
Islamic History and* *Culture.* Aldershot: Variorum/Ashgate, 1996.

Bosworth, Clifford E.*The Islamic Dynasties.* Edinburgh: Edinburgh
University Press, 1967.

Bosworth, Clifford E.*The Mediaeval Islamic Underworld: The Banū Sāsān
in Arabic Society and  Literature,* Part One *.* Leiden: E.J. Brill,
1997.

Bosworth, Clifford E.*The New Islamic Dynasties.* New York: Columbia
University Press, revised ed., 1996.

Brann, Ross.*Power in the Portrayal: Representations of Jews and Muslims
in Eleventh- and Twelfth- Century Islamic Spain.* Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 2002.

Brett, Michael. *The Rise of the Fatimids: The World of the
Mediterranean and the Middle* *East in the Tenth Century CE.* Leiden:
E.J. Brill, 2001.

Browne, Edward G.*A Literary History of Persia,* 4 Vols. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press, 1902-24.

Browne, Edward G.*The Persian Revolution of 1905-1909.* Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press, 1910.

Bulliet, Richard W.*Conversion to Islam in the Medieval Period: An Essay
in Quantitative* *History.* Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
1979.

Cameron, Averil and Lawrence I. Conrad, eds.*The Byzantine and Early
Islamic Near East: Problems in the Literary Source Materials.*
Princeton, NJ: Darwin Press, 1992.

Chamberlain, Michael. *Knowledge and Social Practice in Medieval
Damascus, 1190-1350.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1994.

Chaudhuri, K.N. *Asia before Europe: Economy and Civilisation of the
Indian Ocean from* *the Rise of Islam to 1750.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press, 1990.

Chew, Samuel C.*The Crescent and the Rose: Islam and England during the
Renaissance.* New York: Oxford University Press, 1937.

Choksy, Jamsheed K.*Conflict and Cooperation: Zoroastrian Subalterns and
Muslim Elites in Medieva Iranian Society.* New York: Columbia University
Press, 1997.

Clancy-Smith, Julia A. *Rebel and Saint: Muslim Notables, Populist
Protest, Colonial Encounters (Algeria and Tunisia, 1800-1904).*
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1994.

Commins, David Dean.*Islamic Reform: Politics and Social Change in Late
Ottoman Syria.* New York: Oxford University Press, 1990.

Conrad, Lawrence I., ed.*History of Historiography in Early Islamic
Times: Studies and Perspectives.* Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press, 2003.

Conrad, Lawrence I., ed. *Reflections on Islamic History and
Civilization: The* *Complete Collected Essays of Sir Hamilton Gibb.*
Princeton, NJ: Darwin Press, 2004.

Cook, Michael.*Studies in the Origins of Early Islamic Culture and
Tradition.* Aldershot: Ashgate, 2004.

Cooperson, Michael.*Classical Arabic Biography: Heirs of the Prophet in
the Age of al-Ma’mūn.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2000.

Courbage, Youssef and Phillippe Fargues.*Christians and Jews Under
Islam.* London: I.B. Tauris, 1997.

Crone, Patricia.*God’s Rule: Government and Islam—Six Centuries of
Medieval Islamic* *Political Thought.* New York: Columbira University
Press, 2004.

Crone, Patricia.*Meccan Trade and the Rise of Islam.* Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 1987.

Crone, Patricia.*Slaves on Horses: The Evolution of the Islamic Polity.*
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1980.

Crone, Patricia and Michael Cook.*Hagarism: The Making of the Islamic
World* . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1977.

Crone, Patricia and Martin Hinds.*God’s Caliph: Religious Authority in
the First Centuries* *of Islam.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press, 1986.

Dabashi, Hamid. *Authority in Islam: From the Rise of Muhammad to the
Establishment of* *the  Umayyads.* New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publ.,
1989.

Daly, M.W. and Carl F. Petry, eds.*The Cambridge History of Egypt,* 2
Vols. Cambridge, UK:  Cambridge University Press, 1998.

Dennett, Daniel.*Conversion and the Poll Tax in Early Islam.* Cambridge,
MA: Harvard Press, 1950.

Divine, Donna Robinson.*Politics and Society in Ottoman Palestine: The
Arab Struggle for Survival and Power.* Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner, 1994.

Donner, Fred McGraw.*The Early Islamic Conquests.* Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University  Press, 1981.

Donner, Fred McGraw.*Narratives of Islamic Origins: The Beginnings of
Islamic Historical Writing.* Princeton, NJ: Darwin Press, 1998.

Doumani, Beshara. *Rediscovering Palestine: Merchants and Peasants in
Jabal Nablus, 1700-1900.* Berkeley, CA: University of California Press,
1995.

Eaton, Richard Maxwell.*Essays on Islam and Indian History* . Oxford,
UK: Oxford University Press, 2001.

Eaton, Richard Maxwell.*The Rise of Islam and the Bengal Frontier,
1204-1760* . Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1993.

Echevarria, Ana.*The Fortress of Faith: The Attitude Toward Muslims in
Fifteenth Century Spain.* Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1999.

Ehrenkreutz, Andrew S. and Ann Arbor. *Monetary Change and Economic
History in the* *Medieval Islamic World.* Aldershot: Ashgate/Variorum,
1992.

El-Hibri, Tayeb. *Reinterpreting Islamic Historiography: Hārūn al-Rashīd
and the Narrative of the  ‘Abbāsid Caliphate.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press, 2000.

Ephrat, Daphna. *A Learned Society in Transition: The Sunni ‘Ulamā’ of
Eleventh-Century Baghdad.* Albany, NY: State University of New York
Press, 2000.

Faroqhi, Suraiya.*Subjects of the Sultan: Culture and Daily Life in the
Ottoman Empire.* London: I.B. Tauris, 2000.

Feraoun, Mouloud (Mary Ellen Wolf and Claude Fouillade, trans., and
James D. Le Sueur, ed.).*Journal, 1955-1962: Reflections on the
French-Algerian War.* Lincoln, NE: Bison Books, 2000.

Fleet, Kate.*European and Islamic Trade in the Early Ottoman State: The
Merchants of* *Genoa and Turkey.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press, 1999.

Fletcher, Richard. *The Cross and the Crescent: Christianity and Islam
from Muhammad to* *the Reformation.* New York: Viking Press, 2004.

Fletcher, Richard.*Moorish Spain.* Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press, 1993.

Flood, Finbarr B.*The Great Mosque of Damascus: Studies on the Makings
of an Umayyad Visual Culture.* Leiden: E.J. Brill, 2001.

Fortna, Benjamin C. *Imperial Classroom: Islam, the State, and Education
in the Late* *Ottomanm Empire.* Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press,
2002.

Frank, Allen J. *Muslim Religious Institutions in Imperial Russia: The
Islamic World of* *Novouzensk District and the Kazakh Inner Horde,
1780-1910.* Leiden: E.J. Brill, 2001.

Fuchs, Barbara.*Mimesis and Empire: The New World, Islam, and European
Identities.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2001.

Gabrieli, Francesco.*Arab Historians of the Crusades.* Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press, 1969.

Gershoni, Israel, Hakan Erdem and Ursula Woköck, eds.*Histories of the
Modern Middle* *East:* *New Directions.* Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner,
2002.

Gilmartin, David.*Empire and Islam: Punjab and the Making of Pakistan.*
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1988.

Goitein, S.D.*Studies in Islamic History and Institutions.* Leiden: E.J.
Brill, 1966.

Goodman, Lenn E.*Islamic Humanism.* Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press,
2003.

Goodwin, Jason.*Lords of the Horizons: A History of the Ottoman Empire.*
New York: Henry Holt and Co,. 1999.

Gregorian, Vartan.*The Emergence of Modern Afghanistan: Politics of
Religion and* *Modernization,* *1880-1946.* Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press, 1969.

Haj, Samira.*The Making of Iraq, 1900-1963: Capital, Power, and
Ideology.* Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 1997.

Hambly, Gavin R.G., ed.*Women in the Medieval Islamic World.* New York:
Palgrave Macmillan, 1998.

Hardy, Peter.*The Muslims of British India* . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press, 1972.

Harrison, Christopher.*France and Islam in West Africa, 1860-1960.*
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1988.

Hathaway, Jane.*The Politics of Households in Ottoman Egypt: The Rise of
the Qazdağlis.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2002.

Hawting, G.R.*The First Dynasty of Islam: The Umayyad Caliphate, AD
661-750.* London: Routledge, 2nd ed., 2000.

Hawting, G.R.*The Idea of Idolatry and the Emergence of Islam: From
Polemic to History.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1999.

Haykel, Bernard.*Revival and Reform in Early-Modern Islam: The Legacy of
Muhammad al-Shawkani.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2002.

Hillenbrand, Carole.*The Crusades: Islamic Perspectives.* New York:
Routledge, 2000.

Hinds, Martin, et al., eds.*Studies in Early Islamic History.*
Princeton, NJ: Darwin Press, 1997.

Hitti, Philip K.*History of the Arabs: From Earliest Times to the
Present.* London: Macmillan, 10th ed., 2002.

Hitti, Phillip K., trans. *An Arab-Syrian Gentleman and Warrior in the
Period of the Crusades:* *Memoirs of Usāmah ibn-Munqidh.* New York:
Columbia University Press, 2000.

Hodgson, Marshall G.S.*The Order of the Assassins.* Mouton: The Hague,
1955.

Hodgson, Marshall G.S. (Edmund Burke III, ed.).*Rethinking World
History: Essays on Europe, Islam, and World History.* Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press,1993.

Hodgson, Marshall G.S. *The Venture of Islam: Conscience and History in
a World* *Civilization,* 3 Vols. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press, 1974.

Holt, P.M., et al., eds.*Cambridge History of Islam,* 2 Vols. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press, 1970.

Hourani, Albert H.*A History of the Arab Peoples.* London: Faber and
Faber, 1991.

Hovannisian, Richard G. and Georges Sabagh, eds.*Religion and Culture in
Medieval Islam.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2000.

Humphreys, R. Stephen.*Between Memory and Desire: The Middle East in a
Troubled Age.* Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1999.

Humphreys, R. Stephen.*Islamic History: A Framework for Inquiry.*
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, revised ed., 1991.

Humphreys, R. Stephen.*From Saladin to the Mongols: The Ayyubids of
Damascus, 1193-1260.* Albany, NY: State University of New York Press,
1977.

Ibn Khaldūn (Franz Rosenthal, trans.).*The Muqaddimah: An Introduction
to History,* 3 Vols. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1969.

Inalcik, Halil, et al.*An Economic and Social History of the Ottoman
Empire, 1300-1914,* 2 Vols. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press,
1994.

Irwin, Robert.*The Middle East in the Middle Ages: The Early Mamluk
Sultanate, 1250-1382.* London: Croom Helm, 1986.

Itzkowitz, Norman.*Ottoman Empire and Islamic Tradition.* Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press, 1972.

Jackson, Peter.*The Delhi Sultanate: A Political and Military History.*
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1999.

Jankowski, James.*Nasser’s Egypt, Arab Nationalism, and the United Arab
Republic.* Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner, 2002.

Jaschok, Maria and Shui Jingjun.*The History of Women’s Mosques in
Chinese Islam.* Richmond: Curzon Press, 2000.

Jayyusi, Salma Khadra, ed.*The Legacy of Muslim Spain,* 2 Vols. Leiden:
E.J. Brill, 1994.

Juynboll, G.H.A., ed.*Studies on the First Century of Islamic Society.*
Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press, 1982.

Kaegi, Walter E.*Byzantium and the Early Islamic Conquests.* Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press, 1992.

Karpat, Kemal H.*The Politicization of Islam: Reconstructing Identity,
State, Faith and Community in The late Ottoman State.* Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press, 2001.

Karsh, Efraim and Irani. *Empires of the Sand: The Struggle for Mastery
in the Middle East, 1789- 1923.* Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 1999.

Kasaba, Reşat.*The Ottoman Empire and the World Economy: The Nineteenth
Century.* Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 1988.

Kayali, Hasan.*Arabs and Young Turks: Ottomanism, Arabism, and Islamism
in the* *Ottoman Empire, 1908-1918.* Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press, 1997.

Keddie, Nikki R., ed. *Scholars, Saints and Sufis: Muslim Religious
Institutions in the Middle East since 1500.* Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press, 1972.

Keddie, Nikki R. and Beth Baron, eds.*Women in Middle Eastern History:
Shifting* *Boundaries in* *Sex and Gender.* New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press, 1991.

Keller, Shoshana.*To Moscow, Not Mecca: The Soviet Campaign Against
Islam in Central Asia, 1917-1941.* Westport, CT: Praeger, 2001.

Kennedy, Hugh.*The Armies of the Caliphs: Military and Society in the
Early Islamic State.* London: Routledge, 2001.

Kennedy, Hugh.*The Early Abbasid Caliphate: A Political History.*
London: Croom Helm, 1981.

Kennedy, Hugh, ed.*An Historical Atlas of Islam* . Leiden: Brill
Academic Publ., 2002 ed.

Kennedy, Hugh, ed.*The Historiography of Islamic Egypt (c. 950-1800).*
Leiden: Brill Academic Publ., 2001.

Khalidi, Rashid.*British Policy Towards Syria and Palestine, 1906-1914.*
London: Ithaca Press, 1980.

Khalidi, Tarif.*Arab Historical Thought in the Classical Period.*
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1994.

Khoury, Philip.*Urban Notables and Arab Nationalism: The Politics of
Damascus, 1860-1920.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2003.

Kingston, Paul W.T. *Britain and the Politics of Modernization in the
Middle East, 1945-1958.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press,
2002.

Kister, M. J.*Concepts and Ideas at the Dawn of Islam.* Aldershot:
Ashgate/Variorum, 1997.

Kohlberg, Etan.*A Medieval Muslim Scholar at Work: Ibn Tāwūs and his
Library.* Leiden: E.J.Brill, 1992.

Kostiner, Joseph.*The Making of Saudi Arabia, 1916-1936: From
Chieftaincy to Monarchical* *State.* New York: Oxford University Press,
1993.

Kraemer, Joel L. *Humanism in the Renaissance of Islam: The Cultural
Revival during the Buyid Age.* Leiden: E.J. Brill, 2nd ed., 1992.

Kramer, Martin.*Islam Assembled: The Advent of the Muslim Congresses.*
New York: Columbia University Press, 1986.

Laiou, Angeliki E. and Roy P. Mottahedeh, eds.*The Crusades from the
Perspective of* *Byzantium and the Muslim World.* Washington, DC:
Dumbarton Oaks Center Studies, 2001.

Lambton, Ann K. *Continuity and Change in Medieval Persia: Aspects of
Administrative,* *Economic and  Social History, 11th-14th Century.*
London: I.B. Tauris, 1988.

Lane-Pool, Stanley.*Saladin: All-Powerful Sultan and the Uniter of
Islam.* New York: Cooper Square Press, 2002.

Lapidus, Ira M.*A History of Islamic Societies.* Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press,  2nd ed., 2002.

Lapidus, Ira M.*Muslim Cities in the Later Middle Ages.* Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 1967.

Laremont, Ricardo Rene.*Islam and the Politics of Resistance in Algeria,
1783-1992.* Lawrenceville, NJ: Africa World Press, 1999.

Lassner, Jacob.*Islamic Revolution and Historical Memory: An Inquiry
into the Art of* *Abbasid Apologetics.* New Haven, CT: American Oriental
Society, 1986.

Lassner, Jacob.*The Shaping of Abbasid Rule.* Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 1980.

Lazarus-Yafeh, Hava, et al., eds.*The Majlis: Interreligious Encounters
in Medieval Islam.*  Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1999.

Lecker, Michael.*Jews and Arabs in Pre- and Early Islamic Arabia.*
Aldershot: Ashgate/Variorum, 1998.

Lelyveld, David.*Aligarh’s First Generation: Muslim Solidarity in
British India.* Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1978.

Lesch, Ann Mosely.*Arab Politics in Palestine, 1917-1937: The
Frustration of a Nationalist  Movement.* Ithaca, NY: Cornell University
Press, 1979.

Lewis, Bernard.*The Assassins: A Radical Sect in Islam.* London:
Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1967.

Lewis, Bernard.*Islam in History: Ideas, People, and Events in the
Middle East.* La Salle, IL: Open Court, revised ed., 2001.

Lewis, Bernard.*Istanbul and the Civilization of the Ottoman Empire.*
Norman, OK: University of  Oklahoma Press, 1989.

Lewis, Bernard.*The Jews of Islam* . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press, 1987.

Lewis, Bernard.*The Muslim Discovery of Europe.* New York: W.W. Norton &
Co., 1985 (reissue edition).

Lewis, Bernard.*Race and Slavery in the Middle East: An Historical
Inquiry.* Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1990.

Lewis, Bernard, ed.*Islam from the Prophet Muhammad to the Capture of
Constantinople: Politics and  War.* Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press,
1987.

Louis, William Roger. *The British Empire in the Middle East, 1945-1951:
Arab Nationalism,* *the United States, and Postwar Imperialism.* Oxford,
UK: Oxford University Press, 1984.

Lowick, Nicholas.*Islamic Coins and Trade in the Medieval World.*
Aldershot: Ashgate/Variorum, 1990.

Lyons, Malcolm Cameron and David E.P. Jackson.*Saladin: The Politics of
the Holy War.*  Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1984.

Mack, Rosamond E.*Bazaar to Piazza: Islamic Trade and Italian Art,
1300-1600* . Berkeley, CA:University of California Press, 2001.

Madelung, Wilferd.*Religious and Ethnic Movements in Medieval Islam.*
Aldershot: Ashgate/Variorum, 1992.

Madelung, Wilferd.*Religious Schools and Sects in Medieval Islam.*
London: Variorum, 1985.

Madelung, Wiferd.*Religious Trends in Early Islamic Iran.* Albany, NY:
State University of New York Press, 1988.

Madelung, Wilferd.*The Succession to Muhammad: A Study of the Early
Caliphate.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1997.

Madelung, Wilferd and Paul E. Walker, trans. and eds.*The Advent of the
Fatimids: A Contemporary Shi‘i Witness.* London: I.B. Tauris, 2000.

Makdisi, George.*The Rise of Humanism in Classical Islam and the
Christian West.* Edinburgh:Edinburgh University Press, 1989.

Malti-Douglas, Fedwa.*Power, Marginality, and the Body in Medieval
Islam* . Aldershot: Ashgate/Varorum, 2001.

Mandel, Neville J.*The Arabs and Zionism before World War I.* Berkeley,
CA: University of California Press, 1976.

Marcus, Abraham.*The Middle East on the Eve of Modernity: Aleppo in the
Eighteenth* *Century.* New York: Columbia University Press, 1989.

Marsot, Afaf Lutfi al-Sayyid.*Egypt in the Reign of Muhammad Ali.*
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1984.

Marsot, Afaf Lutfi al-Sayyid.*A Short History of Modern Egypt.*
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1985.

Massell, Gregory J.*The Surrogate Proletariat: Moslem Women and
Revolutionary Strategies in Soviet Central Asia, 1919-1929.* Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press, 1974.

Masters, Bruce. *The Origins of Western Economic Dominance in the Middle
East:* *Mercantilism and the Islamic Economy in Aleppo, 1600-1750.*
Washington Square, NY: New York University Press, 1988.

Matar, Nabil.*Islam in Britain, 1558-1685.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press, 1998.

Mattar, Phillip.*The Mufti of Jerusalem.* New York: Columbia University
Press, 1992.

Mazzaoui, Michel.*The Origin of the Safawids: Shī‘ism, Sūfism, and the
Gulāt.* Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner, 1972.

McChesney, R. D.*Waqf in Central Asia: Four Hundred Years in the History
of a Muslim* *Shrine, 1480-1889.* Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press, 1991.

Meri, Josef W.*The Cult of Saints among Muslims and Jews in Medieval
Syria* . Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2003.

Meriwether, Margaret L. and Judith E. Tucker, eds.*A Social History of
Women and Gender* *in the Modern Middle East.* Boulder, CO: Westview
Press, 1999.

Mernissi, Fatima.*The Forgotten Queens of Islam.* Minneapolis, MN:
University of Minnesota Press, 1993.

Morris, Benny.*The Birth of the Palestinian Refugee Problem, 1947-1949.*
New York: Cambridge University Press, 1987.

Mottahedeh, Roy P.*Loyalty and Leadership in an Early Islamic Society.*
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1980.

Nashat, Guity and Judith E. Tucker.*Women in the Middle East and North
Africa: Restoring Women to History.* Bloomington, IN: Indiana University
Press, 1999.

Nicolle, David. *Warriors and their Weapons around the Time of the
Crusades: Relationships between Byzantium, the West, and the Islamic
World.* Aldershot: Ashgate/Variorum, 2003.

Noonan, Thomas S. *The Islamic World, Russia, and the Vikings, 750-900:
The Numismatic Evidence.* Aldershot: Ashgate/Variorum, 1998.

Ouyang, Wen-Chin.*Literary Criticism in Medieval Arabic-Islamic Culture:
The Making of a* *Tradition.* Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press,
1997.

Owen, E. Roger.*The Middle East in the World Economy, 1800-1914.*
London: I.B. Tauris, revised ed., 1993.

Özcan, Azmi.*Pan-Islamism: Indian Muslims, the Ottomans & Britain
(1877-1924).* Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1997.

Peirce, Lelie P.*The Imperial Harem: Women and Sovereignty in the
Ottoman Empire.* Oxford, UK:Oxford University Press, 1993.

Perry, Glenn E.*The Middle East: Fourteen Islamic Centuries.* Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 3rd ed., 1996.

Peters, F.E.*Allah’s Commonwealth: A History of Islam in the Near East,*
*600-1100 AD.* New York: Simon and Schuster, 1972.

Peters, F.E., ed.*The Arabs and Arabia on the Eve of Islam.* Aldershot:
Ashgate, 1999.

Petry, Carl F., ed.*The Cambridge History of Egypt: Vol. 1, Islamic
Egypt, 640-1517.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1998.

Petry, Carl.*The Civilian Elite of Cairo in the Later Middle Ages.*
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1981.

Pipes, Daniel.*Slave Soldiers and Islam: The Genesis of a Military
System.* New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1981.

Quataert, Donald.*The Ottoman Empire, 1700-1922.* Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University  Press, 2000.

Rahman, Fazlur.*Islam and Modernity: Transformation of an Intellectual
Tradition.* Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1984.

al-Rasheed, Madawi.*A History of Saudi Arabia.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press, 2002.

Repp, R.C.*The Mufti of Istanbul: A Study in the Development of the
Ottoman Learned Hierarchy.* London: Ithaca Press, 1986.

Richards, John F.*The Mughal Empire.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press, 1993.

Ricklefs, M.C.*A History of Modern Indonesia since c. 1200.* Stanford,
CA: Stanford University Press, 3rd ed., 2002.

Robinson, Chase F.*Empires and Elites after the Muslim Conquest: The
Transformation of* *Northern Mesopotamia.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press, 2000.

Robinson, Chase F.*Islamic Historiography.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press, 2003.

Robinson, Chase F., ed.*A Medieval Islamic City Reconsidered: An
Interdisciplinary Approach* *to Smarra.* Oxford, UK: Oxford University
Press, 2002.

Robinson, David.*Muslim Societies in African History.* Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press, 2004.

Robinson, David.*Paths of Accommodation: Muslim Societies and French
Colonial* *Authorities in Senegal and Mauritania, 1890-1920.* Athens,
OH: Ohio University Press, 2000.

Robinson, Francis. *Separatism Among Indian Muslims: The Politics of the
United* *Provinces’ Muslims, 1860-1923.* Oxford, UK: Oxford University
Press, 1997.

Rogan, Eugene L. *Frontiers of the State in the Late Ottoman Empire:
Transjordan,* *1850-1921.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press,
1999.

Rogan, Eugene L. and Avi Shlaim, eds. *The War for Palestine: Rewriting
the History of* *1948.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2001.

Rosenthal, Franz.*Muslim Intellectual and Social History: A Collection
of Essays.* Aldershot: Ashgate/Variorum, 1990.

Rosenthal, Franz, trans. and ed.*The Classical Heritage in Islam.*
Berkeley, CA: University of  California Press, 1975.

Sabra, Adam.*Poverty and Charity in Medieval Islam: Mamluk Egypt,
1250-1517.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2000.

Salibi, Kamal.*A House of Many Mansions: The History of Lebanon
Reconsidered.* Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1988.

Sanders, Paula.*Ritual, Politics and the City in Fatimid Cairo.* Albany,
NY: State University of New York Press, 1994.

Saunders, J.J.*A History of Medieval Islam.* New York: Routledge, 1990.

Savage, Elizabeth.*A Gateway to Hell, a Gateway to Paradise: The North
African Response* *to the Arab Conquest.* Princeton, NJ: Darwin Press,
1997.

Searing, James F. *“God Alone is King”: Islam and Emancipation in
Senegal—The Wolof Kingdoms Of Kajoor and Bawol, 1859-1914.* Portsmouth,
NH: Heinemann, 2002.

Sertima, Ivan Van, ed.*Golden Age of the Moor.* Piscataway, NJ:
Transaction Publ., 1991.

Shaban, M.A.*Islamic History: A New Interpretation, Vol. 1: A.D. 600-750
(A.H. 132).* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1971.

Shaban, M.A.*Islamic History: A New Interpretation, Vol. 2: A.D.
750-1075 (A.H.* *132-448).* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press,
1978.

Shaked, Shaul.*From Zoroastrian Iran to Islam.* Aldershot:
Ashgate/Variorum, 1995.

Shaikh, Farzana.*Community and Consensus in Islam: Muslim Representation
in Colonial India, 1860-1947.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press, 1989.

Shatzmiller, Maya, ed.*Crusaders and Muslims in Twelfth-Century Syria.*
Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1993.

Shatzmiller, Maya*. Labour in the Medieval Islamic World.* Leiden: E.J.
Brill, 1997.

Shaw, Stanford J.*History of the Ottoman Empire and Modern Turkey, Vol.
1: Empire of* *the Gazis—The Rise and Decline of the Ottoman Empire,
1280-1808.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1977.

Shoshan, Boaz.*Popular Culture in Medieval Cairo.* Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press, 1993.

Sibai, Mohamed M.*Mosque Libraries: An Historical Study.* London:
Mansell, 1987.

Siddiq, Mohammed.*The Epigraphy of Muslim Bengal: Religious, Cultural
and Historical* *Aspects of Arabic and Persian Inscriptions of West
Bengal and Bangladesh, 1205-1707.* New York: Routledge, 2003.

Smith, Wilfred Cantwell.*Islam in Modern History.* Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 1957.

Stora, Benjamin.*Algeria, 1830-2000: A Short History.* Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press, 2001.

Al-Tabarī (various trans.).*The History of al-Tabari,* 40 Vols. Albany,
NY: State University of New York Press, 1987-1999.

Tabbaa, Yasser.*Constructions of Power and Piety in Medieval Aleppo.*
University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University Press, 1997.

Taylor, Christopher Schurman.*In the Vicinity of the Righteous: Ziyara
and the Veneration* *of Muslim Saints in Late Medieval Egypt.* Leiden:
E.J. Brill, 1998.

Tessler, Mark.*A History of the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict.*
Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1994.

Tolan, John V.*Saracens: Islam in the Medieval European Imagination.*
New York: Columbia University Press, 2002.

Tripp, Charles.*A History of Iraq.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press, 2nd ed., 2002.

Tritton, Arthur Stanley.*The Caliphs and their Non-Muslim Subjects: A
Critical Study of the Covenant ‘Umar.* London: Frank Cass, 1970.

Tucker, Judith E.*Women in Nineteenth-Century Egypt.* Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press, 2002.

Turner, Colin.*Islam without Allah?  The Rise of Religious Externalism
in Safavid Iran.* Richmond, Surrey: Curzon Press, 2001.

Udovitch, Abraham L.*Partnership and Profit in Medieval Islam.*
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1970.

Udovitch, Abraham L., ed.*The Islamic Middle East, 700-1900: Studies in
Economic and* *Social History.* Princeton, NJ: Darwin Press, 1981.

Van Leeuwen, Richard.*Waqfs and Urban Structures: The Case of Ottoman
Damascus.* Leiden:           E.J. Brill, 1999.

Vatikiotis, P.J.*The History of Modern Egypt: From Muhammad Ali to
Mubarak.* Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 4th ed., 1991.

Voll, John O.*Islam: Continuity and Change in the Modern World.*
Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press, 2nd ed., 1994.

von Grunebaum, G.E. (Katherine Watson, trans.).*Classical Islam: A
History, 600-1258.* London: George Allen & Unwin, 1970.

von Grunebaum, G. E.*Mediaeval Islam: A Study in Cultural Orientation.*
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2nd ed., 1953.

Walker, Paul E.*Exploring an Islamic Empire: Fatimid History and Its
Sources.* London: I.B.Tauris, 2002.

Wasserstrom, Steven M.*Between Muslim and Jew: The Problem of Symbiosis
under Early* *Islam.* Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1995.

Watt, William Montgomery.*Early Islam: Collected Articles.* Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press, 1991.

Watt, William Montgomery.*The Influence of Islam on Medieval Europe.*
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1972.

Watt, William Montgomery.*The Majesty that was Islam: The Islamic World,
661-1100.* London: Sidgwick & Jackson, 1974.

Wheatley, Paul.*The Places Where Men Pray Together: Cities in Islamic
Lands, Seventh* *Through the* *Tenth Centuries.* Chicago, IL: University
of Chicago Press, 2001.

Wilson, Mary C.*King Abdullah, Britain, and the Making of Jordan.*
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1987.

Wink, André.*Al-Hind: The Making of the Indo-Islamic World, Vol.1--Early
Medieval India and the Expansion of Islam, 7th-11th Centuries.* Amherst,
NY: Prometheus Books, 2nd ed., 2002.

Woods, John E.*The Aqquyunlu: Clan, Confederation, and Empire.* Salt
Lake City, UT: University of Utah Press, 1999, revised ed.

Yemelianova, Galina M.*Russia and Islam: A Historical Survey* . New
York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2002.

Zaman, Muhammad Qasim.*Religion and Politics under the Early ‘Abbāsids:
The* *Emergence of the Proto-Sunnī Elite.* Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1997.


