10
==

Chapter Ten: Narrations from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.)
=======================================================

<p dir="rtl">
ابْنُ الْمُتَوَكِّلِ عَنْ عَلِيٍّ عَنْ أَبِيهِ عَنْ عَبْدِ اللَّهِ بْنِ
حَمَّادٍ وَ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ سِنَانٍ مَعاً عَنْ أَبِي الْجَارُودِ عَنْ
أَبِي جَعْفَرٍ ع قَالَ قَالَ لِي يَا أَبَا الْجَارُودِ إِذَا دَارَ
الْفَلَكُ وَ قَالَ النَّاسُ مَاتَ الْقَائِمُ أَوْ هَلَكَ بِأَيِّ وَادٍ
سَلَكَ وَ قَالَ الطَّالِبُ أَنَّى يَكُونُ ذَلِكَ وَ قَدْ بُلِيَتْ
عِظَامُهُ فَعِنْدَ ذَلِكَ فَارْجُوهُ فَإِذَا سَمِعْتُمْ بِهِ فَأْتُوهُ
وَ لَوْ حَبْواً عَلَى الثَّلْجِ
</p>

**1-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq (r.a.) has narrated from Ibne
Mutawakkil from Ali from his father from Abdullah bin Hammad and
Muhammad bin Sinan together from Abul Jarud that he said:

Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) said to me “O Abu Jarud, when ages pass and
people say the Qaim has died or perished or gone to some valley, and the
seeker says,*When is this going to happen while his bones have decayed?*
At that time expect him. And when you hear from him, come to him even if
you have to crawl on ice.”

**2-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Ibne Walid from Saffar
from Muhammad bin Isa and Ibne Abil Khattab and Haitham Nahdi together
from Ibne Mahbub from Ibne Raab from Abu Hamza Thumali that he said:

I heard Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) say, “The nearest of the people to
Allah, the Exalted, and their most knowledgeable and their most
compassionate to the populace is Muhammad and the Imams, bliss of Allah
be for them all. Enter where they enter and separate whoever they
separate from. I mean Husain and his progeny by that. Righteousness is
in them and they are the successors and from them are the Imams.

Wherever you see them, follow them. If a time comes one day that you do
not see anyone of them, seek help from Allah and contemplate on the
tradition you are on and follow it, and love whom you love, and disdain
whom you disdain. How soon is the relief coming to you!”

**3-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Abdul Wahid bin Muhammad
from Abu Amr Laithi from Muhammad bin Masud from Jibraeel bin Ahmad from
Musa bin Ja’far bin Wahab Baghdadi and Yaqub Bin Yazid from Sulaiman bin
Hasan from Saad bin Abi Khalaf from Maruf bin Kharbudh that he said:

I said to Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.): “Tell me about yourselves.” He
said: “We are the like of stars. When star sets, another star of peace
and security, harmony and tranquility, leisure and openings rises. So
until the Children of Abdul Muttalib are equal and distinction remains
amongst them, Allah, the Exalted, will manifest your Patron. So praise
Allah, the Exalted. And He will give him a choice between the easy and
the difficult.” I asked, “May I be your ransom, which will he choose?”
He sat, “He will choose the difficult over the easy.”

The author says: Sa’b wa al-Dhahul (Humble and intractable) are
qualities of riding beasts.

**4-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated through the same chains of
narrators from Muhammad bin Masud from Nasr bin Sabbah from Ja’far bin
Sahal from Abu Abdullah brother of Abdullah Kabuli from Qabusi from
Nadhr bin Sindi from Khalil bin Amr from Ali bin Husain Fazari from
Ibrahim bin Atiyya from Umme Hani Thaqafiyya that she says:

I came in a morning to my master Muhammad Ibne Ali Imam Baqir (a.s.) and
said to him, “My master, a verse from the Book of Allah, the Exalted,
has struck my heart and has troubled me and taken away my nights’
sleep.”

He said: “Ask O Umme Hani.” I said: “The saying of Allah, the Exalted:

<p dir="rtl">
فَلَا أُقْسِمُ بِالْخُنَّسِ الْجَوَارِ الْكُنَّسِ
</p>

***“But nay! I swear by the stars, that run their course (and) hide
themselves…” (Surah Takwir 81:15-16)***

He said: “Yes, the subject you asked me about, O Umme Hani, is someone
who will be born in the last period of time and he is the Mahdi and from
this House. There will be a perplexity and occultation about him in
which nations will go astray and nations will remain on guidance.
Blessed be you if you see his time! Blessed be anyone who sees his
time!”

**5-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Muzaffar Alawi from Ibne
Ayyashi from his father from Abul Qasim from Ahmad Dahan from Qasim bin
Hamza from Ibne Abu Umair from Abu Ismail Sarraj from Khaithama Jofi
from Abu Ayyub Makhzumi that he said:

Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) mentioned the conduct of the Rightly Guided
Caliphs and when he reached their last one he said: “The Twelfth is the
one behind whom Isa Ibne Maryam (a.s.) will pray. You must uphold his
conduct and the Noble Quran.”

**6-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Salama bin Muhammad
from Ahmad bin Dawood from Ahmad bin Hasan from Imran bin Hajjaj from
Ibne Abi Najran from Ibne Abu Umair from Muhammad bin Ishaq from Usaid
bin Thalaba from Umme Hani that she says:

I asked Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.), “What is the meaning of Allah’s
word,*Nay. I swear by the Star?”* He said: “O Umme Hani, an Imam who on
the year two hundred and sixty hides himself until his whereabouts is
not known to the people. Then he will appear like a blazing meteor in a
dark night. If you should see that time, your heart will find solace.”

**7-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** Kulaini has narrated from Ali from his
father from Hannan bin Sudair from Maruf bin Kharbudh that he said: Imam
Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) said:

“Your stars are like the stars of the heavens. Whenever a star sets,
another star rises. So when you point with your fingers and make
gestures with your eyebrows, Allah will hide your stars from you. Bani
Hashim will be equal without any distinction amongst them from one
another. Then your star will rise, so praise your Lord.”

**8-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Hamam
through his chains from Abdullah Ibne Ata that he said:

I asked Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.), “Your Shia are many in Iraq and
there is no one, by Allah, in your household like you. So why do not you
uprise?” He said: “O Abdullah Ibne Ata’, you have began lending your
ears to the fools. No, by Allah, I am not your Awaited Patron.” I asked
him, “Then who is our Awaited Patron?” He said: “Look who does Allah
hide his birth from the people, he is your Awaited Patron. There is no
one of us who is pointed at with fingers or hinted by tongues except
that he dies because of being under wrath or because of other causes.”

**9-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Hamam from
Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Malik from Ibad bin Yaqub from Yahya bin Yala
from Abu Maryam Ansari from Abdullah Ibne Ata that he said:

I said to Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.), “Tell me about the Qaim.” He said:
“By Allah, he is neither me, nor the one towards whom you stretch your
necks. His birth will not be known.” “What is his conduct according to?”
I asked. He said: “He will act according to what the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.) has acted, invalidating the past and looking forward.”

**10-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Ahmad from
Abdullah bin Musa from Ibne Abil Khattab from Muhammad bin Sinan from
Abul Jarud that he said:

I heard Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) say, “Times shall come and go until
Allah sends for this enterprise someone you do not know that he has been
created.”

**11-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Hamam
from Fazari from Ibne Abil Khattab from Himyari from Ibne Isa together
from Muhammad bin Sinan from Abul Jarud that Abu Ja’far (a.s.) said:

“You will continue to stretch your necks to a man of ours, saying*He is
the one,* and Allah takes him away; until Allah sends a man for this
affair whom you do not know if he is born or not, has he been created or
not.”

**12-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Husain from
Muhammad Attar from Muhammad bin Hasan Raazi from Muhammad bin Ali Kufi
from Muhammad bin Sinan from Yahya bin Muthanna from Ibne Bukair from
Hakam from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said:

“As if I see you, you climb up and do not find anyone and return and do
not find anyone.”

**13-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** Shaykh Mufeed has narrated from Ali bin
Husain from Muhammad bin Yahya from Muhammad bin Hasan from Muhammad bin
Ali from Ibrahim bin Muhammad from Muhammad bin Isa from Abdur Razzaq
from Muhammad bin Sinan from Fudhail Rassan from Abu Hamzah Thumali that
he said:

I was with Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) one day. When everyone had
dispersed, he said to me, “O Abu Hamzah, one of the destined events that
must happen is the rise of our Qaim. Whoever doubts in what I say, will
meet Allah disbelieving in Him.” Then he said: “My parents be the ransom
of the one who is named by my name and bears my patronymic, the seventh
after me. My father be the ransom of the one who will fill the earth
with equity and justice, as it will be replete with oppression and
injustice.

O Abu Hamzah, whoever sees him and submits to him through the submission
for Muhammad and Ali, I give him a solemn promise of Paradise. And
whoever does not submit,*verily Allah has made Paradise forbidden for
him and his abode is the Fire and bad a place it is for the oppressors.*

*Then he said: The following verse of Quran clarifies our stand:*

<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّ عِدَّةَ الشُّهُورِ عِندَ اللّهِ اثْنَا عَشَرَ شَهْرًا فِي كِتَابِ
اللّهِ
</p>

***“Surely the number of months with Allah is twelve months in Allah’s
ordinance…” (Surah Taubah 9:36)***

**14-** ***Al-Kafi*** **:** It is narrated from some persons from Ibne
Isa from Ali bin Hakam from Zaid Abul Hasan from Hakam bin Abu Naeem
that he said:

I came to Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) when he was in Medina. I said to
him, “I have taken a vow between the*Rukn* and the*Maqam* that when I
meet you, I will not go away from Medina until I know whether you are
the Qaim of Aale Muhammad (a.s.) or not.” He did not answer me anything.
I stayed for thirty days. Then he met me on a road and said: “O Hakam,
you are still here?” I said: “I told you about the vow I have taken by
Allah and you did not order me to do anything, nor did you forbid me
from anything. And you did not give me an answer.” He said: “Come to me
in the morning at my house.” I went to him in the morning. He said: “Ask
what you need.” I said: “I have vowed with Allah of alms and fasting and
charity between the*Rukn* and the*Maqam,* that if I meet you I will not
exit Medina until I know whether you are the Qaim (Establisher) of Aale
Muhammad (a.s.). If you are, I will stay and be at your guard; and if
you are not, I would go in the lands in search of livelihood.” He said:
“O Hakam, we are all Establishers of the Order of Allah.” I said: “Then
are you the Mahdi (the Guide)’?” He said: “We all guide to Allah.” “Are
you the one with the sword’?” “Each one of us is with the sword and heir
of the sword.” “Then are you the one who will kill the enemies of God,
and is it through you that the friends of Allah will be victorious, and
is it through you that the religion of Allah will manifest’?” “O Hakam,”
he said: “how can I be that and I have reached forty-five years of age.
The awaited Patron of that Enterprise is closer to breastfeeding than me
and lighter on the back of a courser.”


