11
==

Chapter Eleven: Narrations of Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
======================================================

<p dir="rtl">
أَبِي عَنِ الْحِمْيَرِيِّ عَنْ أَحْمَدَ بْنِ هِلَالٍ عَنِ ابْنِ أَبِي
نَجْرَانَ عَنْ فَضَالَةَ عَنْ سَدِيرٍ قَالَ سَمِعْتُ أَبَا عَبْدِ
اللَّهِ ع يَقُولُ إِنَّ فِي الْقَائِمِ سُنَّةً مِنْ يُوسُفَ قُلْتُ
كَأَنَّكَ تَذْكُرُ حَيْرَةً أَوْ غَيْبَةً قَالَ لِي وَ مَا تُنْكِرُ مِنْ
هَذَا هَذِهِ الْأُمَّةُ أَشْبَاهُ الْخَنَازِيرِ إِنَّ إِخْوَةَ يُوسُفَ
كَانُوا أَسْبَاطاً أَوْلَادَ أَنْبِيَاءَ تَاجَرُوا يُوسُفَ وَ بَايَعُوهُ
وَ خَاطَبُوهُ وَ هُمْ إِخْوَتُهُ وَ هُوَ أَخُوهُمْ فَلَمْ يَعْرِفُوهُ
حَتَّى قَالَ لَهُمْ يُوسُفُ ع أَنَا يُوسُفُ فَمَا تُنْكِرُ هَذِهِ
الْأُمَّةُ الْمَلْعُونَةُ أَنْ يَكُونَ اللَّهُ عَزَّ وَ جَلَّ فِي وَقْتٍ
مِنَ الْأَوْقَاتِ يُرِيدُ أَنْ يَسْتُرَ حُجَّتَهُ لَقَدْ كَانَ يُوسُفُ
إِلَيْهِ مُلْكُ مِصْرَ وَ كَانَ بَيْنَهُ وَ بَيْنَ وَالِدِهِ مَسِيرَةُ
ثَمَانِيَةَ عَشَرَ يَوْماً فَلَوْ أَرَادَ اللَّهُ عَزَّ وَ جَلَّ أَنْ
يُعَرِّفَ مَكَانَهُ لَقَدَرَ عَلَى ذَلِكَ وَ اللَّهِ لَقَدْ سَارَ
يَعْقُوبُ وَ وُلْدُهُ عِنْدَ الْبِشَارَةِ تِسْعَةَ أَيَّامٍ مِنْ
بَدْوِهِمْ إِلَى مِصْرَ وَ مَا تُنْكِرُ هَذِهِ الْأُمَّةُ أَنْ يَكُونَ
اللَّهُ يَفْعَلُ بِحُجَّتِهِ مَا فَعَلَ بِيُوسُفَ أَنْ يَكُونَ يَسِيرُ
فِي أَسْوَاقِهِمْ وَ يَطَأُ بُسُطَهُمْ وَ هُمْ لَا يَعْرِفُونَهُ حَتَّى
يَأْذَنَ اللَّهُ عَزَّ وَ جَلَّ أَنْ يُعَرِّفَهُمْ نَفْسَهُ كَمَا أَذِنَ
لِيُوسُفَ حِينَ قَالَ هَلْ عَلِمْتُمْ ما فَعَلْتُمْ بِيُوسُفَ وَ أَخِيهِ
إِذْ أَنْتُمْ جاهِلُونَ قالُوا أَ إِنَّكَ لَأَنْتَ يُوسُفُ قالَ أَنَا
يُوسُفُ وَ هذا أَخِي‏
</p>

**1-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq (r.a.) in Ikmaaluddin and Ilalush
Sharai has narrated from his father from Himyari from Ahmad bin Hilal
from Ibne Abu Najran from Faddala from Sudair that he said:

I heard Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) say, “There is a sign from Yusuf in the
Qaim.” I said: “It seems as you are mentioning the perplexity or the
occultation.” He said: “What of this does this nation deny? They are the
likes of swine, whereas brothers of Yusuf were heirs and children of
apostles, yet they traded and sold Yusuf. They addressed him, being his
brothers and he being their brother, yet did not recognize him; so Yusuf
said to them,*I am Yusuf.*

So what is this accursed nation denying that Allah, the Exalted, in a
certain time from times may desire to hide his Hujjah? Yusuf had the
kingdom of Egypt and there was between him and his father the journey of
eighteen days. If Allah, the Exalted, had desired to let his father know
his place, He could have done that.

By Allah, Yaqub and his sons journeyed, when they were given the glad
tidings, for nine days from the beginning of their journey until Egypt.
What is this Ummah denying that God would do to His Hujjah what He did
to Yusuf, that he would walk in their markets and step on their grounds
while they do not recognize him until Allah, the Exalted, identifies him
to them, as He permitted Yusuf when he said:

قَالَ هَلْ عَلِمْتُم مَّا فَعَلْتُم بِيُوسُفَ وَأَخِيهِ إِذْ أَنتُمْ
جَاهِلُونَ {89} قَالُواْ أَإِنَّكَ لَأَنتَ يُوسُفُ قَالَ أَنَاْ يُوسُفُ
وَهَـذَا أَخِي

***“He said: Do you know how you treated Yusuf and his brother when you
were ignorant? They said: Are you indeed Yusuf? He said: I am Yusuf and
this is my brother…” (Surah Yusuf 12:89-90)***

**2-** ***Ilalush Sharai:*** Shaykh Saduq has narrated from Muzaffar
Alawi from Ibne Ayyashi and Haider bin Muhammad Samarqandi together from
Ayyashi from Jibraeel bin Ahmad from Musa bin Ja’far Baghdadi from Hasan
bin Muhammad Sairafi from Hannan bin Sudair from his father, Sudair that
Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said:

“Our Qaim has an occultation the duration of which is lengthy.” I said:
“Why is that so, O son of Allah’s Messenger?” He said: “Allah, the
Exalted, disdains to have the traditions of the occultations of apostles
not proceed in him. O Sudair, he must complete the duration of their
occultations. Allah, the Exalted, says:***You shall surely enter a stage
after another stage.*** It means you will tread on the traditions of the
nations before you.”

**3-** ***Amali Saduq:*** It is narrated from Ibne Mutawakkil from Ali
from his father from Ibne Abi Umair that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
recited the following about Imam Zamana (a.s.):

*For every nation is a rule which they await*

Our governance in the last period of time will come

**4-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Ibne Idris from his father
from Ayyub bin Nuh from Muhammad bin Sinan from Safwan bin Mahran from
Imam Ja’far Sadiq that he said:

“Someone who professes faith in all Imams yet denies the Mahdi is like
one who professes faith in all apostles yet denies the Prophethood of
Muhammad (a.s.).” He was asked, “O son of Allah’s Messenger (a.s.) which
one of your sons will the Mahdi be from?” He said: “He is the fifth from
the sons of the seventh. His person will be invisible to you and you
will be prohibited from mentioning his name.”

In that book the same report is quoted through another chain also.

**5-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq (a.r.) has narrated from his
father and Ibne Walid together from Saad from Hasan bin Ali Zaituni from
Muhammad bin Ahmad bin Abu Qatadah from Ahmad bin Hilal from Umayyah bin
Ali from Abu Haitham Ibne Abu Hayya from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that
he said:

“When three names, Muhammad, Ali and Hasan gather in consecution, the
fourth one will be the Qaim (a.s.).”

**6-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is also narrated from Taliqani from
Muhammad bin Hamam from Ahmad bin Mabandad from Ahmad bin Hilal from
Umayyah bin Ali Qaisi from Abi Haitham Tamimi from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) that he said:

“When three names, Muhammad, Ali and Hasan gather in consecution, the
fourth one will be their Qaim (a.s.).”

**7-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq has narrated from Daqqaq from
Asadi from Nakhai from Naufili from Mufaddal Ibne Umar that:

I came to Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) and said: “My master, I wish that you
confide in us about the heir after you.” He said: “O Mufaddal, the Imam
after me is my son Musa and the Awaited successor is M-H-M-D Ibne Hasan
Ibne Ali Ibne Muhammad Ibne Ali Ibne Musa.”

**8-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Abdullah bin Ahmad
from his father from Muhammad bin Khalaf from Muhammad bin Sinan and Abu
Ali Raazi together from Ibrahim Karkhi that:

I came to Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) and I was sitting there when Imam
Musa Ibne Ja’far (a.s.), who was then a boy, entered. I stood before him
and kissed him and sat down. Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said: “O Ibrahim,
behold, he is your Patron after me. Behold, a nation will perish in him
and the rest will be blessed. May Allah curse his murderer and increase
the chastisement on his soul.

Behold, Allah will bring forth from my seed the best of the people of
the earth in his time, called by the name of his grandfather, the heir
of his knowledge and rules and excellences, the treasure trove of
Imamate and the summit of wisdom. The tyrant from the sons of so-and-so
will kill him out of jealously after novel wonders. However,*Allah
accomplishes His purpose, even though the polytheists may disdain so.*

Allah will bring forth from his seed the completion of the twelve guides
that Allah has distinguished them by His dignity and has settled them in
the abode of His sanctity. A man professing faith in the Twelfth of them
is the like of a swordsman in front of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.)
defending him.”

The narrator says: A man from the allies of the Umayyads entered and the
conversation was disrupted. I went to Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) eleven
times hoping that he would complete the discourse, but it was not to
happen. When it was the eve of the next year, I came to him as he was
sitting. He said: “O Ibrahim, the Reliever of the pains of the Shia will
come after severe hardships, long trials and anxiety and fear. Bliss for
the one who will see that time. This is sufficient for you, O Ibrahim.”
I returned with nothing more gratifying to my heart and more pleasing to
my soul than this.

**9-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Ibne Idris from his father
from Muhammad bin Husain bin Zaid from Hasan bin Musa from Ali bin Samaa
from Ali bin Hasan bin Rabat from his father from Mufaddal that:

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said: “Allah, the High, created fourteen lights
fourteen thousand years before He created the creation. They are our
spirits.” He was asked, “O son of Allah’s Messenger (a.s.) who are the
fourteen?” He said: “Muhammad, Ali, Fatima, Hasan, Husain and the Imams
from the progeny of Husain (a.s.). Their last is the Qaim who will rise
after his occultation and will kill Dajjal and will clean the earth from
every oppression and injustice.”

**10-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Hamadani from Ibne Uqdah
from Abu Abdullah Asimi from Husain Ibne Qasim bin Ayyub from Hasan bin
Muhammad bin Samaa from Thabit bin Sabbah from Abu Basir that he said:

I heard Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) say, “Ours are the Twelve Guides. Six
have gone and six are remaining. Allah will place in the Sixth that
which He loves.”

**11-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Daqqaq from Asadi from
Sahal from Ibne Mahbub from Abdul Aziz Abadi from Ibne Abi Yafur that he
said:

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said: “A person who professes faith in the Imams, my
forefathers and my sons, yet denies the Mahdi from my sons, is like one
who professes faith in all apostles, peace be with them, yet denies
Muhammad (a.s.) his apostleship.” I said: “My master, and who is the
Mahdi from your progeny?” He said: “The fifth from the sons of the
seventh. His person will hide from you and it will not be permissible
for you to mention him by his name.”

**12-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Attar from his father
from Ibne Hashim from Ibne Abi Umair from Safwan Jammal that Imam Sadiq
(a.s.) said:

“Behold, by Allah, your Mahdi will disappear from you until your
ignorant individuals would say, ‘Allah does not have any need in Aale
Muhammad (a.s.).’ Then he will come like a blazing meteor. He will fill
the earth with justice and equity as it will be full of injustice and
oppression.”

**13-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Ibne Abdus from Ibne
Qutaibah from Hamadan bin Sulaiman from Ibne Yazi from Hannan Sarraj
from Sayyid bin Muhammad Himyari that:

I said to Imam Sadiq (a.s.), “O son of Allah’s Messenger, traditions
have been related to us from your forefathers, peace be unto them, with
regard to the occultation and the confirmation of its occurrence. Please
inform me who is it going to happen to?” He said: “It will happen to the
sixth from my sons, the Twelfth from the Imams of guidance after the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.), the first of whom is Amirul Momineen Ali
Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) and their last is the Riser with the Truth, the
Cherished Redeemer of Allah on His earth, the Master of the Age and the
vicegerent of the All-Merciful. By Allah, even if he should remain in
his occultation as long as Nuh remained in his people, he will not go
from the world until he appears and fills the earth with equity and
justice, as it will be replete with injustice and oppression.”

**14-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Ibne Mutawakkil from Ali
bin Ibrahim from Muhammad bin Isa from Salih bin Muhammad from Hani Tamr
that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said:

“The Patron of this Affair will have a disappearance. So the servant
should fear Allah and cling on to his religion.”

**15-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Daqqaq from Asadi from
Nakhai from Naufili from Ibne Bataini from his father from Abu Basir
that:

I heard Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) say, “The customs the apostles went
through in terms of their disappearances will materialize in the Qaim of
us, the Ahle Bayt in the precise and same manner.”

Abu Basir says, I said to him, “O son of Allah’s Messenger, and who is
the Qaim of you Ahle Bayt?” He said: “O Abu Basir, he is the fifth from
the sons of my son Musa. He is the son of the mistress of slave girls.

He will have an occultation in which invalidators will doubt. Then
Allah, the Exalted, will manifest him and will conquer on his hands the
easts of the earth and its wests. Ruhallah Isa Ibne Maryam (a.s.) will
come down and pray behind him. The earth will shine with the
illumination of its Lord. There will be no spot on earth on which a
deity other than Allah, the Exalted, is worshipped,*and the religion
entirely will be for Allah, even if the infidels may dislike this.*

**16-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from a group from Bazufari
from Ahmad bin Idris from Ibne Qutaibah from Fadhl from Ibne Abi Najran
from Safwan from Abu Ayyub from Abu Basir that he said:

Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said: “If you hear of a disappearance with
regard to your Patron, do not reject it.”

**17-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Ahmad bin Idris from Ali
bin Fadhl from Ahmad bin Uthman from Ahmad bin Rizq from Yahya bin Alaa
Raazi that he said:

I heard Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) say, “Allah will bring forth in this
Ummah a man who belongs to me and I belong to him. Allah will drive the
blessings of the heavens and the earth through him. The heavens will
rain down its drops; and the earth will grow out its seeds: and its
beasts and brutes will live in harmony; and it will be full of equity
and justice, as it had been replete with oppression and injustice. He
will put so many on the sword that the ignorant will say, ‘If he was
from the progeny of Muhammad, he would be merciful.”

**18-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Hamam
from Ahmad bin Mabandad from Muhammad bin Sinan from Kahili from Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“Be nice to each other, do kindness to one another, and have compassion
to one another. I swear by the One Who split the seed and created the
people, a time will come to you when no one of you will find a place for
his dinar and dirham to spend, for the lack of need of all the people
with the blessing of Allah and the blessing of his*Wali”* I asked: “When
will that happen?”

He said: “This will happen when you miss your Imam and you will continue
to remain in that state until he rises over you the way the sun rises.
Wherever you may be, beware of doubt and suspicion! Reject doubts from
your hearts. You have been warned so abstain. I beseech Allah for your
success and your guidance.”

**19-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Abdul Wahid bin
Abdullah from Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Rabah from Ahmad Ibne Ali Himyari
from Husain bin Ayyub from Abdul Karim Khathami from Muhammad bin Isaam
from Mufaddal bin Umar that he said:

I was sitting with Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) in his sitting room and
there were other people with me as well. He said to us, “Take care not
to mention him by name,” meaning the Qaim (a.s.) and I was seeing he
meant to say this to the others. Then he said to me, “O Abu Abdullah,
beware not to mention him by name. By Allah, he will disappear for
years. He will be forgotten until it will be said:*He is dead, perished
or gone to some valley.* The eyes of the believers will shed tears over
him and they will be turned over like a ship is turned over by the waves
of the sea and no one will be saved except the one from whom Allah has
taken covenant and has inscribed faith in his heart and has endorsed him
with a spirit from Himself.

Twelve bewildering standards will be raised; not known which is from
whom.” Mufaddal Ibne Umar says: I cried. He said to me, “Why are you
crying.” “May I be your ransom,” said I, “how would I not cry while you
are saying twelve bewildering standards will raised not known which is
one from whom?” He eyed towards the window in the room from which the
sun was shining into his sitting room. He said: “Is this sun luminous?”
I said: “Yes.” He said: “By Allah, our position will be more luminous
(obvious) than that.”

**20-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Hamam
from Hameed bin Ziyad from Hasan bin Muhammad bin Samaa from Ahmad bin
Hasan Mithami from Zaid bin Qudamah from some of his people from Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“When the Qaim rises, people will say, How could this be? Even his bones
must have decayed. “

**21-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Husain from
Muhammad bin Yahya from Muhammad bin Hasan Raazi from Muhammad bin Ali
Kufi from Yunus bin Yaqub from Mufaddal bin Umar that:

I asked Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.), “What is the sign of the Qaim?” He
said: “When times pass much and it is said:*He is dead, perished gone to
some valley.”* I asked: “May I be your ransom, “Then what will happen?”
He said: “He will not appear but with the sword.”

**22-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Uqdah from Qasim bin
Muhammad bin Husain bin Hazim from Abdullah bin Hisham Nashiri from
Abdullah bin Jabla from Fudhail Saigh from Muhammad bin Muslim that Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said:

“When people lose the Imam, they will remain for ages not knowing one
thing from other. Then Allah will manifest their Master to them.”

**23-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Ahmad from
Abdullah bin Musa from Hasan bin Muawiyah from Ibne Mahbub from Khallad
bin Qassar that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) was asked:

“Has the Qaim been born?” He said: “No. If I lived in his times, I would
serve him for all days of my life.”

**24-** ***Iqbalul Amaal:*** Sayyid Ibne Tawus has narrated through his
chains from Abu Ja’far Tusi from a group from Talakbari from Ibne Hamam
from Jamil from Qasim bin Ismail from Ahmad bin Rabah from Abu Faraj
Aban bin Muhammad alias Sindi that:

Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) was in Hajj in the year in which he stepped
under the*Mizab* (water-spout at Kaaba). As he was praying, Abdullah
Ibne Hasan was on his right, Hasan Ibne Hasan on his left, and Ja’far
Ibne Hasan was behind him. Ibad Ibne Kathir Basri came and said: “O Aba
Abdullah.” The Imam remained silent until he had said it three times.
Then he said to the Imam, “O Ja’far.” The Imam said: “Say what you want
to say, O Abu Kathir.”

“I have found in a book of mine the knowledge of this structure,” he
said. “A man will destroy it stone by stone.” The Imam said: “Your book
has lied, O Abu Kathir. On the contrary, I see, by Allah, the man with
yellow steps, injured on the legs, big in the abdomen, thin in the neck,
thick in the head, over this*Rukn,”* and he pointed to the Yemeni*Rukn,*
“prohibiting the people from circumambulating as they are intimidated by
him. Then Allah will send a man from me,” and he pointed to his chest.
“He will kill him like the killing of the Ad and Thamud and Firon, the
lord of the spikes.” At that point, Abdullah Ibne Hasan said: “By Allah,
Abu Abdullah has spoken the truth.” They all endorsed his veracity then.

It is narrated from the handwriting of Shaheed Awwal (a.s.) on the
authority of Abul Walid from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) with regard to the
statement*qad qamat ai-salah,* “The rise of the Qaim (a.s.) has been
implied by this.”

**25-** ***Muqtadhib:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Ja’far Admi
and Ibne Ghalib Hafiz from Ahmad bin Ubaid bin Nasih from Husain bin
Alwan from Hamam bin Harith from Wahab Ibne Munabbah that:

Musa (a.s.) looked on the night of the Conversation at every tree and at
every stone and plant at Mount Tur. They were all speaking the
remembrance of Muhammad and his Twelve Heirs after him. Musa said: “My
Lord, I do not see anything You have created but it speaks the names of
Muhammad and his Twelve Heirs. What is their position before you?” “O
son of Imran,” came the reply, “I created them before the creation of
the lights and placed them in the treasure trove of My sanctity, as they
are nourished in the garden of My will and breathed from the spirit of
My majesty and observed the horizons of My Kingdom, until I desired My
will and implemented my rule and measure. O son of Imran, I have given
them a promotion so I will adorn My Gardens through them. O son of Imran
adhere to their remembrance, for they are the treasures of My knowledge,
coffers of My wisdom, and springs of My illumination.” Husain Ibne
Alawan says, I

mentioned this to Ja’far Ibne Muhammad (a.s.). He said: “That is
correct. They are the Twelve from Aale Muhammad (a.s.): Ali, Hasan,
Husain, Ali Ibne Husain, Muhammad Ibne Ali and the ones whom Allah
desires”. I said: “May I be your ransom, I beseech you to relate the
truth to me.” He said: “I, and this son of mine,” pointing to his son,
Musa, “and the fifth from his sons, whose person will disappear and
mentioning his name will not be permissible.”


