15
==

Chapter Fifteen: Narrations of Imam Ali Naqi (a.s.) and Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.)
================================================================================

<p dir="rtl">
أَبِي وَ ابْنُ الْوَلِيدِ عَنْ سَعْدٍ عَنْ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ أَحْمَدَ
الْعَلَوِيِّ عَنْ أَبِي هَاشِمٍ الْجَعْفَرِيِّ قَالَ سَمِعْتُ أَبَا
الْحَسَنِ صَاحِبَ الْعَسْكَرِ ع يَقُولُ الْخَلَفُ مِنْ بَعْدِي ابْنِيَ
الْحَسَنُ فَكَيْفَ لَكُمْ بِالْخَلَفِ مِنْ بَعْدِ الْخَلَفِ فَقُلْتُ وَ
لِمَ جَعَلَنِيَ اللَّهُ فِدَاكَ فَقَالَ لِأَنَّكُمْ لَا تَرَوْنَ
شَخْصَهُ وَ لَا يَحِلُّ لَكُمْ ذِكْرُهُ بِاسْمِهِ قُلْتُ فَكَيْفَ
نَذْكُرُهُ‏ قَالَ قُولُوا الْحُجَّةُ مِنْ آلِ مُحَمَّدٍ ص
</p>

**1-** ***Uyun Akhbar Reza*** **and** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq
(r.a.) has narrated from his father and Ibne Walid from Saad from
Muhammad bin Ahmad Alawi from Abi Hashim Ja’fari that he said:

I heard Abul Hasan of the Askar (a.s.) say, “My successor after me is my
son, Hasan. How would you be like to the heir after the heir?” “Why, may
I be your ransom?” I asked. He said: “Because you will not see his
person and it will not be permissible for you to mention him by his
name.” I asked him, “So how are we going to mention him?” He said: “Say,
Hujjah (proof) from Aale Muhammad (a.s.).”

**2-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq (r.a.) has narrated from his
father from Himyari from Muhammad bin Umar or Imran Katib from Ali bin
Muhammad Saymoori from Ali bin Mahziyar that he said:

I wrote to Imam Hadi (a.s.) asking him about the relief (*Faraj* ). He
replied: “When your Patron will disappear from the abode of oppressors,
expect the relief.”

**3-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq (r.a.) has narrated from his
father and Ibne Walid together from Saad from Khashab from Ishaq bin
Ayyub that he said:

I heard Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.) say, “The Master of this Affair is the
one about whom people will say he is not born yet.”

**4-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq (r.a.) has narrated from his
father from Saad from Muhammad bin Ubaidullah bin Abi Ghanim from
Ibrahim bin Muhammad bin Faris that he said:

I and Ayyub bin Nuh were on the way to Mecca. We disembarked at the
valley of Zabala and sat down talking. We ended up discussing our
current situation and the lack of access to the Imam. Ayyub bin Nuh
said: “I wrote this year, mentioning some of these things. He wrote back
to me, ‘When your standard is raised from your backs, expect the relief
from beneath your feet.”

The author says: “expect the relief from the beneath of your feet,” is
an allusion that the reappearance will be very soon.

**5-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Hamadani has narrated from Ali from his father
from Ali bin Sadaqah from Ali Ibne Abdul Ghaftar that:

When Imam Ali Naqi (a.s.) passed away, the Shia wrote to Imam Hasan
Askari (a.s.) asking him about the position of Imamate. He wrote to
them, “The position is mine so long as I am alive. When the measures of
Allah, the High, catch me, my heir will come to you. And how would you
be like to the heir after the heir?”

**6-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Attar from Saad from Musa
bin Ja’far Baghdadi that he said:

I heard Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.) say, “As if I see you, you have
disputed after me with regard to my heir.

Behold, someone who professes faith in the Imams after the Prophet of
Allah yet denies my son, is like someone who professes faith in all
prophets and apostles of Allah and then rejects the Prophethood of
Muhammad the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.); and the denier of the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) is like one who rejects all the prophets.
Because obedience to our last one is obedience to our first one and
rejecter of our last one is the rejecter of our first one. Behold, my
son will have an occultation in which people will doubt, except the ones
Allah saves.”

**7-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Taliqani from Ali bin
Hamam that he said:

I heard Muhammad bin Uthman Amari, (a.s.) say, I heard my father say,
Abu Muhammad Hasan Ibne Ali (a.s.) was asked, while I was with him,
about the tradition narrated from his forefathers, peace be unto them,
that the earth does not remain without the Hujjah of Allah over His
creation until Judgment Day and that if anyone who dies without the
cognition of the Imam of his Age, he dies a pagan death. He said: “This
is true as the daylight is true.” It was said: “O son of Allah’s
Messenger, who is the Hujjah and the Imam after you?” He said: “My son
MHMD. And he is the Imam and the Hujjah after me. Whoever dies not
knowing him, will die a pagan death. Behold, he will have an occultation
during which the ignorant individuals will be perplexed and the
invalidators will perish and the time-assigners will lie. Then he will
rise. As if I am gazing at the white standards waving over his head in
the Najaf of Kufa.”

**8-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Abdullah Warraq
from Saad from Musa Ibne Ja’far Baghdadi that he said:

A letter came from Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.) which stated, “They presumed
that they want to murder me in order to cut off my progeny. Allah belied
their word, and all praise is due to Allah.”

**9-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Muzaffar Alawi from Ibne
Ayyashi from his father from Ahmad bin Ali bin Kulthum from Ali bin
Ahmad Raazi from Ahmad Ibne Ishaq that he said:

I heard Abu Muhammad Hasan Ibne Ali Askari (a.s.) say, “All praise is
due to Allah, the One Who did not take me from the world until He showed

me the heir after me, the one who of all people looks most similar to
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) in his physique and in his character.
May Allah, the High, protect him in his occultation and then manifest
him, so he may fill the earth with equity and justice as it will be full
of injustice and oppression.”

**10-** ***Ghaibat*** ***Tusi:*** It is narrated from Saad bin Abdullah
from Hasan bin Ali Zaituni from Zuhri Kufi from Banan bin Hamdawayh that
he said:

The passing away of Imam Ali Naqi (a.s.) was mentioned before Imam Hasan
Askari (a.s.). He said: “That is so long as I am alive and remaining.
However, how would it be like when they miss the one after me?”

**11-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Abu Hashim Ja’fari that
he said:

I said to Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.), “Your majesty prohibits me from
asking you, would that you give me permission to inquire from you?” He
said: “Ask.” I said: “O my master, do you have a son?” He said: “Yes.” I
said: “If something happens, then where should I inquire about him?” He
said: “In Medina.”

**12-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from a group from Abi
Mufaddal Shaibani from Abu Naeem Nasr bin Isaam bin Mughira Fahri alias
Qarqaara from Abu Saeed Muraghi from Ahmad bin Ishaq Qummi that:

He asked Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.) about the Master of this Affair, in
reply to which the Imam made a gesture, meaning he is alive and his neck
has hardened.

**13-** ***Kifayatul Athar:*** It is narrated from Abu Mufaddal Shaibani
from Kulaini from Allaan Razi that he said:

One of our scholars narrated to me that when the concubine of Abu
Muhammad was pregnant, he said to her, “You will give birth to a boy.
His name is MHMD and he is the Qaim after me.”

**14-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Attar from his father
from Ja’far Fazari from Muhammad bin Ahmad Madaini from Abu Hatim that
he said:

I heard Abu Muhammad Hasan Ibne Ali (a.s.) say, “In the year two hundred
and sixty my Shia will go asunder.” In that year Imam Hasan Askari
(a.s.) passed away and his Shia and supporters went different ways. Some
of them followed Ja’far; some of them went astray and were seized by
doubts; some of them remained on their perplexity; and some of them
remained steadfast on their religion through the help of God, the
Exalted.

**15-** ***Al-Kharaij:*** Qutub Rawandi has narrated from Ali bin
Ibrahim from his father, Isa Ibne Sabih that he said:

Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.) entered upon me in the prison. I knew him. He
said to me, “You are sixty five years and one month and two days old.”
There was a book of supplication with me, which had my birth date. I
looked and it was as he had said. He asked, “Do you have a son?” I said:
“No.” He said: “O Allah, give him a son so he may be his forearm. Good a

forearm is a son!” Then he said:*A person with an arm avenges his
oppression. Desolate is the one who does not have an arm.*

I asked, “Do you have a son?” He said: “By Allah, soon I will have a son
who will fill the earth with equity. But now, no.” Then he versified as
follows:

**Perchance, you will see me one day**

**As I will be with my many sons around me, because before Tamim sired a
nation,**

**He lived a long while amidst the people as he was one man.**


