16
==

Chapter Sixteen: Prophecies of Soothsayers engraved on rocks
============================================================

Prediction of Satih the soothsayer before reappearance
------------------------------------------------------

Bursa has narrated from Kaab bin Harith in his*Mashariqul Anwaar* , that
King Dhazdan had an inquiry for which he summoned Satih the soothsayer
and when he came the king placed a Dinar in his shoe below the foot and
then asked him to enter. When Satih entered, he asked:

“O Satih, tell me what I have concealed and where have I concealed it?”

Satih replied, “I swear by the Kaaba, the black stone and the dark night
that you have concealed a Dinar below your foot.”

“You are right,” said the king, “from where have you learnt this?”

“From a brother of mine,” replied Satih.

“Tell me what all would come to pass in the future?”

“When the righteous will be destroyed and the vile would take up
leadership and values will become false and people incline to wealth and
power; when breaking off relations and cruelty will be common and the
mean will be prominent; when the unlawful will be considered legal;
promises will be broken; no one will care for anyone; and it will be at
a time when a tail like comet will appear which will terrify the Arabs.
Rains will stop, water bodies will dry up, different types of storms
will rage. Food grains will become dearer.

After that some people will come from the direction of Berbers riding on
beautiful ponies and their destination will be Egypt. After that a
person will rise from the descendants of Saqar. He will make the black
flags red (by blood). He will legalize unlawful acts; wreak havoc in
Kufa; shame will disappear; most women will be seen displaying their
fair legs on the streets; fornication will become common.

At that time, Mahdi, a descendant of the Prophet will appear. When a
victim will be killed in Medina and his cousin will be eliminated in
Mecca. A secret will be exposed. At that time an unfortunate fellow will
come with his oppressive group and the Romans will help in the killing
of that bull. An eclipse will occur at that time when the armies will be
arrayed.

Then a ruler of Sana (Yemen) will appear. He will be as white as cotton
and he will be named Husain or Hasan. His advent will put an end to
mischiefs. At that time will appear the holy personality and the Alawite
Sayyid and he will save the people from calamities and guide them by the
help of the Almighty Allah. His luminosity will remove the darkness of
ignorance and oppression and the truth will be unveiled. He will
distribute wealth among the people equitably. He will place the sword
back into its case and then never shed any blood. People will live a
life of prosperity and comfort and he will establish justice and peace
in the world and restore the rights of the oppressed and deprived. There
will be celebrations everywhere. Due to his justice, blindness and
ignorance will disappear. He will fill the earth with justice and
equity. He will doubtlessly be a sign of Judgment Day.

Ibne Ayyash has narrated through his chains from Nushjan bin Budmaran in
his*Al-Muqtadhib* that:

When Fars was defeated in Qadisiya and Yazdgird bin Shahryar came to
know that Rustom was killed and defeated by the Arabs he thought that
the whole army was killed with Rustom; meanwhile a messenger arrived
with the news that 50000 soldiers were killed at Qadisiya. Yazdgird fled
with his family members and standing at the Gate of Aiwan said:

O Aiwan, peace be on you; I am leaving you now, but I will return soon;
and if I am unable to return a person from my descendants will come
whose time had not yet arrived.

Sulaiman Dailami has say: I came to Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) and
inquired about the above narration. He replied: It denotes your Imam
Qaim who will be my sixth descendant and he will be a descendant of
Yazdgird from the maternal side.

Abdullah bin Qasim has narrated from Abi Islam Qaji from Abdullah bin
Muslim from Shobi that once Abdul Malik bin Marwan summoned him and
said: O Abu Umar, a letter has come from Musa bin Nasr, governor of the
western province, which says that there was a city of yellow skinned
people which Prophet Sulaiman (a.s.) had constructed with the help of
jinns. It is located in Andalusia desert. Prophet Sulaiman (a.s.) had
buried treasures in that area. I have decided to march there but a slave
has informed me that the route is long and difficult and as long as
provisions are not there for the whole journey, it is difficult to go
there. So far whoever has tried to reach there has failed. Only Dara bin
Dara had managed to reach there. But when Alexander killed Dara he said:
Except from that part of Andalusia there is no land which I have not
conquered and annexed. If Dara can reach there I am more eligible to go
there.

So Alexander made preparations for a year; and when he was sure that
everything was ready, before that he dispatched some of his scouts to
explore the route but they came back to report that there were many
obstructions on the way.

Abdul Malik wrote to Musa bin Nasr that he should appoint someone as his
representative and prepare to leave for that place.

So Musa made the preparations and set out for that place. He reached
there and after returning from there he wrote to Abdul Malik the
conditions prevailing there and wrote that when many days passed and all
the provisions were exhausted, we turned to the sea shore which was full
of trees and finally reached a wall on which the following verses were
inscribed:

“Those who possess unlimited power, and they think that they will live
in the world forever; they should know that no one will live in the
world forever. If someone had lived forever; who was more powerful than
Sulaiman bin Dawood (a.s.)? He should have lived forever. He commanded
the jinns to make a building for himself that would last till Judgment
Day. So that building was constructed adjacent to those walls and there
he buried all the treasures of the world; but they sunk into the ground
and no sign remained of his kingdom. It was so because that he may know
that except for the kingdom of Allah no ones kingdom will endure
forever. Now when

in the progeny of Adnan, from the family of Bani Hashim, a person will
be born whom the Almighty Allah will give miracles and send to all the
people of the world. He will have the keys of all the world. And then
those keys will remain with his successors and they are his twelve
caliphs who will come after him and when from those caliphs the one who
will rise with the order of Allah (*Qaim bi Amrillah* ) his name will be
announced from the sky.

When Abdul Malik read this letter and the messenger, Talib bin Mudrik
also narrated the eye-witness account, at that time Muhammad bin Shahab
Zuhri was seated with Abdul Malik. He asked Zuhri: “What is your opinion
about this strange matter?”

Zuhri said: “In my view, jinns are guarding that place.”

“And what do you think about the call of the sky?”

“Chief of believer, its better if you don’t ask about it.”

“How can I ignore it? It is a great news. You will have to tell me about
it in any case.”

“His Eminence, Ali Ibnul Husain (a.s.) has said that the call will be
issued for one of the descendants of Fatima, daughter of the Prophet
(s.a.).”

“He and you, are both liars, boasting all the time! He will be from my
family.”

“I have only narrated a tradition of Ali Ibnul Husain (a.s.) to you; if
you don’t believe me you can ask him directly and don’t blame me for
lying. He alone is the source of this report.”

Abdul Malik said, “I have no need to question the descendants of Abu
Turab (Imam Ali). But O Zuhri, never repeat this to anyone else.”

“All right, I will do as you say,” said I.


