19
==

Chapter Nineteen: People with long lifespans in the History of Humanity - longevity of Imam Zamana (a.s.)
=========================================================================================================

In this chapter the first mention should be made of that which is quoted
by Shaykh Saduq in*Ikmaaluddin wa Tamaamun Nima:*

Abu Duniai Muammar
------------------

**1-** It is mentioned in the above book that Abdullah bin Muhammad bin
Abdul Wahab Shajari said: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Qasim Raqqi and
Ali bin Husain bin Habka Alaiki that:

“Once we met a person in Mecca who was from Maghrib. We had come to the
House of Allah for Hajj along with a group of traditionists and we went
to meet that person. It was three hundred and nine Hijra then. We saw
that all the hairs of the head and beard of that person were black.
However, he was a skeleton covered with skin like a dry water-bag. He
was surrounded by his grandchildren and elderly people of his homeland.
They informed that they lived in the far most region of the north-west
Africa near Bahirah Ulya. Those elderly persons testified and said: ‘We
have heard from our forefathers and they from their ancestors that they
are watching this person who is called Abu Duniya Muammar whose name is
Ali bin Uthman bin Khattab bin Marra bin Muwayyad from a long time. He
is Hamadani and a resident of highland of Yemen.’

We asked that aged person, ‘Have you seen Ali (a.s.)?’ He gestured. His
eyebrows were hanging in front of his eyes. When his eyes were opened,
it appeared as if two lamps were lighted. He told us, ‘I have seen him
with these eyes of mine. I was his servant. I accompanied him in the
Battle of Siffeen and this injury was caused by the leg of his mount.’
We saw the mark of injury on his right eyebrow.

All the grandsons and other relatives of that elderly person surrounding
him testified for his long life and said: ‘We have seen him in the same
state since the time we were born and began to understand things and we
have heard the same from our forefathers also.’

When we talked to him, we came to know that he was not of unsound of
mind and whatever was asked to him, he replied after thinking. We asked
him about himself. He related, ‘My father used to read ancient books and
Sahaifs (scriptures). Thus, he read about Aab-e-Hayat (Life-giving
water) in one of the books that it is in darkness (deep wilderness) and
whoever drinks this water will have a very long life.

After reading this, he developed interest in visiting the darkness. We
gathered essential items for the journey and took a few servants, milch
camels and camels as beast of burden and departed. I was thirteen years
old then. After continuous traveling, we reached darkness and entered
the darkness. We traveled in it continuously for six days. We used to
differentiate day and night by a faint light, which slightly reduced the
darkness of night. After continuous travel, we descended between some

mountains and valleys and my father went around searching for a spring
of life everywhere. He had read that the spring of Aab-e-Hayat was at
that spot. We stayed at that place for a few days and the water we had
with us was depleted. We lived on the milk of she-camels. If we had not
the she-camels with us, we would have died of thirst.

My father continuously went about here and there in search of Spring of
Life and he had ordered us to keep the fire burning so that the way
remains visible and he does not have difficulty in reaching us. We
stayed there for five days and my father remained busy continuously
searching, but the spring was not found. At last, he gave up and
intended to return. Our provisions for journey were exhausted. When
servants feared for their lives, they insisted my father to move out of
the darkness.

One day, I came out of my caravan to relieve myself and went a little
far away. Incidentally, I saw a spring, which had white and sweet water.
That spring was neither too small nor too big and was of medium size,
which was gushing forth slowly. I went near it and drank two or three
fistfuls of water, which was very sweet, tasty and cool. I came back
running to my caravan and gave the good news to servants that I had
found out a spring of water. They took along water-bags and came along
with me. I did not realize at that time that my father was searching for
a spring. Instead I was happy that water was exhausted in our caravan
and I found a spring.

My father was not present at that time and had gone in search of the
spring. We searched for that spring a lot but could not find it. The
servants falsified me and said: ‘You did not speak the truth.’ When we
returned to our camp, we saw that my father had also returned. I
narrated the entire episode to him.

He said: ‘My son, I bore all these calamities for the sake of this
spring only but I could not find it and you found it. Now your life
would be so long that you would become wary of living.’ Eventually, we
returned to our home. My father remained alive for a few years and
passed away after that. May Allah be pleased with him.

When my age reached nearly thirty years, the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.) and two of his caliphs had passed away. When I came to Mecca
during the last days of third caliphate, my heart was attracted to Ali
among all the companions of Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.).

Thus, I joined his service and was present along with him in all the
battles. This is the mark of the injury caused to me in the Battle of
Siffeen by the hoof of his horse. I continued to serve him after that
also till he passed away. Then his children and household members
insisted that I stay with them, but I returned to my homeland. I set out
for Hajj again during the time of Bani Marwan and came back with my
fellow countrymen. Whenever I go on a journey, the kings of western
countries who know about my long life summon me to their court and ask
me about my long life and what I had witnessed and experienced. I wished
that I perform Hajj for last time and as you see my grandsons gathered
around me have brought me here.” Muammar Maghribi said: “My teeth fell
two or three times and grew up again.”

Reports of Abu Duniawi
----------------------

We asked him, “Please narrate the traditions heard by you from The
Commander of faithful, Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.).” He said: “I had no
interest or enthusiasm in seeking knowledge and his companions were
seeking a lot of knowledge from him. As I loved the master very much, I
used to remain busy serving him.

Then too, whatever I had heard from master, I narrated to
knowledge-loving people of western countries, Egypt and Hijaz and all of
them have passed away but these grandsons of mine have recorded them
all. Then he took out a book and read aloud a few traditions from it
(which are narrated below).

1- Narrated to us Abul Hasan Ali bin Uthman bin Khattab bin Murra bin
Mazeed Hamadani famous as Abu Duniya Muammar Maghribi (May Allah be
pleased with him in his life as well as after his demise):

Ali Ibne Abi Talib told me that the Messenger of Allah had said:
“Whoever loves the people of Yemen loves me and whoever hates the people
of Yemen hates me.”

2- And Narrated to us Abu Duniai Muammar Maghribi that Ali Ibne Abi
Talib (a.s.) narrated to him that Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said:

“If someone helps a troubled person Allah will grant him ten rewards,
forgive ten of his sins and increase his status by ten levels.”

Then the Commander of faithful said that Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) also
said: “If someone fulfills the wish of a brother-in-faith for the sake
of Divine pleasure then it is as if he has served Almighty Allah for one
thousand years and did not disobey Him even for a moment.

3- Narrated to us Abu Duniai Muammar Maghribi that he heard Ali Ibne Abi
Talib saying:

“One day, the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) was very hungry. He was in
the house of Lady Fatima then. He told me, ‘O Ali! Please lay the food.’
When I laid the food, it comprised of a few loaves of bread and roasted
meat.”

4- Narrated to us Abu Duniai Muammar that one day he heard the Commander
of faithful say:

“I got twenty-five injuries on my body in the Battle of Khyber. When I
came to Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) in this state, he saw me and started
crying and applied his tears to my wounds and those injuries healed
immediately.

5- Narrated to us Abu Duniya that Ali Ibne Abi Talib said that Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said:

“If a person recites Surah Ahad once, it is as if he has recited
one-third of Holy Quran. If a person recites it twice, it is as if he
has recited two-third of Holy Quran. If a person recites it thrice, it
is as if he has recited the entire Holy Quran.”

6- Narrated to us Abu Duniya that Ali Ibne Abi Talib said that the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said:

“One day I had taken my goats for grazing when a wolf came before me. I
asked it, “What are you doing here?” It said: “What are you doing here?”
I said: “I am flock-keeping here.” Then it went away.”

Then, he said: “One day I was making my flock of goats drink water.
Suddenly, a wolf came and caught hold of a goat and tore it. I caught
hold

of its neck, slaughtered it and took it in my custody. Then I took it
(slaughtered goat) to market and suddenly, three angels appeared in
front of me viz. Jibraeel (a.s.), Mikaeel (a.s.) and the Angel of Death.
When they saw me, they said: “He is Muhammad. Whom Allah has granted
abundance.”

They made me lie down and tore open my chest with a knife they were
carrying and removed the heart from my chest, washed it with cool water
they were carrying in a bowl so much that all the blood on my heart was
cleansed. Then they kept it back in my chest and moved their hand on it
and my chest became normal by the order of Almighty Allah. I did not
feel pain or hurt because of that knife.

I came back to my foster-mother, Halima. She asked me, “Where are the
animals?” When I narrated the entire incident to her, she said: “Very
soon you would be given a high rank in Paradise.”

Statements of Shaykh Saduq about Abu Duniai Maghribi
----------------------------------------------------

Then Shaykh Saduq says: Narrated to us Abu Saeed Abdullah bin Muhammad
bin Abdul Wahhab that he said: Mentioned Abu Bakr Muhammad bin Fatah
Markani and Abul Hasan Ali bin Husain Laiki that: “When the governor of
Mecca came to know about Abu Duniya, he objected and told him, ‘You
would compulsorily have to come along with me to Muqtadir in Baghdad. If
he comes to know, he would be displeased with me for letting you go.’

The people of North-west Africa, Egypt and Syria who had come for Hajj
said: ‘Please forgive him and do not take him on a journey, because he
is an old man and would not remain alive after bearing the
difficulties.’ Then, his life was spared.

Abu Saeed says, ‘If I would have gone for Hajj that year I would have
surely met Abu Duniya. His fame had spread in all cities and the
narrators of Egypt, Syria, Baghdad etc. narrated traditions from him. I
too was interested in meeting him and narrating traditions from him.’”

2- Also narrated to me Abu Muhammad Hasan bin Muhammad bin Yahya bin
Hasan bin Ja’far bin Abdullah bin Hasan bin Ali bin Husain bin Ali Ibne
Abi Talib (a.s.) and he gave me the license to narrate traditions which
were authentic and according to me, the tradition of Abu Abdullah
Muhammad bin Hasan bin Ishaq bin Husain bin Musa bin Ja’far bin Muhammad
bin Ali bin Husain bin Ali Ibne Abi Talib is correct. He said that he
performed Hajj in 313 A.H. and the same year the chamberlain of Muqtadir
Billah, Nasr Qishwari had also come for Hajj. He was accompanied by
Abdullah bin Hamadan whose agnomen is Abul Hijaa.

We all reached Medina in the month of Zilqad and found an Egyptian
caravan there. Abu Bakr Muhammad bin Ali Maazrai was also present among
them. He was accompanied by a person who was among the inhabitants of
west about whom it came to be known that he had seen (one of) the
companions of Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.). There was a large crowd of people
who had come to see and meet him. People had surrounded him and looked
at him with astonishment and touched him. Soon his soul was going to
depart from his body because of crowd and pushing and pulling. My
paternal uncle, Abul Qasim Tahir bin Yahya (r.a.) ordered his slaves to

disperse the crowd. Thus, slaves did as ordered and Muammar Maghribi was
moved to the house of Ibne Abu Sahl Tifli.

My uncle came there and permitted people to meet him one by one. Muammar
Maghribi was accompanied by five persons who were sons of his sons. One
of them was also an old man whose age was more than eighty years, about
whom it came to be known that he was the grandson of Muammar Maghribi.
Another one was seventy years old and two more persons were of fifty or
sixty years old who were his grandsons. The fifth one was seventeen
years old who was his great grandson. There was no one younger than him.
Muammar Maghribi did not appear more than thirty or forty years old. All
the hairs of his head and beard were black and he was thin and slim,
short in height and had small legs and flat cheeks. Abu Muhammad Alawi
says that this person named Ali bin Uthman bin Khattab bin Marrah bin
Muwayyad narrated a few traditions to me, which I have written using the
same words. When I looked carefully, I saw that the hair present between
his lower lip and chin were white. After he had his meals, they used to
turn black.”

Abu Muhammad Alawi says: If prestigious people of Medina, a congregation
of Pilgrims and many such persons would not have heard this tradition I
too would not have narrated it. I have heard a few traditions from him
in Medina and Mecca in the renowned house of Sahmiyyin, which is famous
by the name Mukabbiriyah, which belongs to Ali bin Isa bin Jarrah and
also in the tents of Qishwari and Mazrai near Baab-e-Safa.

Nasr Qishwari wanted to take along Muammar Maghribi and his children
with him to Muqtadir in Baghdad. However, the people of Mecca came and
said: “May Allah keep you safe! Among all the traditions, which have
reached us through our ancestors, one of them says that if Muammar
Maghribi enters Baghdad it would be destroyed and the kingdom would
fall.” Hearing this, he dropped the idea of taking him along and turned
him towards western countries.

When we asked the chiefs of the people of North-west Africa and Egypt,
they said: “We have heard the name of this person and name of his
homeland, Tunjah from our ancestors and we have narrated many traditions
from him in this book owned by us.

Abu Muhammad Alawi narrates that that elderly person, Ali bin Uthman
Maghribi narrated about his first journey as follows: “My father and my
paternal uncle took me along with an intention of performing Hajj and
Ziyarat and set out from the Hadhramaut. They forgot the way during
journey. They could not find the way for three days and three nights.
After traveling constantly, we got stuck in knolls of sand, which is
called Ramal-e-Aalij and which is before Ramal-e-Iram Dhaatul Imad.

We were still involved in this difficulty and we saw large footprints.
We followed those marks and reached a village. We saw that two persons
were sitting near a well or a spring. As soon as they saw us, one of
them got up, filled a bucket of water from the well, came to us and
offered it to us. My father said: “We would stay tonight at this well
only and would do Iftar with it only.” Then that person came to my uncle
and said: “Drink this water.” He too gave the same reply as my father.
Then he offered the bucket to me

and said: “Take this and drink water from it.” When I drank water from
it, the person said: “Congratulations, you would meet Ali Ibne Abi Talib
(a.s.). When you meet him, say that Khizr and Ilyas have conveyed
salutation to him and narrate this event to him. O son! You would remain
alive for such a long period that you would meet Imam Qaim (a.t.f.s.)
and Prophet Isa (a.s.). When you meet them, convey our salutation to
them.”

Then they asked me, “What relation do you have with these two persons?”
I said: “My father and my uncle.” They said: “Your uncle would not be
able to reach Mecca but you and your father would reach. However, your
father would pass away. You will get a long life. You would not be able
to meet Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) because he is going to pass away.”

I swear by God, after saying this, I don’t know where both of them
disappeared - towards the heaven or inside the earth. Then we saw that
there were neither any footprints nor a spring or water.

We were surprised at this incident a lot. We all returned to Najran. My
uncle fell ill and died over there. I and my father performed Hajj and
went to Medina. My father fell ill there and he willed to Ali Ibne Abi
Talib (a.s.) about me and passed away. Ali (a.s.) brought me up. I was
with the Commander of faithful Ali Ibne Abi Talib during the time of
three caliphs and during the apparent caliphate of Ali (a.s.). Then Ibne
Muljim martyred him. May Allah curse him.

When the house of Uthman was besieged, he called me and handed over a
letter and a mount and asked me to take that letter to Ali (a.s.). Ali
(a.s.) was in Medina at that time. He had gone to his lands. I took that
letter and departed. When I reached the wall of Abaya, I heard a voice
reciting Holy Quran. I saw that Master Ali Ibne Abi Talib was coming
from Maqam-e-Yambu’ reciting the verse of Holy Quran:

<p dir="rtl">
أَفَحَسِبْتُمْ أَنَّمَا خَلَقْنَاكُمْ عَبَثًا وَأَنَّكُمْ إِلَيْنَا لَا
تُرْجَعُونَ
</p>

***“What! did you then think that We had created you in vain and that
you shall not be returned to Us?”(Surah Mominoon 23:115)***

When he saw me, he said: “O Abu Duniya! How did you come here?” I said:
“I have brought a letter given to me by Uthman.” When Imam (a.s.) opened
the letter, he found the following two lines quoted in it: “If I am
worthy of being eaten up then please do eat me. Otherwise help me before
I am torn apart.” After reading this letter, Imam said: “Lets go.”

However, when we reached Medina, Uthman was already murdered. He turned
towards the walled garden of Bani Najjar. When people came to know about
his arrival, they came running towards him.

Before that, it appeared that people would pay allegiance to Talha but
when they saw Imam (a.s.), they came running to his side like a flock of
goats, which runs after being attacked by a wolf. First, Talha and then
Zubair and then Muhajireen and Ansar paid allegiance. I was busy serving
the Imam. I was present in the Battle of Jamal and Battle of Siffeen.
Once, the whip fell down from Imam’s hand in Siffeen. I was standing on
his right. When I tried to bend and pick up the whip, I was struck on my
eyebrow by the iron bridle and this injury is because of that.

The Commander of faithful, Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) called me and
applied the wetness of his mouth on my injury and put a pinch of dust on
it.

I swear by God, my pain disappeared immediately because of its blessing.
I continued to serve the Imam (a.s.). Then I served Imam Hasan (a.s.)
till he was injured in Hall of Madayan and came to Medina along with
him. I remained busy in his service till Joada binte Ashath Ibne Qais
Kindi (may Allah curse her) conspired with Muawiyah and martyred Imam
Hasan (a.s.) by poisoning him.

Then I reached Kerbala along with Imam Husain (a.s.). When Imam Husain
(a.s.) was martyred, I feared Banu Umayyah and escaped to Maghrib and
now I am awaiting the reappearance of Imam-e-Qaim (a.t.f.s.) and
emergence and descent of Prophet Isa (a.s.).”

Abu Muhammad Alawi narrates: I saw a strange thing that when he was
narrating these events in the house of my uncle, Tahir bin Yahya, the
hair between his lower lip and chin became red and then turned white. I
had seen (earlier) that there was no white hair on his head and beard.

When that elderly person saw my amazement, he said: “What are you
looking at? It happens whenever I am hungry; and when my stomach is
full, these hair turn black.”

Eventually, my uncle ordered food and three trays full of food were
brought. One of the trays was kept in front of Muammar Maghribi and I
joined him along with a few other persons. The other two trays were kept
between rest of the people. My uncle told people: “I have right upon you
then why don’t you eat? Why do you make my food unlawful for
yourselves?” Thus, some people ate food and some people did not. My
uncle was sitting to the right of Muammar Maghribi. He used to eat
himself and forward it to him also. I saw that he ate food as much as a
young man eats. I saw that the hair between his lower lip and chin were
blackening. When he ate enough that his stomach was full, all his hairs
became black.

Then he said: Narrated to us Ali bin Uthman bin Khattab from Ali Ibne
Abi Talib (a.s.) that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said: “Whoever
loved the people of Yemen has loved me and whoever hates the people of
Yemen has hated me.”

Ubaid bin Sharid Jurhami
------------------------

**3-** It is narrated from Abu Saeed bin Abdullah bin Muhammad bin Abdul
Wahhab Shajari that he saw a text in a book written by his brother, Abul
Hasan:

I have heard a scholar who used to read books narrating that Ubaid bin
Sharid lived for three hundred and fifty years. He had seen the sacred
period of Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and accepted Islam. Then he remained
alive after Holy Prophet’s (s.a.w.s.) demise and met Muawiyah during the
time he had power and rule. Muawiyah told him, “O Ubaid! Tell me, how
was the time? What all did you hear and what all did you see?”

Ubaid said: “The time has not changed much. Day and night exist today as
they used to do earlier. As people used to live and die earlier, they do
it now also. Yes, people call their time bad. I have seen a person and
have met him who lived for one thousand years and he told me that he has
met a person who lived for two thousand years.”

“Whatever I have heard is that among kings of Hamiran there was a king
from the Shahs of Yemen and he was well-known to people in all the
cities.

He was called Dhu Sarah. He was made king in his youth. He used to treat
his subjects with good character. He was kind to them. People used to
obey him. He ruled for seven hundred years. Often he used to go for
stroll or hunting along with his companions.

One day when he went for a stroll, he saw two snakes on the way. One of
them was as white as silver and another as black as a coal. Both of them
were fighting with each other. Black snake overpowered the white one and
very soon white snake was going to die. The king killed the black snake
and picked up the white one. He took it to a spring and made it drink
water from there and it regained consciousness. The king set it free and
it crawled away. The king returned to his camp and came back to his
palace in the evening. He went and sat alone in a room such that no one
was allowed to come inside. Suddenly, he saw a youth whose handsomeness
cannot be explained who stood there resting his hands on the door frame.
The king was frightened and said: “Who are you and why have you come
here when no one is permitted to come here?”

That youth answered, “O king! Do not fear. I am not a human being but a
Jinn and I have to repay you for your nice behavior towards me.” The
king said: “What good have I done to you?” He said: “Actually, I am that
snake whose life was saved by you today and the snake you killed was my
slave and he was betraying me. He had killed many of my family members.
Whenever he used to find someone alone, he used to kill him and you have
killed my enemy and saved me. Thus, I want to give you something in
return and want to thank you. O king! We are Jinn and not Al-jinn.” The
king asked, “What is the difference between Jinn and Al-jinn?” The text
ends here.

Rabi bin Dhaba Fazari
---------------------

**4-** It is narrated from Ahmad bin Yahya Mukattib that he said:

Abu Tayyab Ahmad bin Muhammad Warraq from Muhammad bin Hasan bin Duraid
Azdi Omani in his narrations and books that we have found in other
sources that:

“Rabi bin Zaba Fazari was also present in the delegation that went to
Abdul Malik bin Marwan. He was one of the most aged persons. He was
accompanied by his grandson, Wahab bin Abdullah bin Rabi who was very
weak. His eyebrows hung in front of his eyes and he used to tie them on
his forehead. When the chamberlain saw him, he thought that he was the
weakest person and said: “First you please come inside.” He came in with
the support of his staff and stood with its support. His beard was so
long that it reached his knees. When Abdul Malik saw him, he said: “O
elderly person! Please sit down.” He said: “How can I sit when my
grandfather is standing at the door.” Abdul Malik said: “Okay, so you
are the grandson of Rabi bin Zaba.” He said: “Yes, I am Wahab bin
Abdullah bin Rabi.” Abdul Malik ordered his chamberlain to call Rabi.
The chamberlain called out: “Who is Rabi?” Rabi came forward and said:
“I am Rabi.” Then, he quickly entered the court and saluted. Abdul Malik
told his courtiers, “Fie on you, he is younger than the two men. O Rabi!
How did you pass your age and what all did you see?” Rabi said: “I am
the one who said:

**Know that I am one who hopes to live forever and eternally**

**My life and birth has seen many ages and understood them**

**I am Imrul Qais, you certainly would have heard about it**

**Alas, alas, his life was prolonged.**

Abdul Malik said: “I noticed words ‘and I was a child’ in your verses.
He said: “And I had said:

**When a person lives for two hundred years**

**His desires and youth disappears.**

Abdul Malik said: “I also noticed words ‘when I was a boy’ in your
verses. O Rabi! You have got best luck and now tell me about your life.”
Then he said: “I spent two hundred years of my life in*Fatara* , between
Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) and Prophet Isa (a.s.). Then I spent one
hundred and twenty years during the time of ignorance and then I lived
for sixty years during the time of Islam.”

Abdul Malik said: Tell me about the persons of Quraish who have similar
names. He said: “Ask me about anyone.” Abdul Malik said: “What kind of
person was Abdullah bin Abbas?” He answered, “He possessed knowledge,
understanding and benevolence and was serene and forbearing.”

He then asked, “Tell me about Abdullah bin Umar.” He replied, “He was
possessor of knowledge and serenity. He was kind and controlled his
anger and kept away from injustice.”

He asked, “Abdullah bin Ja’far?” He said: “He was like light and mild
scent and softhearted and Muslims were not hurt by him.”

He was asked about Abdullah bin Zubair. He said: “He was such a
mountain, from which rocks used to fall.” Abdul Malik said: “By God, how
did you gain so much information?” He said: “Some of it was gained while
staying close to them and most from reports I received about them.”

Shaqqul Kahin and his wise counsels
-----------------------------------

**5-** It is narrated from Ahmad bin Yahya Mukattib (r.a.) that he said:
Narrated to us Abu Tayyab Ahmad bin Muhammad Warraq from Muhammad bin
Hasan bin Duraid Azdi Omani from Ahmad bin Isa Abu Bashir Aqili from Abu
Hatim from Abu Qubaisah from Ibne Kalbi from his father who heard from
the elders of Bajila that:

“They had not seen anyone more courteous, dignified and handsome (than
Shaqul Kahin). They have informed that Shaqul Kahin lived for three
hundred years. When the time of his death arrived, the people of his
community gathered around him and said: “Please give us some advice,
because now your last moments have arrived.” He said: “O people! All of
you remain united. Do not break relations and remain ahead of one
another and do not remain behind. Behave nicely with your relatives.
Fulfill your duties. Appoint an intelligent man as your leader. Honor
one who is going to provide salvation. Respect elders. Disgrace the
wicked. Remain forbearing during the time of seriousness. Do not destroy
your good deeds with ostentation. After you overpower your enemy,
forgive him. When you are wary, sign a peace treaty and when you are
deceived, do a favor. Obey elders and be the first to invite towards
goodness in case of enmity, because reaching the end in enmity is such
an injury, which is difficult to be healed. Do not taunt anyone’s
relation. Do not point out the faults of others. Do not marry your
daughters with one who is not your equal, because it is great

mistake and a cause of disgrace. Behave softly, because oppressiveness
leads to disgrace and earns condemnation. Remaining patient is more
profitable than taking revenge. Satisfaction is the greatest wealth.
People are slaves of pride and avarice. Destruction sits along with
them. Their mounts are souls of a being, which would make them cry and
ashamed. They are such examples whose sleepy eyes have the hope of
gaining wealth and fear (of destruction) of their wealth.”

Then he said: “What kind of advice is this? That is full of sweetness
and eloquence when it should have been very strict and strong and the
mine of advice is not common for all.” Then he died.

The author says: Our opponents narrate many such traditions and prove
their truthfulness. They also narrate a tradition about Shaddad bin Aad
bin Iram that he lived for nine hundred years. Also, they narrate
characteristics of his paradise that it is on this earth but hidden from
the eyes of people. They reject Qaim of progeny of Muhammad (a.t.f.s.)
only because of their hatred towards right and rightful people and they
reject the traditions narrated about him.

Shaddad bin Aad bin Iram and his paradise. Like which nothing was ever made on this earth
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 - Informed us Muhammad bin Harun Zanjani through what he wrote to us
that: Narrated to us Maaz Abu Muthanna Anbari: Narrated to us Abdullah
bin Muhammad bin Asma: Narrated to us Juwairiya from Sufyan from Mansur
from Abi Wael that he said:

“A man called Abdullah bin Qalabah set out in search of his lost camel.
He was searching it in the desert and wilderness of Aden. He saw a city
in that wilderness, which was surrounded by a city-wall on all four
sides and had many palaces and countless flags. He thought that the city
would be inhabited and went there to enquire about his camel, but he did
not see anyone entering or leaving the city. He reached near the city,
got down from his camel and tied it on one side, unsheathed his sword
and entered the city through its gate. He saw two more large gates such
that no one would have seen gates as large as and as high as those. The
wood of those doors was fragrant and was studded with saffron and red
rubies, whose light had illuminated all the houses. He was amazed at
this. Then he opened one of the doors and entered. There was a matchless
and unique city inside. He saw palaces standing, whose pillars were of
emerald and ruby. There were windows in every palace and every window
had another window above it. All of them were made from gold, silver,
pearls, ruby and emerald. The doors of those palaces were like the gates
of city, whose wood was fragrant and were decorated with rubies. The
flooring of those palaces was made from the balls of pearls, musk and
saffron. When he saw those buildings, he did not find anyone there and
became frightened. There were flower-beds on all four sides of those
palaces.

Trees were planted in them and fruits were hanging from the trees.
Streams were flowing beneath them. He thought that it is the same
paradise, which Allah has promised for His virtuous servants. He thanked
God for making him enter Paradise in the world itself. Then he picked up
small

bottles containing pearls, musk and saffron as much as he could.
However, he could not remove even a single emerald or ruby because they
were strongly fitted on walls and door and balls containing pearls, musk
and saffron were spread in palaces and rooms like sand. He collected as
much as he could and then came out, mounted his camel and reached Yemen
from the way he had come. There he showed those balls of pearls, saffron
and musk and narrated whatever he had seen. He sold the pearls, which
had turned saffron and changed because of ravages of time. This news
spread and when it reached Muawiyah bin Abi Sufyan, he sent a messenger
to the governor of Sanaa and summoned that person. Thus, the person went
to Muawiyah. He enquired about that city in private and asked what he
had seen in it. He narrated the entire incident to him and showed him
the pearls, musk and saffron he had picked up from there and said: “By
God, even Sulaiman bin Dawood did not have such a city.” Muawiyah called
Kaabul Ahbar and said: “O Abu Ishaq! Have you received the information
about a city in this world, which is made of gold and silver? Its
pillars are made of rubies and emerald and its palaces and windows are
made of pearls. Its flower-beds have trees and streams flow beneath
them?”

Kaab said: “Yes, such a city was built by Shaddad bin Aad. It is Iram
Dhatul Imad, which was praised by Almighty Allah and He says in the book
revealed on His Messenger (s.a.w.s.) that nothing was created like
that.”

Muawiyah said: “Tell me about it.” Kaab said: “There was a person called
Aad-e-Ula and he was not from Aad, the community of Prophet Hud (a.s.).
He had two sons - Shadeed and Shaddad. When Aad died, both of his sons
became kings and came to power so much that everyone in the east and
west started obeying them. Shadeed died first and Shaddad became the
king undisputedly.

He loved books very much. When he used to hear about Paradise that there
would be buildings made of rubies, emerald and pearls, he wished that he
too would make such a paradise like that in this world against God. He
appointed one hundred persons for his work and appointed one thousand
people to help each one of them and ordered: “Look for the best and wide
ground and make a city of gold, silver, rubies, emerald and pearls for
me in it and make the pillars from emerald. Make its pillars from
emerald. Construct palaces in it and make windows in them and construct
more windows above the existing ones. Plant trees of different fruits
below those palaces and make streams flow beneath the trees as I have
read in books about the features of Paradise. I want to construct a city
like that in this world. Those people said: “From where will we get so
many jewels and gold and silver to make a city with them as wished by
you? Shaddad said: “Maybe you people don’t know that all the countries
of world are under my control.” The people said: “Yes, we know that.” He
said: “Go and appoint a group on every mine of gold, silver and jewels
so that they collect as much as you want. Also, get the gold and silver
from people as much as they have.”

Thus, letters were written to the sovereigns of the east and west and
they collected jewels for ten years. Then the city was constructed in
three hundred years. Shaddad lived for nine hundred years. People
informed him

that they had completed the construction of Paradise. He ordered,
“Construct a boundary on all four sides of it and build a thousand
palaces around that boundary and fix a thousand flags near each palace
because each palace would be occupied by one of my viziers. Hence, go
back and complete this work.” Hearing this, those people came back and
constructed as they were ordered and informed him. Now, when he ordered
people to make preparations to go to Iram Dhatul Imad, people collected
belongings for the journey for ten years.

Then, the king departed with an intention of visiting Iram. When he
reached near that paradise and the journey of only a day and night was
left, Lord of worlds sent a voice on him and his companions and all of
them died after hearing it. Neither he could enter Iram nor could any of
his companions do so. It is a characteristic of that Iram that a city
could not be created like that one.

Also, I have noted this fact in books that a person would go to that
Iram. He would see it and narrate it to the people but the people would
not believe him. However, faithful people would enter it during the last
age.”

The author says: If it is permissible for a paradise made on earth to
remain hidden from the eyes of people and no one can find it out and
even though its location is unknown, people believe in it on the basis
of traditions then why don’t they accept the occultation of Qaim
(a.t.f.s.) on the basis of traditions? Also if it is acceptable that
Shaddad bin Aad lived for nine hundred years then why is the long life
of Imam Qaim (a.t.f.s.) objected to?

The narration about Shaddad bin Aad is reported by Abu Wael and reports
about the Qaim (a.t.f.s.) are narrated from Prophets (a.s.) and Imams
(a.s.). Thus, it is mere rejection of truth.

I have seen in*Kitab Muammareen,* in which it is narrated from Hisham
bin Saeed Rihal: I saw a stone in Alexandria, on which it was inscribed
“I am Shaddad bin Aad” who constructed Iram Dhatul Imad such that no
city was constructed like it. I trained many armies and leveled many
battlefields with the power of my arms and constructed Palaces of Iram
when there was no old age and death, and stones were as soft as flowers.
Also, I threw a lot of wealth whose quantity reached twelve storeys in
sea and no one would be able to remove it but the Ummah of (Prophet)
Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) will bring it out.

Aus bin Rabiah bin Kaab bin Umayyah Astami lived for two hundred years
and composed the following verses:

**I lived so much that my family members became wary**

**Of my living with them and my long life**

**And it is justice that apart from two hundred years**

**The fourteen years, which were spent**

**Making one wary of life and every morning**

**Is followed by night**

**My bones had left the flesh like Rahib (his bones)**

**And my heart accepted it.**

Abu Zubaida whose name was Badr bin Hurmula was a Christian and he lived
for one hundred and fifty years.

Nasr bin Duhman bin (Basar bin Bakr bin) Sulaiman bin Ashja’ bin Reeth
bin Ghatfan lived for one hundred and ninety years and all his teeth
fell and all his hair turned white and he became unsound of mind. When
his community needed his advice in one of the matters, they prayed to
Allah to restore his mind and youth. Allah accepted their supplication
and granted him mind and youth and all of his hairs turned black.

Thus, Musallama bin Kharshab Anmari told Anmar bin Bagheez (about this)
and it is said that Ayaz Mardas Salami said:

**Nasr bin Duhman’s life was like a hundred-year-old camel, which he
lived**

**His posture was straightened and his body accepted it**

**And the whiteness of his hair was changed to black for ninety more
years**

**And his youth began once again after he had lost it**

**His also regained his sense**

**Even though he had lost it but he died in spite of all these things.**

Saub bin Saddaq Abadi lived for two hundred years.

Khatham bin Auf bin Hudhaimah lived for a long period and composed the
following verses:

**Till when would Khatham have lived?**

**Who neither had anyone to support him and nor was he rich**

**Alas, there is no medicine for death.**

Thalaba bin Kaab bin Zaid bin Abdul Ash-hal Ausi lived for two hundred
years and composed the following verses:

**I spent life with many groups**

**But all of them went away. They became so silent**

**That when I call them, they don’t respond**

**Thus, my life was lengthened too much for me after them**

**Hence, I used to sit in a corner of my house whole day**

**And spent those days wishing for death.**

Kaab bin Rida-ah bin Kaab bin Dhahl bin Qais Nakh-I’ lived for three
hundred years and composed the following verses:

**And it did not remain, alas, what an infamy**

**I am neither the father of sons nor of daughters**

**Nor am I a barren woman for whom there is no sleep**

**But the dead are counted daily**

**Is there anyone who would buy my life and I would sell it to him?**

Adi bin Hatim Tai lived for one hundred and twenty years.

Ammabaat bin Qais bin Harith bin Shaiban Kindi lived for a hundred and
sixty years.

Umair bin Hajir bin Umair bin Abdul Azza bin Qumair lived for one
hundred and seventy years and composed the following verses:

**I got involved and the time destroyed me and I received**

**Hundred more years of life and ten more years after that**

**And I have become like a chick that I am neither included among
dead,**

**Which would have ended my problems nor am I included among alive to
give order**

**I spent a long period of my life with the people of my tribe**

**Now I am like a man heading to his grave.**

Awwaam bin Mundhar bin Zubaid bin Qais bin Haritha bin Laam lived for a
long period during the time of ignorance and saw the time of Umar bin
Abdul Aziz and met him. When his cloak used to fall, his ribs were
visible one above the other. Hence, he asked, “What did you get?” He
recited the following lines in reply:

**And I swear by Allah that I don’t know whether I**

**Have seen the people of the time of Dhulqarnain and thought that I am
older than them**

**When you will remove my shirt so that**

**You would see the chest, which neither has flesh nor blood.**

Saif bin Wahab bin Judhaimah Taai lived for two hundred years and
composed the following verses:

**Know that very soon I am going away**

**And don’t think I am a liar**

**Whichever cloak I wore was thus, destroyed**

**And the controlling power saw me**

**And warded off the enemy and benefited his friend so that someone may
live with him.**

Irtaah bin Dush-habah Muzni lived for one hundred and twenty years. His
agnomen was Abu Waleed. Abdul Malik bin Marwan told him, “O Irtah! Is
something left from your verses? He replied, “O Amirul Momineen! I do
not drink wine nor do I sing nor get angry while the poets who come to
me do not have these characteristics. Then I said:

**I showed man that nights eat him up**

**Like earth eats up the fragments of iron**

**And when death arrived**

**The life of Adam’s son did not remain even for a moment**

**And know it that it would come back again in order to**

**Complete the offering of Abu Waleed.**

Abdul Malik was taken aback. He said: “O Irtah!” Then Irtah said: “O
Amirul Momineen! My agnomen is Abu Waleed.”

Also Ubaid bin Abras lived for three hundred years and composed the
following verses:

**I was destroyed and the time destroyed me**

**And my example is like Banu Naa’th and like the polestar.**

Then Numan bin Mundhir arrested him and killed him on the day he was
angry.

Also Shuraih bin Hani lived for one hundred and twenty years till he was
killed during the time of Hajjaj bin Yusuf. He composed the following
verses about his weakness and old age:

**I became aged and continued to bear the sufferings of old age**

**And I spent a long period among polytheists**

**Then I saw the time of prophet who was a warner**

**And after that I saw Siddique and Farooq also**

**And I also saw the day of Mahran and Shushtar**

**And the gatherings of Siffeen and Nahrawan**

**Alas, I am sad about this long life.**

Masjaah’ bin Sabaa’: Also, a person from Bani Z’abbah who was called
Masjaah’ bin Sabaa’ Z’abbi lived for a long time and composed the
following verses:

**I went around the earth many times**

**I became weak and wished that I should have died**

**And I was destroyed and if day**

**And night are destroyed then they come back**

**And a month comes after a month**

**And a year comes after every year.**

Luqman[^1] Aadi, the elder lived for five hundred years. Umar lived for
seven Unsurs; and every Unsur consists of eighty years. He was included
in the delegation of the community of Aad, which had gone to Haram to
pray for rain. He used to keep a female young one of a vulture on the
mountain, which was his actual home till the vulture remained alive.
After that he used to catch another one and bring it up till nothing
remained of it and his life was very long. Thus, it is said about him
that he lived till now without having anything.

Also, many famous poems are quoted from him. He was granted strength and
sharp hearing sense and sight, which was necessary for him and he has
narrated a number of traditions.

Zuhair bin Junaab bin Hubal bin Abdullah bin Kunana bin Bakr bin Auf bin
Uzrah bin Zaidullah bin Rufaidah bin Thaur bin Kalb Kalbi lived for
three hundred years.

Maziqiyyah whose name was Umar bin Aamir was like water from the sky. He
used to spread life wherever he went. He was called Maziqiyyah because
he lived for eight hundred years. He was a common man for four hundred
years and ruled for four hundred years. He used to wear two suits
everyday and then tear them so that no one reuses them.

Hubal bin Abdullah bin Kananah lived for six hundred years.

Abu Tahaman lived for one hundred and fifty years.

Mutasawwaghar bin Rabia’h bin Ka’ab bin Zaid Munah bin Tameem lived for
three hundred years. He saw the time of Islam but did not convert. The
verses quoted from him are famous.

Duwaid bin Zaid bin Nahd lived for four hundred and fifty years. He
said:

**The time surrounded me**

**And the time is such that if someone makes something, it destroys it**

**Whoever is corrected today, it defaces him tomorrow.**

When the time of his death arrived, he called all his children and
willed them: “Do bad to people and do not accept their apology and do
not accept their revenge.”

Rabi bin Zaba bin Wahab bin Bagheez bin Malik bin Saad bin Adi bin
Fuzara lived for two hundred and forty years. He saw the time of Islam
but did not accept Islam.

Maadi Karb Himyari from the progeny of Dhi Yazn lived for two hundred
and fifty years.

Also Tharyah bin Abdullah Jofi lived for three hundred years. Thus, he
came to Umar bin Khattab in Medina and said: “I have seen in this
desert, in which you are that the people of my community read your
testimony i.e.*Laa ilaaha illallaah.* He was accompanied by his son at
that time who stumbled as he walked. He had become very old. He was
told, “O Tharyah! Your son has become old and you are still alive.” He
replied, “I swear by God, I had married his mother when I was seventy
years old. However, this wife of mine was very chaste and loyal.
Whenever I was happy, she used to treat me so that my eyes used to
become cool and if I was upset she used to coax and make me happy.
However, this son of mine has married a woman who is very immodest and
evil-doer. Whenever he is happy, she troubles him so much that he
becomes unhappy and if he is sad she abuses so much that he approaches
his death.

Auf bin Kunana and his wise statements
--------------------------------------

Auf bin Kunana bin Auf bin Uzrah bin Zaid bin Thaur bin Kalb lived for
three hundred years. When his final moments arrived, he gathered his
children and willed:

“Fear Allah, do not mourn or grieve (for loss of wealth). Keep away from
distrust. Do not disturb wild animals otherwise all of them will come
out of their shelters and you will be disgraced. Do not hurt people and
live with peace and harmony. Do not ask excessive questions lest people
get fed up with you.

Do not speak except the truth, so that people praise you. Treat people
with love so that their hearts become spacious for you. Do not deprive
people of benefiting from you. Otherwise, their hearts will become full
of complaints for you and include yourselves among those who give gifts
to their children secretly. Do not spend much time with people lest you
would be considered lowly. Be patient during the time of difficulty and
make the time wear its clothes. Certainly speaking nice with difficulty
is better than speaking bad with ease.

Be humble to one who is humble to you, for people come closer because of
love. If someone expresses hatred and dislike do not move away from
promise and commitment. If someone seeks excuse from you, accept his
excuse. Keep your promises and do not break them.

Lift your status by keeping away from falsehood, because human
misfortune is in falsehood and speaking against the will. Do not express
your helplessness to people. Otherwise, you will lose respect in their
eyes. Fear poverty because it is a disgrace. Treat your equals honorably
and wish that you are uplifted. The beauty of women should not separate
you from healthy lineage and involve you in worry because marriage with
virtuous women invite respect and honor.

Be humble while meeting your family. Do not betray them and do not show
indifference in a matter, in which they are united, because opposition
is against obedience of a leader. First do good to your people and then
to others and do not fear the wishes of your near and dear ones, because
it is a cause of extinguishment of fire of hard work and non-fulfillment
of duties. And leave the one who sleeps and become their helpers during
the time of their difficulties and pains so that you will conquer and
fear from asking

that, whose benefits did not reach them. Treat your neighbors with
respect who comes to you with expectation. Give preference to the right
of weak over your right.

Tolerate fools so that your sorrow and grief is reduced. Keep away from
groupism, because it is a disgrace. Do not trouble yourself more than
your capacity except during the time of difficulty so that your are not
condemned inspite of your helplessness; and you should have such a
strength, which is better than supporting them through apologies in the
state of helplessness (i.e. you should assist them before it is time to
seek forgiveness) and make effort and do not be sluggish, because effort
keeps away poverty and helplessness. You all should shout one slogan
because it is a cause of respect and keep your edges sharpened. Do not
pay attention to disrespectful people nor bring them near you and do not
meet wicked people, because you will be hurt by them. Do not be jealous
among yourselves else you will be destroyed. Miserliness is a disease.
Keep away from it. Elevate your status through generosity, kindness and
by respecting the purity of excellent people. Spend and gain love. Take
care of knowledge and respect of knowledgeable and excellent persons.
Benefit from the experience of the experienced persons. They would not
stop you even from a smallest deed, which contains reward and do not
consider people lowly. Otherwise the same would be returned to you,
because a person is judged by the purity of his heart and purity of his
tongue and when you are involved in fear of something it is necessary
for you to be steadfast instead of hurrying up. Also, see to it that you
make your place near rulers through love, because whoever tried to
disrespect them was disrespected himself and whoever elevated them was
elevated. Show courtesy, because eyes are pointing you out. Show
humility with dignity to people so that your Lord likes you.” Then he
said:

**“And every intelligent and shrewd will not advise you**

**Nor every advisor is intelligent**

**However, if both things are collected in one person**

**Then it is necessary for you to obey him.”**

Saifi bin Riyah bin Aktham who was from the progeny of Asad bin Amr bin
Tameem, lived for two hundred and seventy years. He used to say, “Your
brother is under your control in all circumstances, except during the
time of war, because when a man picks up a weapon, he cannot be
controlled by anyone. Sword is the best advisor. Avoiding pride keeps
praises alive. The greatest punishment is that given to a traitor. The
mischief of help is injustice. The worst character is one, which is
troublesome and bad manners are cause of increasing displeasure.” Then
he hit his staff on ground and recited the following verses:

**It is necessary for a destroyed person that he realizes his faults
before his death comes**

**And human beings got knowledge so that they understand everything.**

Inscription on the Ehram Tablet of Egypt
----------------------------------------

Abdullah bin Muhammad bin Abdul Wahhab bin Nasr Sajzi narrated from Abul
Hasan bin Muhammad bin Abdullah bin Hamza bin Zaid

She’rani who was from the progeny of Ammar bin Yasir that Abul Qasim
Muhammad bin Qasim Misri narrated that:

“The treasures of Egypt opened for Abul Jaish Hamaduyah bin Ahmad bin
Tuloon so much that they had not opened for anyone else. When he
intended to raze the pyramids of Egypt, his trustworthy advisers advised
him not to do so but he did not listen and appointed one thousand
laborers for this work who continued to dig the area around it for one
year but could not find a way and when they intended to return without
any hope, they saw a hole. Hence, they estimated that it was the same
door and opened it through its mechanism. (Muhammad bin Muzaffar says
that they saw a foundation behind that, which was very strong. They
removed and cleansed it.) It contained an inscription in Greek. All the
wise people from all the regions of Egypt were called to read that
inscription, but no one was successful in deciphering it.

There was a person called Abu Abdullah Madini who was one of the great
scholars of the world. He told Abul Jaish Hamaduyah bin Ahmad, “I know
an Ethiopian Bishop whose age is three hundred and sixty years now and
he knows this writing. He had tried to teach this writing to me also but
I loved Arabic more and hence, I could not learn it. That person is
alive even today.” Eventually, Abul Jaish Hamaduyah wrote a letter to
the Shah of Ethiopia to send that Bishop to him. The Shah of Ethiopia
wrote a letter in reply: the Bishop has grown very old and has become
used to the environment of this place. If he leaves this environment and
goes to another place then there is a risk that the environment will not
be suitable for him there and he would die. Also, he can no longer bear
long journeys. His presence is a cause of honor, joy and tranquility for
us. Therefore, if you want him to read something or explain or to answer
your questions then write and send them here.” Hence, that marble slab
was kept in a tray and sent to the city of Aswan. Then it was sent to
Ethiopia from Aswan, which was near it. When that piece reached
Ethiopia, the Bishop read it and translated it into Ethiopian language.
It was then translated into Arabic from Ethiopian. It was written as
follows in it:

“I am Rayyan bin Dumagh.” Abdullah Madini asked the Bishop who that
person was. He replied, “He was the father of King Aziz of Egypt during
the time of Prophet Yusuf (a.s.) whose name was Waleed bin Rayyan bin
Dumagh. The Aziz of Egypt lived for seven hundred years. His father
Rayyan lived for one thousand and a hundred years and Dumagh lived for
three hundred years. In short, it was inscribed as follows:

“I am Rayyan bin Dumagh who had set out to know where river Nile
originated, because I was not aware of it. I was accompanied by four
thousand people and I continued to travel for eighty months and I
reached darkness and the ocean. I saw that river Nile cut that
encircling ocean and crossed it. There was no way for me to cross the
river and only one person was left with me out of four thousand. I
feared that my rule would come to an end and hence, I returned to Egypt.
Then I constructed many pyramids and cellars. I also constructed two
such pyramids, in which I kept all my treasures safely and I have
composed the following verses about it:

**My knowledge consists of that which exists**

**And my I don’t have knowledge of unseen and Allah knows better**

**And provided firmness in creation of a thing, which required it**

**And Allah is the Most Powerful and Wisest**

**Thus, I tried to find out the origin of River Nile,**

**I became wary and man is wary**

**I spent eighty months in journey**

**Even though I was surrounded by the people Bani Hajar and a very huge
army**

**Till the point we had left behind all men and Jinn**

**And I came face to face with a dark river**

**Thus, I accepted that there is no stage after this**

**For any person who dares before or after me**

**Then I returned to my country and stayed there**

**Sometimes in calamities and sometimes with bounties**

**I am the owner of all the pyramids of Egypt**

**And of all the earthen utensils and I am one who initiated**

**I have left in it signs of my craftsmanship and wisdom**

**And handed over to the time, which would neither get torn or
destroyed**

**And it has many treasures and strange things**

**And this act is a cause of bitterness and disappointment for the
time**

**My locks will be opened and my strange things will come out**

**In the hands of a friend of Lord, which would shine like a star during
the last age**

**His actions will be seen around the House of Allah**

**And he will reach the peak and then it would be a time of peace and
harmony**

**Eight and nine and two and four**

**And other ninety or nine will be killed or taken captives**

**Then there would be clashes for ninety-nine years**

**And all signs of mine would come into their hands and will be
destroyed**

**All my treasures will come out**

**However I see that blood would be shed because of this**

**I have written my words on rocks**

**They would remain and would then be destroyed and will then become
extinct.**

After looking at this inscription, Abu Jaish Hamaduya bin Ahmad said:
“This is a thing, which would be used by Qaim of progeny of Muhammad
(s.a.w.s.).” Then that marble slab was kept back in its place.

A year later, Abu Jaish was killed in the state of intoxication on his
bed by his slaves. It was known after this incident when pyramids were
constructed and by whom and it is one of the most authentic narrations
about Nile and pyramids.

Zabira bin (Saeed bin) Saad bin Sahm Qarshi lived for a hundred and
eighty years. He lived during the time of Islam also. His death was
accidental.

Lubaid bin Rabia
----------------

Lubaid bin Rabia Ja’fari lived for a hundred and forty years and lived
during the time of Islam and accepted it. When he was of seventy years,
he composed the following verses:

**As if I have spent seventy years**

**And took the cloak off my shoulders**

**This soul is crying and complaining to me**

**That I lifted you for seven years more than seventy years**

**If you complete three more years then you would get a wish**

**And eighty years will be completed after those three years**

When he was ninety, he composed the following verses:

**As if I have completed ninety years now**

**Thus, I have taken off the bridle of life along with it**

**The daughters of the time attack me from unknown place**

**However, I am injured with something other than arrows.**

When he completed one hundred and ten years, he wrote:

**A person who lived for a hundred years and completed ten more years
after that**

**Then what is missing in his age?**

When he completed one hundred and twenty years, he wrote:

**I spent a long life before I fell ill**

**But there is no place for this adamant soul.**

When he was a hundred and forty, he composed the following verses:

**Now I am fed up with life and its length**

**And with the question of people, “Lubaid, how are you?”**

**Men were overcome but you did not lose**

**That lengthy period, which will be forever and elongated**

**If a day comes for me and a night after that**

**Then both of them come once again after they have passed.**

When he was in his final moments, he willed to his son, “Your father
will not only die but will be destroyed. Thus, when your father’s soul
is captured, close his eyes, make him face Qibla and wrap him in his
clothes and tell everyone strictly that they should not cry or shout.
Then prepare nice food in the large vessel, in which I used to feast and
send it to those people in the mosque who have mourned for me. Make the
people eat it after the Imam completes prayer with salutation. When they
have finished eating, tell them that their brother Lubaid has died and
request them to attend my funeral and that Almighty Allah has captured
my soul.” Then he recited following verses:

**“When you bury your father, put some wood and wet sand on him**

**And use such strong planks that uninvited guests do not manage to make
nests inside**

**And it is certain that the face would become like fine sand although
it is unbelievable.”**

There is another tradition that Lubaid had taken an oath that when
northern wind blows, he would slaughter some camels and fill them in a
large vessel and invite everyone for feast.

When Walid bin Uqbah bin Abi Muit became the governor of Kufa, he
delivered a sermon and said after praising and glorifying Allah, “O
people!

You know about Lubaid bin Rabia Ja’fari and his courtesy and helpfulness
and you also know that he had taken an oath that whenever northern wind
blows, he would slaughter a few camels. Hence it is your duty that to
help him for his courtesy.” Saying this, he got down from the pulpit and
sent five camels and wrote the following verses to Lubaid:

**I see that when Abi Aqeel Lubaid’s northern wind blows**

**The butchers sharpen their knives**

**He is a Ja’fari who is very tall and has a broad chest**

**He is generous like his lineage and like a sharp sword**

**And these virtues are present in Ja’fari sons also**

**As if there is dearth of wealth for him.**

It is said that Walid had send twenty camels. When Lubaid read those
verses, he said: “May Allah give ten rewards to Amir for this. Probably,
he does not know that I have stopped composing verses.” Then, Lubaid
called his five-year-old daughter and said: “Reply these verses of
Amir.” The girl thought for a while and then recited the following
verses:

**Now, whenever Abu Aqeel’s northern wind blows**

**We would remember Walid**

**A tall one with broad chest**

**And one who is related to Abdush Shams**

**He helped Lubaid like long ropes, like a caravan of camels**

**On which the people of Bani Haam are mounted**

**O Abu Wahab (Walid)! May God reward you for it**

**We have slaughtered the camels gifted by you and**

**Please be generous another time also because a generous is one who**

**Is generous again and again and our oath is fulfilled again and
again.**

Lubaid (after hearing these verses) said: “O daughter! You have quoted
very nice verses but you should not have asked for anything in them.”
She replied, “A king never gets angry when asked for something.” Lubaid
said: “Then you are a very good poet.”

Dhul Asba Adwani whose name was Harthan bin Harith bin Muharrith bin
Rabia bin Hubairah bin Thalaba bin Zarb bin Uthman lived for three
hundred years.

Ja’far bin Qabt lived for three hundred years and lived during the time
of Islam.

Aamir bin Zarb Adwani lived for three hundred years

Muhassin bin Utbaan bin Zaalim bin Amr bin Qatiah bin Harith bin Salama
bin Mazin Zubaidi lived for two hundred and fifty years and composed the
following verses:

**Beware, O Muslim (community)! I am not from you**

**I am such a man whose strength is hungry**

**When I was challenged by two persons, I told them to come**

**They said: “Every person who is challenged, displays his strengths**

**Beware, O (Bani) Muslim! My life has made me wary**

**And trade and traveling for it has made me weak**

**I have become a burden for my house because of illness and weakness**

**And every stranger and relative has become wary of me**

**This time and days are like a table with food laid on it**

**Which has a part for every hungry person.**

Aad bin Shaddad Yarbui lived for a hundred and fifty years.

Aktham bin Saifee
-----------------

Aktham bin Saifi from the progeny of Asad bin Amr bin Tameem lived for
three hundred and sixty years. Some say that he lived for one hundred
and ninety years. He saw the time of Islam. There is difference of
opinion whether he accepted Islam or not. Most people say that he did
not accept Islam. He said about this:

**Certainly, a man should spend ninety years of life**

**If it is extended by hundred more years then an ignorant (person) does
not become wary of life**

**If six and four are subtracted from two hundred then one hundred and
ninety would remain**

**It is when nights are also counted.**

Muhammad bin Salama says, “When Aktham wanted to accept Islam, his son
made him die out of thirst. Also, I have heard that this verse was
revealed for him:

<p dir="rtl">
وَمَن يَخْرُجْ مِن بَيْتِهِ مُهَاجِرًا إِلَى اللّهِ وَرَسُولِهِ ثُمَّ
يُدْرِكْهُ الْمَوْتُ فَقَدْ وَقَعَ أَجْرُهُ عَلى اللّهِ
</p>

***“And whoever flies in Allah’s way, he will find in the earth many a
place of refuge and abundant resources, and whoever goes forth from his
house flying to Allah and His Apostle, and then death overtakes him, his
reward is indeed with Allah.”***

There was no one wiser than him among the people of Arabia. When he got
the news of annunciation of apostleship of the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.), he sent his son Halees to Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and said: “O
son! I want to give you some advices. You should follow them after you
depart till your return to me. Try your luck in the month of Rajab. Then
try to make it lawful so that it becomes lawful, because unlawful is not
only illegal for oneself but also for one’s acquaintances. During this
journey, you should stay with the person who is most respectful, in
whichever tribe you happen to pass by. Maintain your relations with
noble persons. Keep away from disgraced ones, because if they would not
have been disgraced then they would have been respected in their
community and when you approach that person then first of all, I am
aware of him and his family as he belongs to one of the most honored
households of Quraish. You should keep two things in mind. Even if he
desires kingdom, you should honor him and stand in front of him. Do not
sit unless he asks you to do so. In this way, you would not be hurt by
him and you will be benefited by him and if he is really a prophet then
Allah would not like misbehaving with him. You would find that all his
matters are right and you would find humility in him. He would be an
obedient one of his Lord. Be humble when you meet him and do not say
anything except what I have ordered you. Remember whatever I have told
you and follow it.

Then he handed over a letter addressed to the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) to
his son, which contained the following text: In the name of Allah, this
letter is from a servant to another servant. I got the news of you
apostleship, but I

don’t know the truth. If you have seen something then show me and if you
have received knowledge then give it to me also and include me in your
treasury. Wassalaam.

Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) replied this letter as follows: From Muhammad,
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) to Aktham bin Saifi. I thank Allah
that he ordered me to say ‘There is no God except Allah’ and order
others to do so. All creatures are created by Allah and every order
belongs to Allah. Only He gives life and only He gives death. Only He
will assemble people and we have to return only to Him. I have been sent
to teach you people the manners of messengers and you would certainly be
asked about the great news and that great news would be known soon.”

When Aktham bin Saifi read the letter of Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.), he
asked his son, “How was he according to you?” He said: “I saw that he
orders good things and stops from doing bad deeds.” Thus, he told his
son, “O son! Gather Banu Tameem but do not bring any fool, because every
person has an opinion and a fool’s opinion is weak however physically
strong he might be. Whoever does not have intelligence, does not have
goodness (When Banu Tameem gathered, he delivered a sermon following:)

“O Banu Tameem! Now, I have become aged and I have entered the disgrace
of old age. If I say a right thing, you must accept it. Otherwise,
inform me about a right thing so that I become steadfast on it. My son
had gone to meet a person. He informed that that person orders to do
good things and stops from evil. He narrates benefits of good character
and restrains one from having bad character. He orders worship of One
Allah. He prevents from worshiping idols and fire. He says that he is
the messenger of Allah and that messengers had come before him also who
had books and ordered worship of One Allah. Hence it is the duty of you
all that you help Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) in his mission. If the orders
given by him are rightful, you will benefit and if it is not rightful,
it is your duty to hide him and do not become angry with him.”

“Earlier Asqaf Najran had also narrated his characteristics. Before
that, Sufyan bin Majashi’ had also talked about him and hence, he named
his son Muhammad. Those among you who possess opinion know it well that
the matter, towards which he is inviting is a good thing. Hence, you
should be the first to accept him and do not delay this matter. If you
obey him, it would be a cause of your honor and you would be manifested.
Make haste in obeying him before you are compelled to do so, because I
see that he would not leave any high or low position and would not live
without uprooting fixed thing and would reach everywhere. Even if it is
supposed that whatever he is inviting towards is not a religion then too
it is merciful character. Accept whatever I say and follow it. I am
asking for a thing from you, which can never be snatched from you. Your
population is a majority in Arabia and your cities are largest. I think
that even if a disgraced one will follow him, he would become respectful
and even if a respectful person opposes him, he would be disgraced. You
people are respectful. Hence, your respect will be doubled. Then there
would be no one to compete with you. Remember that those who go ahead do
not leave anything for those who are left behind. Leadership is for
those who come first and those who are left

behind have to obey. Thus, hasten in your work, because determination is
strength and precaution is helplessness.

Malik bin Nuwairah said: “O people! This old man has become unsound of
mind.” Aktham said: “Curse be upon the person who is aggrieved and
extremely sorrowful. You people kept quiet over my words. The worst
thing for an advice is that people turn their faces away from it.”

“Woe unto you, O Malik! You would be destroyed. When truth becomes
manifest, it manifests its followers also and backward people also come
in the level of those who have progressed. Thus, you should make it
obligatory for yourself to be among those who stand up for establishing
truth. Now, when you have considered me elder to you, bring my camel so
that I mount on it.” Saying this, he mounted on his camel and his son
and nephew walked behind him. Then he said: “I am sad about the work,
which I could not accomplish and which did not take me ahead.”

Banu Tai wrote a letter to Aktham. They were his maternal uncles. Some
narrators say that Bani Marrah wrote a letter to him. They were also his
maternal uncles. They sought advice from him. Aktham wrote to them in
reply:

“So to say: I advise you to fear Allah and maintain good relations,
because its roots are strong and branches are spread out. Keep away from
sins and breaking relations, because its roots are weak and branches do
not spread. Do not marry foolish women because it is abominable to have
sexual intercourse with them and the children born are useless. Consider
the worth of camels. They are like a strong fort for Arabia. Do not load
them more than their capacity. They are fixed as dower and accepted in
expiation for killing. Their milk is a gift for elders and food to
children. They can also be used for operating grinding mill. A person
who considers his worth will never be destroyed. Poverty of intelligence
is the real poverty. A virtuous man would never allow his wealth to be
destroyed. Sometimes, a single man happens to be better than a hundred
men and sometimes a single group happens to be better than two groups
together. A person, who complains about time, bears pain. A person, who
is thankful for his fortune lives a good life. Lust and greed are
barriers in the way of (a person with) opinion and habit should be in
accordance with good manners. A needy, who has love in his heart is
better than a rich who has hatred in his heart. World is a temporary
abode, which will be destroyed. Whatever is bound to come, will come in
spite of your weakness even if you fail to seek it and whatever is bound
to go, will go in spite of all the force and attempts made by you. The
defect of poverty and hunger wastes honor. Jealousy is such a disease,
for which there is no medicine; rejoicing at another’s distress comes
after that. If a person treats others with goodness, he too would be
treated with goodness. Foolishness is accompanied by shame. Forbearance
is the pillar of mind. The collection of all (good) deeds is patience;
and forgiveness is the best act. Keeping promises, maintains friendship
and the love for a person who shows inclination increases.”

Wise bequest of Aktham bin Saifi to his children
------------------------------------------------

Aktham bin Saifi gathered his children at the time of his death and told
them: “O my sons! I lived for a long period of time and want to make
some wills to you before I die.

I will you that you should fear Allah and to maintain relations.
Continue to do good deeds so that your number increases. Neither its
roots nor its branches deplete. Keep away from disobedience of Allah and
breaking relations because neither roots nor branches of a person who
breaks relations are strong. Control your tongue, because it is your
enemy. Even a friend would not like to hear a true thing and look at the
necks of camels and load them according to their capacity because they
are given in dowers and also accepted as blood-money. You must not marry
foolish girls, because it would be nothing but trouble for you and
children from them would be nothing but trouble. To have proper food
during a journey guarantees comfort and strength and a person who does
not become hopeless after losing a thing will get peace and if a person
remained satisfied with whatever he has, his eyes will be cooled. Leave
that (wrong) deed before you are embarrassed and according to me, it is
better to do a good deed than committing a sin. No man dies without
knowing his value and status. Helplessness during distress is a barrier
for dignity. Pity on that scholar who is fearless about his foolishness;
and fear takes insight away. Whenever some issue is brought to him, he
becomes confused and when the work is taken back, he is recognized by
clever as well as foolish. Extravagance during happy times is stupidity.
Attaining heights give respect. Do not be sad if you get a little,
because you will get more. Do not answer a thing, which is not asked to
you. Do not laugh at a thing, which is not worthy of laughing. Express
your aloofness from this world and do not have hatred. Jealousy resides
among relatives and when everyone gathers in one place, their weapons
start cackling. You get near because of love but do not depend on
proximity. Also, it is obligatory that you reform through wealth,
because the reformation of wealth and property cannot take place without
your reformation. Pay attention to your diet. Do not rely on your
brother’s wealth to fulfill your needs. It is like that one who tries to
enclose water in the hollowed palm. If a person wants to become rich, he
should spend on his family members. Respect your leaders. The game of a
respectful woman is to play with spindle (i.e. she remains busy in her
work). When there is no way out, patience is the last policy.”

Qirdah bin Thalaba bin Nafasha Sulooli lived for one hundred and thirty
years during the time of ignorance. Then he saw the period of Islam and
accepted it.

Masaad bin Junaab bin Maraarah was from the progeny of Amr bin Yarboo’
bin Hanzala bin Zaid bin Munaah and he lived for a hundred and forty
years.

Qus bin Saada Ayaadi lived for six hundred years and he was one who
composed the following verses:

**Does a raining cloud take peace away from a person who is in a bad
condition?**

**Or it showers favor on him?**

**Whatever has passed away and lost from the hands then**

**There is no use of lamenting and saying, “Only if it would have been
as such”.**

Similarly, Lubaid says:

**And Qus said “Only if” and “If I would have been as such”**

**He left Luqman the wise behind by saying that.**

Harith bin Kaab Midh-haji lived for a hundred and six years.

Shaykh Saduq’s view
-------------------

The author says: All traditions narrated by us are also related by our
opponents from Muhammad bin Saaeb Kalbi, Muhammad bin Ishaq Bashaar,
Awaana bin Hakam, Isa bin Zaid bin Aab and Haitham bin Adi Tai. And the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said: “Whatever has happened in the previous
Ummahs will happen in this Ummah also, in the same order.”

Thus, if it is appropriate that long life was prevalent among previous
Ummahs and the incidents of occultation of proofs of Allah (a.s.) took
place in previous centuries, why should the occultation of Imam Qaim
(a.t.f.s.) and his long life be rejected in spite of the fact that there
are traditions from the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) and Holy Imams
(a.s.) about his, which are narrated in this book?

Narrated to us Ali bin Ahmad Daqaaq from Muhammad bin Abi Abdullah Kufi
from Musa bin Imran Nakhai from his uncle, Husain bin Yazid Naufili from
Ghiyath bin Ibrahim from Imam Ja’far Sadiq from his holy father from his
holy ancestors that Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said:

“Whatever has happened in previous Ummahs will happen exactly in the
same way in this Ummah also, in the same order.”

Muhammad bin Zakariya from Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Imarah from Imam
Ja’far Sadiq from his father from his holy ancestors that Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) said:

“I swear by Him, Who made me a rightful Prophet and harbinger of good
news that all those things are going to occur in my Ummah in the same
order, which had occurred during previous Ummahs. So much so that if a
snake entered a hole in Banu Israel, it would happen in my Ummah also.”

Narrated to us Shareef Abul Hasan Ali bin Musa bin Ahmad bin Ibrahim bin
Muhammad bin Abdullah from Abu Ali Hasan bin Rakaam from Ahmad bin
Muhammad Naufili from Ahmad bin Hilal from Uthman bin Isa Kilaabi from
Khalid bin Najeeh from Hamza bin Hamraan from his father from Saeed bin
Jabeer that he heard Syedul Aabideen Ali bin Husain bin Ali bin Abi
Talib (a.s.) saying:

“Our Qaim (a.t.f.s.) has Sunnah of prophets. The Sunnah of Prophet Nuh,
Prophet Ibrahim, Prophet Musa, Prophet Isa, Prophet Ayyub and Prophet
Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) is included in it.” The Sunnah of Prophet Nuh is a
long life, secret birth and remaining hidden from people is the Sunnah
of Prophet Ibrahim. The Sunnah of Prophet Musa is fear and occultation.
The Sunnah of Prophet Isa is that people have difference of opinion
about him. The Sunnah of Prophet Ayyub is happiness after bearing
calamities and Sunnah of Prophet Muhammad is that he will come out
carrying a sword.”

Thus, if it is correct that the incidents of long life were prevalent
during previous ages, it is appropriate that this Sunnah is true for
Imam Qaim (a.t.f.s.) also, who is the twelfth Imam. It is not possible
that nothing will be

left in the occultation of Imam (a.t.f.s.) and as the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) said: “Even if one day is left before this world perishes
then Allah will prolong that day enough so that Imam Qaim (a.t.f.s.)
will reappear and fill the world with justice as much as it would have
been filled with injustice and oppression and we would get Islam only
when we surrender to the commandments of Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and
Holy Imams (a.s.). There is no power and might, except by Allah, the
High and the Mighty.”

During the previous ages, the people who were religious, worshippers and
abstinent used to hide such a person and their matters and this custom
is followed from the beginning of the world till our time. Then how is
it possible to deny the occultation of Imam Qaim (a.t.f.s.)? Only those
people will reject this, whose hearts are filled with infidelity and
misguidance and hatred of the Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and Imams (a.s.).

Sarbabak Hindi
--------------

Saduq also says: Narrated to us Ahmad bin Hasan Qittan from Hasan bin
Ali Aswari from Makki bin Ahmad from Ishaq bin Ibrahim Tusi who lived
for ninety-seven years; he said in the house of Yahya bin Mansur that
Sarbabak was the king of Kanauj in India. We asked him his age. He said
that his age was nine hundred and twenty-five years and that he was a
Muslim. He narrated: The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) sent ten of his
companions to me, including Huzaifah bin Yaman, Amr bin Aas, Usamah bin
Zaid, Abu Musa Ashari, Sahib Rumi and Safinah etc. They invited me to
Islam and I accepted it. When he kissed the letters of the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) I asked him: In spite of your physical weakness, how do you
sit for the ritual prayer? He replied: the Almighty Allah has said:

<p dir="rtl">
الَّذِينَ يَذْكُرُونَ اللّهَ قِيَامًا وَقُعُودًا وَعَلَىَ جُنُوبِهِمْ
</p>

***“Those who remember Allah standing and sitting and lying on their
sides.” (Surah Aale Imran 3:191)***

I asked him: What is your diet? He said: I need a little once a week. I
asked him about his teeth and he said: They have changed twenty times.
In his stable I saw an animal larger than an elephant which is called
Zind Feel. I said: In what way do you make use of it? He replied: He
carries the dirty clothes of the servants to the washer man. The extent
of his kingdom was having length and breadth of four years of travel and
his capital was fifty farsakhs from all sides. On every gate there were
120000 troops so that if any attack is launched from there they may
tackle it effectively without needing enforcements. The king himself
stayed at the center of his capital. I heard him say: I reached a
western country and saw a desert in which there was no vegetation. After
traveling for sometime I reached the people of Musa (a.s.) the roof of
their houses were equal in height and the store houses of rations were
located outside the town. They brought home some rations and left the
rest in the store houses. The graves of their dead were inside their
houses and their orchards were located at a distance of two farsakhs.
None of them were old in age and I did not see any of them ill or on the
verge of death. There was a market also where one would go if one wanted
anything and weigh and take whatever one liked without the shop owner
being present there. When they wanted to pray they would come,

pray and then go back. There were no fights among them ever; they spent
all the time in prayers and never talked of anything except about God
and death.”

The author (r.a.) says: If our opponents consider the life of Sarbabak,
the king of India as possible they must not present any excuse with
regard to the age of the Proof of Allah and there is no power and
strength except by Allah.

Abdullah Yemeni Moammar
-----------------------

***Al Ghawaali Al Layali:*** Ahmad bin Fahd has narrated from Bahauddin
Ali bin Abdul Hamid from Yahya bin Najal Kufi that he traveled to Kufa
in 734 A.H. Salih bin Abdullah Yemeni narrated to me that his father,
that is Abdullah Yemeni had a very long age and he had the good fortune
to see His Eminence, Salman Farsi (r.a.) and the latter had narrated the
following traditional report from him that the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.) said: Love of the world is the root of evil. And good
expectation from the Almighty Allah is the root of every worship act.

Shaykh Baba Ratan Moammar
-------------------------

***Al Ghawaali Al- Layali:*** Mala Alimul Waiz Abdullah bin Fatehullah
bin Abdul Malik narrated to me from Tajuddin Hasan Sairshnawi from
Shaykh Jamaluddin Hasan bin Yusuf bin Mutahhar from Maulana Sharafuddin
Ishaq bin Mahmud Yamani, Qadi of Qom from his maternal uncle, Maulana
Imaduddin Muhammad bin Muhammad bin Fathan Qummi from Shaykh Sadruddin
Sawi who says:

Once I went to meet Shaykh Baba Ratan and found that his eyebrows had
sagged on his eyes. He lifted them and looked at me. He said: You can
see my eyes; for a period of time these eyes have had the good fortune
to glance at the luminous face of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.). I
saw the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) digging the trench on the occasion of
the Battle of Khandaq with the people and carrying mud on his back. I
heard him recite the following supplication on that day: O Allah, I beg
You for a pleasant life and an appropriate death; and when I return to
You, there should be no shame for me.

Another Aged Person
-------------------

***Anwarul Madhiya:*** Sayyid Ali bin Abdul Hamid has written in*Anwarul
Madhiya* that Raees Abul Hasan Katib Basri who is considered as a man of
letters, says that in 392 A.H. it had not rained for many years in Basra
when all of sudden pearls rained down there. When Arabs heard about it,
people speaking different tongues came from far off places and I also
came with some people to learn about the details of this incident; so
that perhaps something useful can be learnt from there.

I reached there to find a tall tent and moved towards it with my
friends. A very old man sat there surrounded by his servants and
companions. We greeted the old man and he reciprocated in a nice way. A
person introduced me as the leader of my group and an eloquent Arab. “We
have come to meet you; perhaps we will gain something useful from you.
We have come to you since you are so aged.”

He said: O nephews, I don’t have what you expect from me. I remained
busy in worldly matters. If you want something useful, you must refer to
my respected father; he is in that tent opposite to mine.

So we went to that tent to find an extremely old man lying down on his
bed surrounded by his servants. We came to him, greeted and explained
that his son had sent us to him so that we may learn something useful
from him.

He said: O nephews, I was also involved in worldly matters like my son;
you must refer to my father and he pointed to another tent.

We said: Let us go there and see. We found that old man surrounded by a
crowd of people who hastened to us the moment they saw us approach. They
asked: “What do you want, may Allah bless you?”

“We would like to greet your master and we hope we would learn something
useful from him.”

They said: “You will indeed benefit from meeting our master.”

One of them went inside to seek permission and came back from there.
Then he escorted us inside. We saw a bed in the center of the tent and
two small pillows at the sides and a big pillow in the center on which
the head of that old man was placed. We greeted him in a loud voice and
he replied in a very nice way. One of us repeated the same dialogue that
we had with his son, and told him that he has sent us to him so that we
might be able to gain something from him.

He opened his sunken eyes and asked his servant to help him to sit up.

After that he said: O nephews, pay attention to what I say. None of my
father’s children survived though he was very desirous of them; thus
when I was born, he was very much excited. When I was hardly seven that
my father passed away. After that my uncle took me under his care and
like my father, he was also worried about my survival. So he brought me
to the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) and beseeched: O Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.) this is my nephew and my brother is no more. I am responsible
for his upbringing. I fear that he might also die like the other
children of my brother. So write an amulet for his safety and health.

His Eminence (s.a.w.s.) asked: Why have you forgotten the four Quls?
That is Surah Kafiroon, Surah Ikhlas, Surah Falaq and Surah Naas.

After that I made it a habit to recite those chapters every morning and
blow on myself. No harm touched me ever after that and I have lived to
this old age. So you also take note of this.

After that we returned.

Abu Amr Uthman bin Khattab bin Abdullah bin Awwam (Moammar)
-----------------------------------------------------------

***Majalis Shaykh Tusi:*** Ibrahim bin Hasan bin Jamhur narrated that
Abu Bakr Mufeed Jarjarai told me in 376 A.H. that when I went to meet
Abu Amr Uthman bin Khattab bin Abdullah bin Awwam in 316 A.H. in Egypt
there was so much rush of visitors that he had to occupy the attic of
the house. After that I traveled to Mecca with him and he dictated
fifteen traditions to me. He informed me that he was born during the
reign of Abu Bakr bin Abi Qahafa. When the tenure of Amirul Momineen Ali
Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) arrived, I came out to meet him with my father. On
way to Kufa

we had water shortage and were on the verge of death. My father was very
much aged and I asked him to wait when I went out in search of water.

I found a well full of water at a short distance. First of all I
undressed and had a bath; and then drank as much water as I wanted. I
decided to bring my father there since he was near by.

I went to him and said that there was a well nearby. But when he
accompanied me out we could not find any well. We gave up after a long
time and had hardly sat down to rest when he passed away. Somehow I
managed to bury him there and then came to Amirul Momineen (a.s.). He
was about to march for the Battle of Siffeen. When I bent down to kiss
his feet, I received this wound.

Abu Bakr Mufeed says: A clear scar was visible on his face.

Imam Ali (a.s.) asked about me and I narrated to him about what had
befallen us. He said: Anyone who drinks from that well has a long age.

Then he named me as Motamar.

Abu Bakr Mufeed says: Then he narrated many traditions to me from Imam
Ali (a.s.) which I noted down. At that time some teachers of his native
country, Tanja were also present there. They also verified his
authenticity and the fact that he had met Amirul Momineen (a.s.).

Finally that aged personality passed away in 317 A.H.

Moammar Mashriqi
----------------

Karajaki has narrated this report in detail in his*Kanzul Fawaid* along
with the report of Abu Duniya Moammar Maghribi through his chains.

After that he has mentioned another incident of Moammar Mashriqi.

There was a man who inhabited a mountainous region of Persia and he
claimed to have met Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and that he was known to all
since ages, that he had remained in the company of Imam Ali (a.s.). His
face also carried a scar like that of Moammar Maghribi

Once a group of people of different faiths narrated to me that they had
also met and talked to him. Such a one is Abul Abbas Ahmad bin Nuh bin
Muhammad Hanbali Shafei, who narrated to me in 411 A.H. at Ramla that he
was traveling to Iraq to learn jurisprudence when he passed through the
Suharward province near Zanjan. He was informed that an aged person
lived in that area who claims to have met Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and it
was worth meeting him.

“I found him to be an extremely aged man with a round beard and he also
had a one-year-old son. They told him that we were heading to Iraq and
requested him to narrate his meeting with Amirul Momineen (a.s.).”

He said: A rider passed by me and when I looked at him he passed his
hand over my head. When I came to know that he was Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) I ran after him and joined his entourage.

He narrated: I lived with the Imam at Tikrit also and continued to serve
him. And after that I also served his children.

Ahmad bin Nuh says: His countrymen verified his statements and that they
had heard about this man from their ancestors and that he had gone away
for sometime and lived in Ahwaz, from where he moved to Dailam and now
he lived in Suharward.

Abu Abdullah Husain bin Muhammad bin Qummi has narrated that many people
have met and spoken to him and people of Suharward have also narrated
from him.

Harith bin Kaab Moammar
-----------------------

Sayyid Murtadha (q.s.) has written in*Ghurar wad Durar* that among the
long lived persons of the world is Harith bin Kaab bin Amr bin Waala bin
Khalid bin Malik bin Adad Madh-haji. Abu Hatim Sajistani says: When the
death of Harith approached, he gathered his children and said: I have
reached an age of a hundred and sixty years, but so far have neither
made peace with any traitor nor befriended any transgressor. Nor flirted
with cousins and sisters-in-law. I have never kept a woman of loose
character in my house.

I follow the religion of Prophet Shuaib (a.s.) and except for me, Asad
bin Hazima and Tamim bin Murrah no one in the Arab Peninsula follows
this faith. So remember my will and live on my religion. Continue to
fear the Almighty Allah as He is sufficient for you in every way. Never
disobey Him.

My sons, be united and never should you fall into discord. Without any
doubt, a death of honor is better than a life of degradation and
helplessness. What is destined would come to pass. Everything is of two
different types. Thus time is also of two kinds: A time of prosperity
and a time of troubles. People are also of two types: One kind will
support you and another will oppose you.

Also remember that you should take in marriage a woman who is compatible
to your status and is chaste. Avoid foolish girls as their issues will
be useless.

Those who cut off relations will never get peace.

There is enmity in discord with the people of your community. That is if
you oppose them, they will become inimical to you.

No matter how numerous you may be; if you have no unity, you are in
great trouble.

Goodness erases evil.

To reciprocate evil with evil is to participate in evil.

Sins destroy good deeds.

Breaking off of the relations create sorrow.

Disrespect destroys blessings.

Disowning of parents leads to destruction. It reduces population and
houses are destroyed.

Bad behavior cuts off benefits. Mutual enmity causes separations.

Mustaughar Moammar
------------------

Mustaughar was also among those who attained a long age. He real name
was Amr bin Rabia bin Kaab bin Saad bin Zaid Manat bin Tamim bin Murrah
bin Aadde bin Tabikha bin Ilyas bin Mudhir. Experts of genealogy are of
the view that he lived for 320 years and was present during the period
of Islam.

Duraid bin Zaid Moammar
-----------------------

Duraid bin Zaid bin Nahad bin Zaid bin Laith bin Sawad bin Aslum bin
Haaf bin Qaza-a bin Malik bin Murra bin Malik bin Himyar also had a long
lifespan and he lived for 456 years. Ibne Duraid says that he was among
the Moammareen; among the Arabs one who lives for more than 120 year is
called as a Moammar.

Zuhair bin Janab Moammar
------------------------

Zuhair bin Janab bin Abdullah bin Kanana bin Bakr bin Auf bin Azra Ibne
Zaid Laat bin Rafida bin Thawr bin Kalab bin Babra bin Taghlib bin
Halwan bin Imran bin Haaf bin Qaza-a bin Malik bin Amr bin Murra bin
Zaid bin Malik bin Himyar also had a long lifespan and he lived for 220
years, according to Abu Hatim. And he participated in 200 battles. He
was the leader of his tribe and possessed ten extraordinary qualities:
He was a chief of his tribe, he was of noble lineage and an eloquent
speaker and a poet. He used to visit other kings as a diplomat; he was
an accomplished physician, a soothsayer and an expert rider. He was a
wise advisor.

Once he heard some words from his wife which ladies should not speak to
their husbands. When he objected, she threatened to thrash him and she
said that she was under the impression that he was deaf and stupid.

Zuhair composed the following verses in response:

**Brothers, look at my condition. My eyebrows sag on my eyes and I can
neither see the stars nor the sun and my wife threatens to thrash me
with a stick. But I say: Forgive me. Death is better than a life of such
degradation.**

Zul Asba Adwani
---------------

Zul Asba Adwani also had a long lifespan. His full name was Harsan bin
Muharras bin Harith bin Rabia bin Wahab bin Thalaba bin Zarab bin Amr
bin Attab bin Yashkar bin Adwan. He was called Zul Asba (one having
finger), because he was bitten by a snake which paralyzed his index
finger. It is said that he lived for 170 years and according to Abul
Hatim he attained an age of 300 years. He was an Arab king during the
period of Jahiliyya.

Mady Karb Himyari
-----------------

Mady Karb Himyari also had a long lifespan from Aale Zeeroin according
to Ibne Sallam.

Rabi bin Zaba Fazari
--------------------

Rabi bin Zaba Fazari also had a long lifespan. It is said that he lived
through the Umayyad period and according to traditional reports, he
attended the court of Abdul Malik bin Marwan and also that he lived
during the period of Muawiyah. It is said that when he was 200 years
old, he composed the following verses:

**When a man reaches 200 years neither youth remains nor the pleasure of
youth.**

Abu Tamahan Qini
----------------

His real name was Hanzala bin Sharqi and he was from the Bani Kanana bin
Qin. According to Abu Hatim he also lived for 200 years.

Abdul Masih bin Baqila Ghassani
-------------------------------

Abdul Masih bin Baqila Ghassani also had a long lifespan and he lived
for 350 years. His name was Abdul Masih bin Amr bin Qays bin Hayyan bin
Baqila, according to Kalabi and Abu Mikhnaf. He lived during the Islamic
period but did not accept Islam; on the contrary he remained a
Christian.

It is narrated that when Khalid bin Walid laid siege to Hira he sent a
man to them with the message to send a responsible person for mediation.

They sent Abdul Masih bin Baqila. He came to Khalid on foot and said:
Good morning, O King.

Khalid said: The Almighty Allah has made us needless of this greeting.

“Where have you come from, O Shaykh?”

“From the loins of my father.”

“I wanted to ask you about your origin.”

“From the womb of my mother.”

“Do you know where you stand?”

“Yes, on the earth.”

“No, I mean to ask you where you are located?”

“In my garments.”

“Who is your father?”

“A man.”

“I have never seen anyone so full of wit and an expert at deflecting the
question.”

“I replied to all your questions. But you can ask me again, if you
want.”

“Are you an Arab or a Nabatean?”

“I am an Arab but people think that I am a Nabatean. And the Nabateans
consider me as a Nabatean.”

“Do you like hostilities or you are a peaceful person.”

“Peaceful.”

“Then why have you made these forts?”

“We are afraid of foolish people.”

“How old are you?”

“Three hundred and fifty years.”

The narrator says: Abdul Masih was carrying a very effective fatal
poison.

Khalid asked: “What is this?”

“It is poison.”

“What do you want to do with it?”

“I will thank the Almighty Allah if I can find something useful for my
people from you; and on the contrary I don’t want to be the first from
my community to put my people into trouble and return to them alive. I
will consume this poison and free myself from this life, because not
much of it is left.”

“Hand it over to me.” And he took away the poison and then said:

“In the name of Allah and by Allah; Lord of the earth and the heavens.
Nothing causes any harm if it is accompanied by His name.” And he
consumed that poison which made him lose consciousness. After that he
perspired a lot and then regained his posture. He felt that he had been
freed from prison.

Abdul Masih bin Baqila returned to his people and remarked: I have met a
satan who did not die even after consuming the poison. So make peace
with these people somehow and send them away.

So they made peace with Khalid at a hundred thousand dirhams.

Some scholars have written that when the people of Hira wanted to
construct a chapel, they found a hole in the foundation; when they dug
further they found a house and people entered the house to see a dead
body placed on a glass throne and the following was engraved at his
head:

“I am Abdul Masih bin Baqila.”

Nabigha Jodi
------------

Nabigha Jodi was among the long lived personalities among the Arabs. His
real name was Qays bin Kaab bin Abdullah bin Aamir bin Rabia bin Joda
bin Kaab bin Rabia bin Aamir bin Saasa. His patronymic was Abu Laila.

Abu Hatim says that he attained an age more than that of Zebani. That is
he lived for more than 180 years. According to Hisham bin Muhammad
Kalabi, he lived for 180 years. It is narrated from Ibne Duraid from Abu
Hatim that Nabigha Jodi lived for 200 years and witnessed the period of
Islam.

It is narrated that Nabigha Jodi used to boast on his Islam and say: I
recited the following verses to the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.):

“Our greatness and nobility has reached to the skies and we hope that it
will go beyond them.”

The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) asked: “Till where, O Abu Laila?”

I replied: “In Paradise, O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.).”

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) remarked: “All right, if Allah so wills.”

According to another report, till Nabigha Jodi was 120, he did not lose
any of his teeth.

Some say that when he lost a teeth, another one grew in its stead.

Luqman bin Aad
--------------

Shaykh Saduq has mentioned Luqman bin Aad also among the long lived
persons. He lived for 3500 years.

Rabi bin Zaba bin Wahab bin Baghiz bin Malik bin Saad bin Abas bin
Khuzara is also mentioned among the aged people. He lived for 340 years.

With regard to Aksam bin Saifi it is mentioned that he lived for 333
years and his father Saifi bin Raba lived for 270 years without any
decrease in his mental capacities.

Zabira bin Saeed
----------------

Zabira bin Saeed bin Saad bin Saham bin Amr is also included among
people with long life spans. He lived for 220 years and no signs of
senility were visible in him. Although he lived during the period of
Islam, he did not accept faith. Abu Hatim and Rayashi have written on
the authority of Atba that he lived for 220 years. His hair had not
grayed and his teeth were also intact.

Duraid bin Sama Jashami
-----------------------

Duraid bin Sama Jashami lived from 200 years and witnessed the period of
Islam without accepting the faith. He was the chief of the polytheists
during the Battle of Hunain and was at the forefront in fighting the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.). He was killed in the same battle.

Mohsin bin Ghassan
------------------

Mohsin bin Ghassan bin Zalim Zubaidi lived for 256 years.

Amr bin Hamama Doosi
--------------------

Amr bin Hamama Doosi lived for 400 years.

Harith bin Mazaz Jurhami
------------------------

Harith bin Mazaz Jurhami also lived for 400 years.

Yarab bin Qahtan
----------------

His real name was Rabia. He was the first to speak the Arabic language.
He ruled for 200 years. According to Abal Hasan Nasaba Isfahani, he was
a Yemenite progenitor.

Note: After that Shaykh Saduq (r.a.) says: Also take note of the aged
persons from Fars.

A brief account of the long lived Persians
==========================================

Zahak, the man with two snakes

He lived for 1200 years.

Afridun, the Just
-----------------

He lived for more than a thousand years and it is said that he initiated
the celebration of Meherjan festival. He lived for 1500 years from which
he disappeared from his people for 600 years.

Amr Aaamir Maziqiya
-------------------

Isfahani has written that he lived for 800 years. He is known as
Maziqiya, because during his reign the people of Yazd migrated to
various parts of the world. He was a king of the Saba kingdom.
Soothsayers told him that his country would be destroyed by the floods
of Iram. So he sold his land and migrated to some other place. The Ansar
of Medina are his descendants.

Jalhama bin Adad bin Zaid bin Yashjab
-------------------------------------

Jalhama bin Adad bin Zaid bin Yashjab bin Arib bin Zaid bin Kahlan bin
Yarab is also known as Lajalmaha Tai and Bani Tai are his descendants.
His account is very long. Yahabir bin Malik bin Adad was one of his
nephews. Each of them lived for 500 years and there was a battle between
them regarding a pasture land. Jalhama thought that in this way his
whole clan will be destroyed. So he left that place and traveled a great
distance; that is why he began to be called as Tai. He was the owner of
two mountains in Tai, named Aja and Salma.

Amr bin Lahih
-------------

His real name was Rabia bin Haritha bin Amr Maziqiya. According to
scholars of Khaza he was the chief of the Khaza during the battle
between Khaza and Jurham. He had initiated the customs of Saiba, Wasila
and

Haam. He brought the idols of Hubal and Manat from Syria to Mecca. He
entrusted Hubal to Khazima bin Mudrika and that is why it began to be
referred to as the Hubal Khazima. Then he placed Manat on Abu Qubais
mountain and he was the first to bring Nard (a dice game) to Mecca,
which people played all the time in Kaaba.

It is narrated from the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) that he said: I
was shown the Hell during my journey of Meraj. I saw a short stature
man, Amr bin Lahih paying with his baton in Hell. When I asked about
him, I was told:

He is Amr bin Lahih. He also behaved with the Kaaba as the Jurham had
done, till he died.

The Shaykh says: I saw a writing of Sharif Ajal Razi Abul Hasan Muhammad
bin Husain Musawi dated Sunday, 15th Mohurrum 381 A.H. in which he has
mentioned the account of a long lived man in Syria who had crossed the
age of 140 years. He says: I met him in Karkh and he was a wonder that
Imam Ali Reza (a.s.) had also met with.

It is mentioned in*Kanzul Fawaid* that all the communities accept the
occurrence of longevity. Thus such points are also mentioned in Old
Testament and there is no difference of opinion among them. It is
mentioned therein that:

Aged Personalities of the Old Testament and their ages
------------------------------------------------------

Adam (a.s.) - 930 years.

Sheeth (a.s.) - 912 years.

Anush - 965 years.

Qinan - 910 years.

Mahlail - 895 years.

Burd - 962 years.

Akhnuh (Idris) - 965 years.

Matuselah - 969 years.

Lamak - 767 years.

Prophet Nuh (a.s.) - 950 years.

Saam - 600 years.

Azfaqshar - 498 years.

Shalikh - 493 years.

Aabir - 870 years.

Faligh - 299 years.

Arguh - 260 years.

Bahor - 140 years.

Tarukh - 280 years.

Prophet Ibrahim (a.s.) - 175 years.

Prophet Ismail (a.s.) - 137 years.

Prophet Ishaq (a.s.) - 180 years.

These personages are mentioned in the Old Testament and there is no
difference of opinion between the Jews and Christians. In the same way,
there is no difference between Muslim scholars regarding this.


