24
==

Chapter Twenty-four: Report of Saad bin Abdullah Ashari
=======================================================

<p dir="rtl">
مُحَمَّدُ بْنُ عَلِيِّ بْنِ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ حَاتِمٍ النَّوْفَلِيُّ عَنْ
أَحْمَدَ بْنِ عِيسَى الْوَشَّاءِ عَنْ أَحْمَدَ بْنِ طَاهِرٍ الْقُمِّيِّ
عَنْ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ بَحْرِ بْنِ سَهْلٍ الشَّيْبَانِيِّ عَنْ أَحْمَدَ
بْنِ مَسْرُورٍ عَنْ سَعْدِ بْنِ عَبْدِ اللَّهِ الْقُمِّيِّ قَالَ كُنْتُ
امْرَأً لَهِجاً بِجَمْعِ الْكُتُبِ الْمُشْتَمِلَةِ عَلَى غَوَامِضِ
الْعُلُومِ وَ دَقَائِقِهَا كَلِفاً بِاسْتِظْهَارِ مَا يَصِحُّ مِنْ
حَقَائِقِهَا مُغْرَماً بِحِفْظِ مُشْتَبِهِهَا وَ مُسْتَغْلِقِهَا
شَحِيحاً عَلَى مَا أَظْفَرُ بِهِ مِنْ مَعَاضِلِهَا وَ مُشْكِلَاتِهَا
مُتَعَصِّباً لِمَذْهَبِ الْإِمَامِيَّةِ رَاغِباً عَنِ الْأَمْنِ وَ
السَّلَامَةِ فِي انْتِظَارِ التَّنَازُعِ وَ التَّخَاصُمِ وَ التَّعَدِّي
إِلَى التَّبَاغُضِ وَ التَّشَاتُمِ مُعَيِّباً لِلْفِرَقِ ذَوِي
الْخِلَافِ كَاشِفاً عَنْ مَثَالِبِ أَئِمَّتِهِمْ هَتَّاكاً لِحُجُبِ
قَادَتِهِمْ إِلَى…
</p>

His meeting with the Imam and the questions that he asked the Imam
------------------------------------------------------------------

Shaykh Saduq (r.a.) has narrated from Muhammad bin Ali bin Muhammad bin
Hatim Naufali from Abul Abbas Ahmad bin Isa Washsha Baghdadi from Ahmad
bin Tahir Qummi from Muhammad bin Bahr bin Sahl Shaibani from Ahmad bin
Masroor from Saad bin Abdullah Qummi that he said:

“I was very fond of collecting books on intricate and difficult subjects
so that I may learn the reality. I used to consider it my duty to speak
up about the reality and had the habit of learning by heart complicated
matters. I always desired to obtain success over the deviations and
difficulties of the books.

I had firm belief in the religion of the Imamiyah and often took part in
debates against the opponents. I used to expose their defects and
explained the weaknesses of their religious leaders.

I exposed scandals of their religious guides till one day I was
subjected to a fight with severe Nasibis. Enmity with them continued for
a long time and there were terrible fights between us. I used to
ridicule them through questions and proved that they were obstinate on a
false stand.

Objection of an opponent of Shia
--------------------------------

Once I faced a debate with a deeply bigoted Nasibi. During the debate he
said: ‘Death be on you and all your co-religionists. You*Rafidis* lay
curse on the Emigrants and Helpers and deny their love for the Holy
Prophet while the Siddiq was the most exalted persons among the
companions and he had precedence in accepting Islam. Don’t you know that
the Messenger of Allah took him along to the cave on the night of
migration due to the risk to his life, just as he was concerned for his
own safety. Because he knew that he would be his caliph and successor.
Therefore he wanted to protect his life like he was concerned about his
own security. So that the religion may not be destroyed after him. In
those very circumstances he made Ali sleep on his

bed as he knew that even if he were killed, there would be no problem
for Islam in the future, because there were people among the companions
who could have taken his place, therefore he did not accord much
importance to his (Ali) getting killed.’”

Saad says: “I replied to it but the replies were not so effective. So he
said: ‘You Rafidis say that the first and the second caliphs were
hypocrites and you support it by what happened on the Lailatul Uqbah.’

Then he said: ‘Come let us see if they accepted Islam willingly and
happily or it was under duress and pressure?’ Here I did not give any
reply, because if I said it was under duress it would not be correct as
Islam at that time was not dominant and if I said they accepted
willingly it would negate their hypocrisy. Thus the Almighty Allah says
in the following verse:

<p dir="rtl">
فَلَمَّا رَأَوْا بَأْسَنَا قَالُوا آمَنَّا بِاللَّهِ وَحْدَهُ
وَكَفَرْنَا بِمَا كُنَّا بِهِ مُشْرِكِينَ فَلَمْ يَكُ يَنفَعُهُمْ
إِيمَانُهُمْ لَمَّا رَأَوْا بَأْسَنَا
</p>

***“But when they saw Our punishment, they said: We believe in Allah
alone and we deny what we used to associate with Him. But their belief
was not going to profit them when they had seen Our punishment…” (Surah
Ghafir 40:84-85)***

I returned from this debate with a heavy heart, took a paper and wrote
down forty odd questions that were difficult for me and said to myself
that I must hand it over to the representative of Maula Abu Muhammad
Hasan bin Ali Askari (a.s.) (that is Ahmad bin Ishaq who resided in
Qom).

Replies of Imam Zaman (a.s.) to these Objections
------------------------------------------------

But when I went to him I learnt that he had left on a journey. I
departed in his pursuit and when I reached him, I told him all that had
happened. Ahmad bin Ishaq said to me: Come let us go together to Surre
man Raa (Samarrah) and ask our master, Hasan bin Ali (a.s.) about this.
So I accompanied him to Surre man Raa till we reached the house of our
master and asked for permission to enter, which was given and we went
inside. Ahmad bin Ishaq had a leather bag that he had concealed inside
his Tiberian cloak. The bag contained one hundred and sixty purses
containing gold and silver coins. Each purse was sealed with the seal of
the sender. When our eyes fell on the elegant face of His Eminence, Abu
Muhammad Hasan bin Ali (a.s.) we saw that his face was like a full moon
and a child was sitting in his lap. He was very beautiful, like a
Jupiter star having nice locks of hair. In front of the Imam was placed
a golden pomegranate decorated with jewels and precious stones; it was
presented by an affluent gentleman from Basra. The Imam was holding a
pen and writing something on paper. Whenever the child caught his hand
he tossed the pomegranate and the little one chased it and brought it
back. In the meanwhile he wrote whatever he wanted. So Ahmad bin Ishaq
opened the cloak and the leather bag before Imam Hadi (a.s.) [a title of
Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.)]. His Eminence threw a glance at the child and
said: Remove the seals from the gifts of your Shia and friends. It was
asked: O my master, is it lawful that a pure hand should extend towards
impure gifts and filthy monies?”

His Eminence asked Ahmad bin Ishaq to take out the contents of the bag
so the lawful and the unlawful can be separated. He did as he was told.
The child said: “This is from so-and-so of so-and-so locality of Qom,
containing 62 dinars from sale proceeds of a house, and inheritance from
his father 45 dinars and from the money of six dresses 40 dinars and the
rent of three shops amounting to three dinars.” Our master said: “You
are right, my son. Now tell us what is unlawful in it?” The child said:
“There is a dinar in this purse which was minted in Rayy in so-and-so
year. Half of its inscription is worn out; its three corners are
cropped, such that its weight is reduced by 1.5*Daniq* . This same
amount is unlawful in it because the sender of this purse in so-and-so
year, so-and-so month gave to a weaver who was his neighbor a mound and
a quarter of old cotton for spinning. That cotton was stolen from the
weaver who informed him about it, but he didn’t accept his version and
in its place took a mound and a half of softer cotton. Then he ordered a
garment be made for him from this material. Thus that money and the
cropped amount is from that money.” Ahmad bin Ishaq untied the purse and
removed from it the said dinar and the cropped pieces from it. Then he
took out another purse. The child said: “This is from so-and-so of
such-and- such locality of Qom, containing 50 dinars. It does not befit
us to touch it at all.” Ahmad bin Ishaq asked: “Why?” He replied: “It is
the sale proceed of wheat that the sender had paid to his farmers, but
while giving he measured some with a correct measure and some with a
tampered measure.”

Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.) said: “You are right my son.” Then he said: “O
Ibne Ishaq, take that purse and return it to the sender and tell him to
give the money to its actual owner, that is those farmers, as we are not
in need of this money.” At that moment, he said: “Give me the garment
sent by the old lady.” Ahmad bin Ishaq said: “I have forgotten it.” He
went out to look for it. At that moment my master, His Eminence, Abu
Muhammad Hadi (a.s.) looked at me and asked: “What a surprise that you
came here?” I said: “Ahmad bin Ishaq encouraged me to come and meet
you.” He asked: “What happened to those questions that you wanted to
ask?” I said: “They are yet unanswered, my master.” He said: “Ask
whatever you want from my dearest son.” And he gestured to the child. I
asked: “O our master and master’s son, it is narrated to us that the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) had given Amirul Momineen (a.s.) the right to
divorce his wives. Therefore on the day of Jamal, he sent message to
Ayesha that she had wreaked havoc with Islam and Muslims (and taken
wrong advantage of her position). That she has in an ignorant way
condemned her children to perdition. ‘Thus if you do not refrain from
your act I will divorce you.’ Tell me, my master, that what is the
meaning of divorce here? That the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) left it
at the discretion of Amirul Momineen (a.s.)?”

He replied: “The Almighty Allah, hallowed be His name, gave an exalted
status to the wives of the Prophet and gave them the honor of being the
mothers of the faithful. Thus the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) told
Amirul Momineen (a.s.): O Abal Hasan, this status is valid for them till
they remain in the obedience of the Almighty Allah. So whoever of them
disobeys Allah and after me, comes out in armed confrontation against
you, remove her from my wifehood and take away her status of motherhood
of faithful.”

Then I asked: “What is open obscenity? That if the wife commits, the
husband is entitled to expel her from his house even during her menses?”

He replied: “It is*Musahiqa* and not fornication. Because if she commits
fornication they will apply the penalty on her and if one wants to marry
her there is no problem in it. And the penalty that is given is no
obstacle for it. But if she commits*Musahiqa,* it is obligatory that she
must be stoned and being stoned is a disgrace, as for whomsoever Allah
has ordered stoning, He has disgraced that person. Therefore no one is
permitted to marry her.”

Then I asked: “O son of the Prophet, Tell me about the statement of the
Almighty Allah to His Prophet Musa (a.s.) that:

<p dir="rtl">
فَاخْلَعْ نَعْلَيْكَ إِنَّكَ بِالْوَادِ الْمُقَدَّسِ طُوًى
</p>

***“Therefore put off your shoes; surely you are in the sacred valley,
Tuwa.” (Surah Taha 22:12)***

Scholars of the two sects are of the view that the shoes of Musa (a.s.)
were made of skin of dead animal?”

He replied: “Whoever says this has made a false allegation against His
Eminence, Musa and considers him ignorant in his prophethood, because it
implies one of the two possibilities and each of them is a mistake;
either prayer was allowed in it or not. If it was allowed, it would also
be allowed to hide them in that place as it is pure. If his prayer was
not allowed, then His Eminence, Musa (a.s.) failed to discriminate
between lawful and unlawful, that wearing what one can pray and with
what not, and this is infidelity.”

I said: “So, my master, tell me the exegesis of this verse.” He replied:
“His Eminence, was in the sacred valley, when he said: ‘O my Lord, I
have made my love sincere to You and washed my heart of everything other
than You. But Musa was very much attached to his family. So the Almighty
Allah told him:***“Therefore put off your shoes…”*** If your love for Me
is sincere and your heart is devoid of inclination for anyone except Me,
remove the love of your family from your heart.” “Please tell me what is
the interpretation of the verse*Kaaf Ha Ya Ain Saad?”* He replied:
“These letters are from the unseen informations that the Almighty Allah
conveyed to His servant, Zakariya. Then He related the story to Muhammad
(s.a.w.s.). It was that when Zakariya implored his Lord to teach him the
names of*Panjetan* (the holy five) the Almighty Allah sent Jibraeel to
him and he taught him their names. Thus whenever Zakariya mentioned
(remembered) the names of Muhammad, Ali, Fatima or Hasan (a.s.) his
sorrow and grief used to go away, but whenever he thought of Husain
(a.s.) a terrible grief used to beset him and he was very much
astonished why it was so. Thus one day he prayed to the Almighty: O my
God, how is it so that when I remember the four names I get peace, but
when I think of Husain, tears flow from my eyes and I begin to wail?

Allah, the Mighty and the High informed him about the tragedy of Imam
Husain (a.s.) and told him that in*Kaaf Ha Ya Ain Saad: Kaaf* is for
Kerbala,*Ha* stands for Halakat (getting killed) of ‘Itrat’ (progeny)
the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.),*Ya* implies Yazid who would oppress Husain
(a.s.),*Ain* denotes ‘Atash’ (thirst) of Husain (a.s.) and*Saad*
indicates ‘Sabr’ (patience).

Thus when Zakariya heard this, he did not leave the Masjid for three
days and did not allow anyone to meet him and continued to weep and
wail. He lamented on Husain (a.s.) and prayed to Allah: My God, will
they make the best of Your creature sit in mourning for his son? O Lord,
would this tremendous tragedy befall him? My God, would they make Ali
and Fatima put on the dress of mourning? Would they make the shock of
this calamity reach their abode? Then he said: Bestow me a son, so that
I can be pleased in my old age and that his love affects my heart. After
that make me sit in his mourning as You would make Muhammad, Your
beloved sit. So the Almighty Allah gave him Yahya and later his
martyrdom made him aggrieved. And the period of Yahya’s pregnancy was
six months like in the case of Husain (a.s.).”

Then I asked: “O my master, why is it so that people cannot select the
Imam for themselves?” He replied: “Righteous or a corrupt Imam?” I said:
“Righteous.” He said: “Is there a possibility that they may choose a
transgressor while they are not aware what goes on in his mind, whether
he is righteous or corrupt?” “Yes,” I said. He said: “That is the reason
that I shall explain to you with logical argument.” I said: “Please do.”

He said: “Let us consider the prophets that the Almighty Allah has
appointed, on whom He revealed heavenly scriptures and supported them
with revelation and infallibility. They were the leaders of nations,
like Musa and Isa. Inspite of having knowledge and sharp insight were
they not prone to select hypocrites considering them believers?” “No,”
said I. The Imam said: “Then how did it happen that His Eminence, Musa
Kalimullah, inspite of having that same knowledge and receiving
revelations, he chose seventy persons from the senior ones of the
community and those who were in the forefront of his army; about whose
sincerity he was sure and about whom he had no doubt, in fact he had
selected hypocrites. Allah, the Mighty and the High says:

<p dir="rtl">
وَاخْتَارَ مُوسَى قَوْمَهُ سَبْعِينَ رَجُلاً لِّمِيقَاتِنَا
</p>

***“And Musa chose out of his people seventy men for Our appointment…”
(Surah Araaf 7:155)***

As we have seen that when someone who is appointed by the Almighty Allah
(like Musa and Isa) when he could select the corrupt instead of the
righteous we realize that selection is not lawful except for one who is
aware of hidden secrets and the concealed thoughts. And we understand
that the selection of the Emigrants and Helpers was worthless, after the
prophets intending to select good people ended up choosing corrupt men.
Then he said: O Saad, your opponents claim that the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) took with him the selected one of this Ummah to the cave as
he was afraid for his safety in the same way as he was worried about his
personal security, because he knew that he would be the caliph of the
Ummah after him. While the necessity of hiding in the cave only arose
because he took him along. As for Ali (a.s.) he made him sleep on his
bed as he knew that the vacuum created by the death of Abu Bakr will not
be as that due to the death of Ali because there were others who could
fill that vacuum. You can reply by asking him that are you not having
the belief that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said: After me the caliphate
shall be for thirty years. And they apply it to the

tenures of the four persons, Abu Bakr, Umar, Uthman and Ali (a.s.). The
opponent will have to agree. Tell him if this is correct, why did he
take only one caliph, Abu Bakr, to the cave, leaving the other three.
This shows that the Prophet considered them unimportant since it was
necessary that he acts with them all like he did with Abu Bakr. Since he
did not do it, he considered their rights unimportant and he
discriminated between them in his kindness to them while it was
necessary for him to have the same concern for all of them.

As for your opponent’s question that: Did those two accept Islam
willingly or unwillingly? Why don’t you say: It was due to greed.
Because they used to sit in the company of Jews and they were knowing
about the proclamation and victory of Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) on the Arabs.
The Jews had told them all about the prophecies in the Old Testament and
ancient scriptures. They had said that his domination over the Arabs
would resemble that of Nebuchadnezzar in Bani Israel except that he
would be claiming to be a prophet while in fact he would not be one.
Thus when the proclamation of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) was made
they helped him on the testimony of ‘There is no god except Allah and
Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah’ with the greedy intention that when
circumstances are good and his affairs are in order, they would also be
able to get his deputyship and authority. But when they despaired of
getting rulership from His Eminence, they joined other people having
same view on the night of Uqbah to frighten the camel of Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) so that it may throw him down, killing him. They covered
their faces like others, but the Almighty Allah kept His Prophet safe
from their plot and they could not harm him in any way. Those two were
just like Talha and Zubair who came and pledged allegiance to Ali (a.s.)
coveting governorship of a province. But when they despaired, they broke
the pledge and rose up in rebellion against His Eminence, till they met
the fate of those who break the pledge of allegiance.”

When the conversation reached this point, our master, Imam Hasan bin Ali
(a.s.) arose to pray. Qaim (a.s.) also arose with him and I returned
from their company and came out looking for Ahmad bin Ishaq. I saw him
coming to me weeping. I asked: “Why were you delayed? And why are you
crying?” He replied: “I don’t have the garment that my master has asked
for.” I said: “Don’t be upset, go and tell the Imam about it.” So he
went inside and returned smiling and reciting*Durood* on Muhammad and
Aale Muhammad. I asked: “What happened?” He replied: “I saw the garment
concealed under the feet of my master.” So we praised Allah the
Almighty. After that day we visited the house of our master a few times
more, but did not see that child with His Eminence again. When it was
time to say farewell I, Ahmad bin Ishaq and some of our co-religionists
came to His Eminence. Ahmad bin Ishaq stood up and said: “O son of
Allah’s Messenger, departure is soon and our grief is intense. I pray to
Allah to convey our*Durood* on your grandfather Muhammad Mustafa, your
father, Murtadha, your mother, Sayydatunnisa and the two chiefs of the
youths of Paradise, your uncle and your father and the Purified Imams
after them from your forefathers. And also we convey our*Durood*
and*Salawaat* on you and

your son. And we pray that may your station be exalted and may your
enemies be disgraced. And may not Allah make this our last audience with
you.” When Ahmad bin Ishaq reached this point His Eminence was moved to
such an extent that tears flowed from his eyes. Then he said:

“O Ahmad bin Ishaq, in your supplication, do not ask for invalid thing
as in this journey you will meet the Lord.” When Ahmad bin Ishaq heard
this, he fell down unconscious. On regaining consciousness he said: “I
implore you by the sanctity of your grandfather, grant me a piece of
cloth that I can take as my shroud.”

Our master felt under his seat and removed thirteen dirhams and said:
“Take this and don’t spend anything else on yourself and you will not be
deprived of what you desire. Indeed Allah does not waste the reward of
the doers of good.”

Saad continues: “On the return journey when three*farsangs* remained
from Halwan, Ahmad bin Ishaq developed fever and became seriously ill
and was on the verge of death. When we arrived at Halwan and lodged at
one of the caravanserai, Ahmad bin Ishaq summoned one of his townsmen
who lived in that place, and after that he said to us: ‘Tonight, you all
leave me alone.’ Each of us retired to our bedrooms, and near dawn a
thought came to my mind. When I opened my eyes I saw Kafur, servant of
my master, Abu Muhammad (a.s.) who said to me: ‘May Allah increase your
reward in this calamity and may He compensate you for this tragedy. We
have finished the funeral bath and shrouding of your friend. You may
please get up for his burial, because his status in the view of your
master is more exalted than that of you all.’ After that he went out of
my sight and we participated in the funeral of Ahmad bin Ishaq, weeping
and wailing. We fulfilled his rights and completed his last rituals, may
Allah have mercy on him.”

In*Dalailul Imamah* , Tabari has also narrated this traditional report
from Abdul Baqi Yazdad from Abdullah bin Muhammad Thalabi from Ahmad bin
Muhammad Attar from Saad bin Abdullah and also it is mentioned in brief
in*Ihtijaaj Tabarsi* .


