6
=

Chapter Six: Words of Allah and His Messenger about the Qaim as narrated by Shia and Sunni
==========================================================================================

<p dir="rtl">
أَحْمَدُ بْنُ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ إِسْحَاقَ عَنْ إِسْمَاعِيلَ بْنِ
إِبْرَاهِيمَ الْحُلْوَانِيِّ عَنْ أَحْمَدَ بْنِ مَنْصُورٍ زَاجٍ عَنْ
هُدْبَةَ بْنِ عَبْدِ الْوَهَّابِ عَنْ سَعْدِ بْنِ عَبْدِ الْحَمِيدِ بْنِ
جَعْفَرٍ عَنْ عَبْدِ اللَّهِ بْنِ زِيَادٍ الْيَمَانِيِّ عَنْ عِكْرِمَةَ
بْنِ عَمَّارٍ عَنْ إِسْحَاقَ بْنِ عَبْدِ اللَّهِ بْنِ أَبِي طَلْحَةَ
عَنْ أَنَسِ بْنِ مَالِكٍ قَالَ قَالَ رَسُولُ اللَّهِ ص نَحْنُ بَنُو
عَبْدِ الْمُطَّلِبِ سَادَةُ أَهْلِ الْجَنَّةِ رَسُولُ اللَّهِ وَ
حَمْزَةُ سَيِّدُ الشُّهَدَاءِ وَ جَعْفَرٌ ذُو الْجَنَاحَيْنِ وَ عَلِيٌّ
وَ فَاطِمَةُ وَ الْحَسَنُ وَ الْحُسَيْنُ وَ الْمَهْدِيُّ
</p>

**1-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ahmad bin Muhammad bin
Ishaq from Ismail bin Ibrahim Halwani from Ahmad bin Mansur Zaaj from
Hudbah bin Abdul Wahab from Saad bin Abdul Hamid bin Ja’far from
Abdullah bin Ziyad Yamani from Akrama bin Ammar from Ishaq bin Abdullah
bin Abi Talha from Anas Ibne Malik that the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.) said:

“We the children of Abdul Muttalib are the chiefs of Paradise dwellers;
the Messenger of Allah, Hamza, the chief of the martyrs, Ja’far with two
wings, Ali, Fatima, Hasan, Husain, and the Mahdi.”

*Ghaibat Tusi* narrates an identical tradition through Muhammad bin Ali
from Uthman bin Ahmad from Ibrahim bin Abdullah Hashmi from Hasan bin
Fadhl Busrani from Saad Ibne Abdul Hamid and on as above.

**2-** ***Uyun Akhbar Reza:*** Through the chains of Tamimi, it is
narrated from Imam Reza (a.s.) through his holy forefathers, from the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) that he said:

“The Hour shall not stand until our*Qaim* uprises. And that will be when
Allah, the Glorified, gives him permission. Whoever follows him will
find salvation and whoever falls behind, will perish. For Allah’s sake,
for Allah’s sake! Servants of Allah! Come to him even if you have to
walk on ice, for he is the vicegerent of Allah, the Exalted, and my
vicegerent.”

**3-** ***Amali Saduq:*** Ibne Mutawakkil has narrated from Asadi from
Nakhai from Naufili from Ali Ibne Saalim from his father from Thumali
from Ibne Tarif from Ibne Nubatah from Ibne Abbas that the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.s.) said:

“When I was raised for Meraj to the seventh heaven, and from there to
the Lote Tree, and from the Lote Tree to the Veils of Light, my Lord,
the Exalted, called on me, ‘O Muhammad, you are My servant and I am your
Lord. So be humble for Me and worship Me and trust Me and have
confidence in Me, for I am pleased with you as a servant, as a beloved,
as a Messenger, as an Apostle; and with your brother as the vicegerent
and as the gateway. He is My Hujjah over My servants and the Imam for My
creation. Through him, My friends are known from My enemies and through
him th

party of Satan is distinguished from My party. Through him My religion
will be established, and My codes observed, and My rules executed.
Through you, through him, and through the Imams from your progeny, I
confer mercy upon My servants and slave girls.

‘And through the Qaim from yours, I will develop My earth with My
praise*.* Through him, I will purify the earth from My enemies and
bequeath her to My friends. Through him, I will make the word of those
who have disbelieved in Me low, and My word high. Through him, I will
revive My lands and My servants with My knowledge. Through him, I will
manifest treasures and riches with My will. I will expose the secrets
and the hidden to him with My resolve; I will help him through My angels
to aide him in the enforcement of My order, and uncovering of My
religion. That is My friend rightfully, and the Mahdi of My servants
truly.’”

The author says: Many such traditions were mentioned in the section of
the traditions affirming the Twelve Imams and the section pertinent to
the reasons of his holy names.

**4-** ***Uyun Akhbar Reza:*** It is narrated from Abdullah bin Muhammad
Saigh from Muhammad bin Saeed from Husain bin Ali from Walid bin Muslim
from Safwan bin Amr from Shuraih bin Ubaid from Amr Bakai from Kaabul
Ahbar that he said:

“The Caliphs are Twelve. When their demise approaches and a virtuous
generation comes, Allah will prolong their lives. Such has Allah
promised this Ummah. Then he recited:

<p dir="rtl">
وَعَدَ اللَّهُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا مِنكُمْ وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ
لَيَسْتَخْلِفَنَّهُم فِي الْأَرْضِ كَمَا اسْتَخْلَفَ الَّذِينَ مِن
قَبْلِهِمْ
</p>

***“Allah has promised to those of you who believe and do good that He
will most certainly make them rulers in the earth as He made rulers
those before them…” (Surah Nur 24:55)***

He said: “Likewise did Allah, the Exalted, to the Children of Israel. It
is not difficult that He may gather this Ummah in a day or half a
day.*And a day before your Lord is like a thousand years of your
reckoning.* ”

**5-** ***Uyun Akhbar Reza:*** It is narrated from the chains of Tamimi
that Imam Reza (a.s.) said that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said:

“The world will not perish until a man from the progeny of Husain takes
charge of my Ummah. He will fill it with justice as it shall become full
of oppression and injustice.”

**6-** ***Amali Tusi:*** Shaykh Mufeed has narrated from Ismail bin
Yahya Abasi from Muhammad bin Jarir Tabari from Muhammad bin Ismail
Sawari from Abu Sulat Harawi from Husain Ashqar from Qays bin Rabi from
Amash from Abaya bin Rabi from Abu Ayyub Ansari that the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.s.) said to Fatima during his illness:

“By the One in whose Hand my soul is, there will definitely be in this
Ummah the Mahdi, and he is, by Allah, from your sons.”

**7-** ***Amali Tusi:*** It is narrated from Al-Haffar from Uthman bin
Ahmad from Abi Qalaba from Bushr bin Umar from Malik bin Anas from Zaid
bin Aslam from Ismail bin Aban from Abi Maryam from Thuwayr bin Abi
Fakhta from Abdur Rahman bin Abi Laila from his father that:

“The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) gave the standard to Ali Ibne Abi
Talib (a.s.) in the battle of Khyber and Allah granted him victory. Then
he mentioned how the Prophet appointed him on the day of Ghadeer. He
recounted some of his excellent attributes, which the Messenger had
elaborated. My father said: Then the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) wept.
They asked him, “O Apostle of Allah, why are you crying?”

He said: “Jibraeel (a.s.) informed me that they will oppress him, deny
him his right, wage wars against him, and kill and tyrannize his progeny
after him. Jibraeel (a.s.) also informed me from his Lord, the Exalted,
that this will end when their Qaim rises, at which their word will
ascend and the Ummah will unite on their love, at which their enemies
will be reduced, their haters disgraced, and their praisers will be
many. This will happen when lands change and the servants of God are
weakened and lose hope in an opening. At that time the Qaim will rise
amidst them.” The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said:

“His name is like my name, and his father’s name is like my son’s name.
He is from the progeny of my daughter. Allah will manifest the truth
through them and smother vanity through their swords. People will follow
them, some in their love and some in their fear.” When the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.s.) stopped crying, he said: “Congregations of the
Faithful! Rejoice the glad tidings of salvation, for Allah’s promise
does not fail and His destiny does not falter and He is the All-Wise the
All-Knowing. Victory from Allah is near. O Allah, they are my household,
take away uncleanness from them and purify them, a thorough
purification. O Allah, guard them, protect them and be their shepherd.
Be for them, help them, assist them, honor them and do not dishonor
them, and be my successor amongst them. You are All-Powerful on
everything.”

**8-** ***Amali Tusi:*** Shaykh Mufeed has narrated from Ahmad bin Walid
from Saffar from Muhammad bin Ubaid from Ali bin Asbat from Saif bin
Umair from Muhammad bin Humran that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said:

“When the fate of Husain Ibne Ali reached where it reached, the angels
wailed to Allah, the Exalted and said: O Lord, is this done to Husain,
your chosen friend and the son of Your Messenger? Allah raised the
shadow of the Qaim (a.s.) for them and said: Through him will I avenge
from his oppressors.”

**9-** ***Amali Tusi:*** It is narrated from a group from Abi Mufaddal
from Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Bishar from Mujahid bin Musa from Ibad bin
Ibad from Mujalid bin Saeed from Jubair bin Nauf that he said: I said to
Abu Saeed Khudri:

“By Allah, no new year comes to us but it is worse than the last, and no
ruler, but he is worse than the one before him.”

Abu Saeed said: “I heard this from the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.). He
was saying what you are saying. But I heard him say, ‘This will continue
so much so that people will be born in mischief and inequity and they
will not know anything but mischief and inequity, so much so that the
earth will be full of corruption. No one will be able to say, Allah.
Then Allah, the Exalted, will send a man from Me and my family. He will
fill the earth with justice as those who have been before him will have
filled it with injustice. The earth will bring out its riches and
treasures to him. He will dispense wealth without counting it once. This
will happen until Islam is established firmly.”

**10-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Ibne Mutawakkil from Ali
from his father from Harawi from Imam Reza (a.s.) that the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.s.) said:

“By the One Who sent me with Truth as a herald of happy tidings, the
Qaim from my progeny will go into hiding with a promise from me confided
in him; so much so that the majority of people will say: Allah does not
need Ahle Bayt (a.s.). The remainders will doubt his birth. Whoever sees
his time must adhere to his religion and not give Satan a way to him,
who will take him off my path and away from my religion.*Verily Satan
brought out your parents from Paradise* before, and Allah, the
Exalted,*has made satans masters of the people who disbelieve.”*

**11-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Ibne Idris from his
father from Muhammad bin Adam from his father from Ibne Ayaas from
Mubarak bin Faddalah from Wahab bin Munabbah directly from Ibne Abbas
that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said:

When my Lord elevated me in Meraj, a call came, “O Muhammad.”*“Here I
am, O* Lord of Dignity, here I am,” I said. Allah, the Exalted,
addressed me, “O Muhammad, in what did the*High Congregation* dispute?”
I said: “My Lord, I do not know.” He said to me, “O Muhammad, you should
choose a premier from mankind, a brother and a successor after you.” I
said: “My Lord, who should I choose? You select for me, my Lord.” Allah
said to me, “O Muhammad, I select Ali for you from the mankind.” I said:
“My Lord, my cousin?”

He said to me: “O Muhammad, Ali is your heir and the heir of the
knowledge of those after you; he is your standard bearer on Judgment Day
and the patron of your Pool. He will provide water to the believers of
your Ummah who will enter upon him.”

Then Allah, the Exalted, said to me, “O Muhammad, I have taken a
truthful oath over My Soul that no one will drink from that Pool who
disdains you, your household and your pure progeny. Truly, truly, do I
say, O Muhammad, I will enter the entirety of your Ummah to Paradise
except whose who will refuse.” I said: “My Lord, is there anyone who
would refuse to enter Paradise?” He said: “Yes.” I asked, “How does he
refuse?”

So Allah, the Exalted, said to me, “O Muhammad, I selected you from my
creation, and I selected for you a successor after you. I designated him
the position of Harun from Musa, except that there will not be an
apostle

after you. I put his love in your heart and made him the father of your
progeny. His right after you on your Ummah is like your right on them
during your lifetime. Whoever denies his right, he denies your right.
Whoever refuses to take him as his master, he refuses from taking you as
his master; and whoever refuses from taking you as his master, he verily
refuses entering Paradise.” I fell in prostration before Him, thanking
His graces upon me.

Then a caller was calling, “O Muhammad, raise your head and ask Me, I
shall grant you.” I asked, “My Lord, unite my Ummah after me on the love
of Ali Ibne Abi Talib, so they all may enter upon my Pool on Judgment
Day.” Allah, the Exalted, said, “O Muhammad, I have outlined to My
servants before I created them, and My providence is to be fulfilled,
that I will destroy through him whoever I wish, and will guide through
him whoever I wish. I have granted him your knowledge after you and have
made him your legatee and successor after you over your family and over
your Ummah, as a determination of Mine. Will not enter Paradise whoever
has enmity towards him, despises him, or denies his guardianship after
you. Whoever despises him despises you, and whoever despises you
despises Me. Whoever is an enemy of his is an enemy of you, and whoever
is an enemy of you is an enemy of Me. Whoever loves him loves you, and
whoever loves you, he verily so loves Me. I have assigned this
excellence to him. My grant to you is that I will bring from his
offspring Eleven Men of Guidance, all of whom are from your progeny of
the Chaste Lady*.* Isa Ibne Maryam will pray behind the last man of
them. Their last man would fill the earth with equity as it will be full
of oppression and tyranny.

I will save through him from annihilation, and guide through him from
ignorance. I will heal through him the blind and cure through him the
sick.” I asked, “My Lord, My Chief, when will this be?” Allah, the
Exalted, said to me, “It will be when knowledge will be scarce and
ignorance manifest; when reciters will be many and action scant; when
murders will be plentiful and guided jurists few; when jurists of
misguidance and treason will be many and poets will be countless.

When your Ummah will make their graves their mosques; when Qurans will
be decorated and mosques will be adorned; when tyranny and mischief will
be common; when your Ummah will encourage vice and forbid virtue; when
homosexuality and lesbianism will be common; when rulers will be
infidels, their friends will be aberrant, their supporters will be
oppressors and their thinkers, corrupt.

At that time, there will be three eclipses - an eclipse in the east, an
eclipse in the west, and an eclipse in the Arabian peninsula. Basra will
be destroyed by a man from your progeny whose followers will be a
certain generation of blacks. A man will rise from the progeny of Husain
Ibne Ali. Dajjal will appear from the east from Sajistan and Sufyani
will rise.”

I said: “My Lord, what trials will there be after me?” So Allah informed
me of the mischief of the Umayyads, may He curse them, and of the
mischief of the children of my uncle, and all that will happen until
Judgment Day. I conferred that knowledge to my cousin when I descended
on earth and conveyed the message. Praise is for Allah for this all, as
apostles have

praised Him, and as everything before me has praised Him, and as all
that He has created will praise Him until Judgment Day.

*The author says:* “In what did ‘*the High Congregation’* dispute?”
refers to the holy verse:

<p dir="rtl">
مَا كَانَ لِي مِنْ عِلْمٍ بِالْمَلَإِ الْأَعْلَى إِذْ يَخْتَصِمُونَ
</p>

***“1 had no knowledge of the exalted chiefs when they contended.”
(Surah Saad 38:69)***

The common opinion amongst interpreters is that it alludes to the holy
verse:

<p dir="rtl">
إِنِّي جَاعِلٌ فِي الأَرْضِ خَلِيفَةً
</p>

***“I am going to place in the earth a vicegerent.” (Surah Baqarah
2:30)***

*…* and the questioning of the angels with that respect. Perhaps, Allah,
the Exalted, asked His Prophet first about this and then informed him
about it and explained that the earth cannot be without a Hujjah and
vicegerent and then asked him about his vicegerent and appointed his
successors for him. It is possible that the angels may have asked at
that time about the heir of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) so Allah
informed him of that. Some assertions about this were mentioned in the
section of Meraj.

The saying of Allah, the Exalted, “Basra will be destroyed,” is an
allusion to the story of the leader of the*zanj* (a certain tribe from
the blacks) who rose in Basra in the year two hundred and fifty-five or
fifty-six. He promised to all the blacks who were coming to him to free
them and honor them. When a large number of them gathered around him,
his campaign became forceful and he got the title of ‘the Leader of the
Zanj.’

He believed that he was Ali Ibne Muhammad Ibne Ahmad Ibne Isa Ibne Zaid
Ibne Ali Ibne Husain Ibne Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.). Ibne Abil Hadid
says: Majority of people question his lineage, specially so the children
of Abu Talib. The majority of genealogists believe that he is from the
tribe of Abdul Qais and that he is Ali Ibne Muhammad Ibne Abdur Rahim
and that his mother is from the Asad, from Asad Ibne Khuzaimah, and that
her grandfather is Muhammad Ibne Hakim Asadi from Kufa.

Ibne Athir has said likewise in*Kamil* and Masudi in*Murujuz Zahab.*
However, this tradition suggests that his lineage is valid. It is worth
remembering that these signs are not necessary to be contemporaneous
with his victorious rise, since the objective is to describe that these
incidents will occur before his rise. Comparatively, many conditions of
Judgment Day that Ahle Sunnat as well as the elite congregation has
narrated have appeared ages and years before the Hour. The story of ‘the
Leader of the Zanj’ was contemporary with his holy birth and from that
time his signs have begun appearing until he uprises. It is also
possible, however unlikely, that the purpose is to describe the signs of
his birth.

**12-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Ibne Masrur has narrated from Ibne Aamir from
Mualla from Ja’far bin Sulaiman from Abdullah bin Hakam from his father
from Saeed bin Jubair from Ibne Abbas that the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.) said:

“My successors and heirs and the Hujjas of Allah over the creation after
me are twelve. The first one of them is my brother, and their last is my
son.” It was asked, “O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.), who is your
brother?” He said: “Ali Ibne Abi Talib.”

He was asked, “Who is your son?” He said: “He is Mahdi. He would fill
the earth with equity and justice as it will be full of oppression and
tyranny. By the One Who sent me as an apostle with truth, even if a day
is left from the world, Allah will prolong it until my son, Mahdi will
rise. Then Allah will send down Ruhullah Isa Ibne Maryam (a.s.), who
will pray behind my son.*And the earth will shine with the illumination
of its Lord,* and his rule will extend from east to west.”

**13-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Ibne Masrur has narrated from Ibne Aamir from
his uncle from Ibne Abi Umair from Abu Jamila from Jabir Jofi from Jabir
bin Abdullah Ansari that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said:

“Mahdi is from my progeny; his name is my name and his patronymic my
patronymic. He is the one from all people most similar to me in his
creation and in his character. For him there will be an occultation and
a wonder, in which nations will go astray. Then he will come like a
meteor of piercing brightness, and fill the earth with justice and
equity as it will be full of oppression and tyranny.”

**14-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Ibne Walid from Saffar
from Ahmad bin Husain bin Saeed from Muhammad bin Jamhur from Faddalah
from Muawiyah bin Wahab from Abu Hamza from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.)
that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said:

“Bliss be for the person who will be in the time of the Qaim of my
household, who follows the Qaim during his occultation before his rise
and loves his lovers and despises his enemies. Such a person is of my
friends and lovers and he is the most honorable of my Ummah to me on
Judgment Day.”

**15-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Abdul Wahid bin Muhammad
from Abu Amr Balkhi from Muhammad bin Aslam Jabli from Khattab bin Musab
from Sudair from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.) said:

“Bliss be for the one who will be in the time of the Qaim of my
household,*who* will be his follower before his rise, and will follow
him and the Imams of Guidance before him, and turns away to Allah with
disdain*from* their enemies. They are my friends and the most honorable
of my Ummah to me.”

**16-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq has narrated from his father,
Ibne Walid and Ibne Mutawakkil, all from Saad, Himyari and Muhammad
Attar, all from Ibne Isa, Ibne Hashim, Barqi and Ibne Abil Khattab, all
from Ibne Mahbub from Dawood bin Hasin from Abu Basir from Imam Muhammad
Baqir (a.s.) that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said:

“The Mahdi is*from* my sons; his name is my name and his patronymic is
my patronymic. He is, of all people, the most similar one to me in his
appearance and his character. There will be an occultation and a wonder
about him, so much so that people will go astray*from* their religion.
At that time, he will come like a meteor of piercing brightness, and
fill it with justice and equity as it will be full of oppression and
tyranny.”

**17-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Ibne Abdus has narrated from Ibne Qutaibah
from Hamadan from Ibne Yazi from Salih Ibne Uqbah from his father from
Imam Baqir (a.s.) that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said:

“The Mahdi is from my offspring. There will be an occultation and a
wonder for him in which nations will go astray. He will bring the
treasures of the apostles and fill the earth with equity and justice as
it will be full of oppression and tyranny.”

**18-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Ibne Mutawakkil from
Asadi from Barmaki from Ali bin Uthman from Muhammad bin Furat from
Thabit bin Dinar from Saeed bin Jubair from Ibne Abbas that the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said:

“Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) is the Imam of my Ummah and my successor over
them after me. From his offspring is the Awaited Qaim, through whom
Allah, the Exalted, will fill the earth with justice and equity as it
will be full of corruption and oppression. By the One Who sent me with
the Truth as a Herald of Glad Tidings, those who will remain steadfast
in the belief in him in the time of his occultation, they are rarer than
red sulfur.”

Jabir Ibne Abdullah Ansari stood up and asked: “O Messenger of Allah, is
the Qaim from your offspring going to have an occultation?” He said:
“Yes, by my Lord.

<p dir="rtl">
وَلِيُمَحِّصَ اللّهُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ وَيَمْحَقَ الْكَافِرِينَ
</p>

***“And that He may purge those who believe and deprive the unbelievers
of blessings.” (Surah Aale Imran 3:141)***

Jabir, this order is a Divine Order, and a secret from the Divine
Secrets, veiled fr*om* His servants. Beware not to doubt in the Divine
Order, for it is*disbelief.”*

**19-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Ibne Abdus has narrated from Ibne Qutaibah
from Hamadan bin Sulaiman from Abdullah bin Fadhl bin Hashmi from Hisham
bin Saalim from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.)
said:

“Qaim is from my progeny. His name is my name, his patronymic my
patronymic, his appearance my appearance, and his conduct my conduct. He
will lead the people on my path and my law, and will call them to the
Book of Allah, the Exalted. Whoever obeys him, obeys me and whoever
disobeys him, disobeys me. Whoever rejects him during his occultation
has rejected me; and whoever belies him, belies me. Whoever affirms his
truth, affirms my truth. I complain to Allah from my beliers in his
affair and rejecters of my word with regard to him and the ones who will
lead my Ummah astray

from his path.*And soon the oppressors will know to what final place of
turning they shall turn back.”*

**20-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Hamadani from Ali from
his father from Ibne Abi Umair from Ghiyath bin Ibrahim from Imam Sadiq
(a.s.) from the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) that he said:

“Whoever rejects Qaim from my offspring has verily so rejected me.”

**21-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Warraq from Asadi from
Nakhai from Naufali from Ghiyath bin Ibrahim from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said:

“Whoever rejects Qaim from my offspring during the time of his
occultation will die a death of ignorance.”

**22-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** A group has narrated from Talakbari from
Ahmad bin Ali from Ibne Abi Darim from Ali bin Abbas from Muhammad bin
Hashim Qaisi from Sahl bin Tamam Basri from Imran Qattan from Qatadah
from Abi Nazra from Jabir Ibne Abdullah Ansari that the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.s.) said:

“Mahdi will appear in the last period of time.”

**23-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Ishaq from
Ali bin Abbas from Bakaar bin Ahmad from Hasan bin Husain from Mualla
bin Ziyad from Alaa bin Bashir from Abdul Sadeeq Naaji from Abu Saeed
Khudri that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said:

“I give you the glad tidings of the Mahdi. He will be sent to my Ummah
when people will be in dispute and concussions. He will fill the earth
with justice and equity as it will be full of oppression and tyranny.
The dwellers of the heavens and the earth will be pleased with him.”

**24-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** From the same chains, it is narrated from
Hasan bin Husain from Talid from Abil Hajaaf that the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.) said:

“Rejoice in the glad news of the coming of the Mahdi,” thrice.

Then he said: “He will come during a time of dispute and severe
concussions of people. He will fill the earth with equity and justice as
it will have become full of corruption and tyranny. He will instill
devotion into the hearts of His servants and will deliver His equity to
them.”

**25-** ***Ghaibat*** ***Tusi:*** It is narrated from the same chain of
narrators from Hasan bin Husain from Sufyan Jurairi from Abdul Momin
from Harith bin Hasir from Ammara bin Juwain Abadi from Abu Saeed Khudri
that: I heard the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) say on the pulpit:

“Mahdi is verily from my household, from my family. He will come in the
last period of time.

The heavens will send down rain for him and the earth will put forth its
crops for him. He will make the earth full of justice and equity as
people will have made it full of oppression and tyranny.”

**26-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Ishaq from
Ali bin Abbas from Bakkar from Misbah from Qays from Abu Hasin from Abu
Salih from Abu Huraira that he said: Said the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.):

“Should there not remain from the world but a single day, Allah will
prolong that day until a man from my household will rise. He will fill
the earth with justice and equity as it will be full of oppression and
tyranny.”

**27-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** Through the same chains, it is narrated from
Bakkar from Ali bin Qadim from Fatar from Asim from Zar bin Hubaish from
Abdullah Ibne Masud that he said: Said the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.):

“Should there not remain from the world but one day, Allah will prolong
that day until He sends a man from me, whose name will be like my name
and his father’s name like my father’s. He will fill the earth with
justice as it will be full of injustice.”

**28-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Ishaq from
Abdullah bin Abbas from Ja’far bin Muhammad Zuhri from Ishaq bin Mansur
from Qays bin Rabi etc. from Asim from Zar from Abdullah Ibne Masud that
he said: Said the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.):

“The world will not end until a man comes to my Ummah from my household
who is called the Mahdi.”

**29-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from a group from Bazufari
from Ahmad bin Idris from Ibne Qutaibah from Fadhl from Nasr bin Muzahim
from Abu Lahia from Abu Qabil from Abdullah bin Amr Ibne Aas that he
narrated a long tradition, in which the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.)
says:

“...And then will be the rise of the Mahdi, and he is a man from the
offspring of this,” pointing to Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.). “Through him
Allah will take away lies. Through him time will take away severity. He
will remove the disgrace of slavery from your necks.” Then he said: “I
am the first of this Ummah, Mahdi is the middle of it, and Isa is the
last of it. And in between there is a crooked old man.”

**30-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Ali from
Uthman bin Ahmad from Ibrahim bin Abdullah Hashmi from Ibrahim bin Hani
from Naeem bin Hammad from Uqbah bin Walid from Abu Bakr bin Abu Maryam
from Fadhl bin Yaqub from Abdullah bin Ja’far from Abu Malih from Ziyad
bin Bunan from Ali bin Nufayl from Saeed bin Musayyab that Umme Salama,
wife of the Prophet said: I heard the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) say:

“Mahdi is from my household from the progeny of Fatima.” Same narration
is mentioned in*Ghaibat Tusi* through another chain of narrators.

**31-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Ahmad bin Idris from
Ibne Qutaibah from Fadhl from Misbah from Abu Abdur Rahman from one who
says that it is narrated from Ibne Abbas that Wahab bin Munabbah asked
him in a lengthy report:

“Is he from your progeny?” He said: “No, by Allah, he is not from my
progeny. He is from the progeny of Ali (a.s.). Bliss be for the one wh

reaches his time. Through him Allah will relieve the Ummah’s stress,
until he makes the earth full of equity and justice...”

**32-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from a group from Talakbari
from Ahmad bin Ali from Ahmad bin Idris from Ibne Isa from Ahwazi from
Husain bin Alwan from Abu Harun Abdi from Abu Saeed Khudri who narrated
a long tradition, which we will summarize. He says: Said the Messenger
of Allah (s.a.w.s.) to Fatima:

“Dear daughter, we the Ahle Bayt have been given seven things that no
one has been given before us. Our apostle is the best of the apostles.
Our successor is the best of the successors, and he is your husband. Our
martyr is the best of the martyrs, and he is Hamzah, the uncle of your
father. From us is the one who has two dyed wings, by which he glides in
Paradise, and he is your cousin Ja’far. From us are the two heirs of
this Ummah, and they are your two sons: Hasan and Husain. And from us
is, by Allah, a deity other than Him is not, the Mahdi of this Ummah,
behind whom Isa Ibne Maryam will pray.” Then he touched Husain’s
shoulder and said thrice, “From him.”

**33-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ahmad bin Ali Bandiji
from Abdullah bin Musa Abbasi from Musa bin Salam from Bazanti from
Abdur Rahman bin Khashab from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) from the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) that he said:

“The similitude of my Ahle Bayt is the similitude of the stars of the
heavens. Whenever a star hides, another star rises. When a certain star
from them will appear and they gaze and point at him, the angel of death
comes to him and takes him. Then you will remain like that for a long
period of time.

The children of Abdul Muttalib will be equal and no one will know one
thing from another. At that time, your star will appear; so praise Allah
and go to him.”

**34-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ahmad bin Hawza from
Nahawandi from Abdullah bin Hammad from Aban bin Uthman from Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (a.s.) that:

“One day the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) was at Baqi, when Ali came
and gave him greetings. The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said to him,
‘Sit down’ and he sat him down on his right. Then Ja’far Ibne Abi Talib
came and asked about the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.). He was told that
he was at Baqi. He also came to the apostle and gave him greetings. The
Messenger sat him on his left. Then came Abbas and asked about the
Apostle. He was told that he was in Baqi. He came also and gave
greetings. The apostle sat him in front of him. Then the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.s.) turned towards Ali (a.s.) and said: “May I not give you
the happy tidings? May I not inform you, O Ali?” “Please do,” said
Amirul Momineen (a.s.). The Apostle said: “Jibraeel was with me a moment
ago and informed me that the Qaim, who will rise during the last period
of time and fill the earth with equity as it will be full of oppression
and tyranny, will be from your progeny from the offspring of Husain
(a.s.).”

Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said: “O Messenger of Allah, no good has ever
come to us from Allah but on your hands.” Then he turned to Ja’far and
said: “O Ja’far, may I not give you glad tidings?” “Please,” said
Ja’far. “Jibraeel was with me a moment ago and informed me that the one
who will do good to Qaim is from your progeny. Do you know who he is?”
Ja’far said: “No.” He said: “The one whose visage will be like a dinar,
will have straightly ordered teeth and his sword would be like the blaze
of fire. He will enter the mountain low and come back high. Jibraeel and
Mikaeel will be protecting him.”

Then he turned to Abbas and said: “O uncle of the Apostle, may I inform
you of what Jibraeel has informed me?” “Please so, O Messenger of
Allah,” said Abbas. “He said to me, ‘Much pain will reach our progeny
from the sons of Abbas.” “O Messenger of Allah, should I abstain from
women?” asked Abbas. “Allah is done with what will happen,” said the
Apostle.

**35-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Ali
bin Husain from Muhammad bin Ali from Yazi from Amr bin Yunus from Hamza
bin Humran from Salim Ashal that he said: I heard Imam Baqir (a.s.) say:

“Musa, the son of Imran saw in the First Book what will be given to the
Qaim of Aale Muhammad (a.s.). He said: ‘O Allah make me the Qaim of Aale
Muhammad (a.s.).’ It was said to him, ‘He is from the progeny of Ahmad.’
Then he looked at the Second Book and found the like of that. He made a
similar wish and was given a similar answer. Then he looked in the Third
Book and saw something similar. He made a similar supplication and
received a similar answer.”

**36-** ***Al-Kafi:*** Kulaini (r.a.) has narrated from Adaa from Sahal
from Muhammad bin Sulaiman from Haitham bin Ashim from Muawiyah bin
Ammar from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that the Messenger (s.a.w.s.) came
out one day very happy as he was laughing from gaiety. People said to
him:

“May Allah ever keep you laughing, O Messenger of Allah, and may He
increase your happiness.” The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said: “There
is not any day or night but Allah gives me a gift. Behold, today my Lord
bestowed me with a gift that He had not bestowed by the like of it in
the past.

Jibraeel (a.s.) came to me and conveyed greetings from my Lord. He said:
‘O Muhammad, Allah, the Exalted, has chosen seven persons from Bani
Hashim, the likes of whom He has never created amongst the predecessors,
nor will He amongst the remainders: You, O Messenger of Allah, are the
chief of the apostles; Ali Ibne Abi Talib, your successor, is the chief
of the successors; Hasan and Husain, your grandson, are the chiefs of
the legatees; Hamzah, your uncle, is the chief of the martyrs; Ja’far,
your cousin, flying in Paradise, glides with angels wherever he desires;
and from you is the Qaim, behind whom Isa Ibne Maryam will pray when
Allah brings him down to earth. He (the Qaim) will be from the progeny
of Ali and Fatima, and from the offspring of Husain (a.s.).”

**37-** ***Kashful Ghummah:*** Ali bin Isa Irbili has in*Kashful Ghummah
written that forty traditions were* compiled by Hafiz Abu Naeem Ahmad
Ibne Abdullah. These forty traditions have reached me, all with respect
to the affair of the Mahdi (a.s.). I will bring them in the same
continuous manner in which he has narrated them. However, I only suffice
on mentioning the name of the narrator.

1. Prosperity during his time: It is narrated on the authority of Abu
Saeed Khudri from the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) that he said: “From
my Ummah will be the Mahdi. If his life is short, [his reign] will be
seven years, otherwise eight, or otherwise nine. My Ummah will enjoy
blessings in his time, the like of which no virtuous or evil person has
ever enjoyed. The heaven will be showering over them abundantly and the
earth will not withhold any of its plants.”

2. Justice of Mahdi: On the authority of Abu Saeed Khudri, it is
narrated from the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) that he said: “The earth
will be full of oppression and tyranny. Then a man from my household
will rise and make it full of equity and justice. He will rule for seven
or nine years.”

3. The same narrator says: Said the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.), “The
Hour shall not come until a man from my Ahle Bayt rules over the earth,
filling it with justice and equity as it shall be full of oppression. He
will rule for seven years.”

4. Mahdi is from the progeny of Fatima: It is narrated from Zuhri, from
Imam Zainul Abideen (a.s.) from his father (a.s.) that the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.s.) said to Fatima, “The Mahdi is from your progeny.”

5. Mahdi is the chosen one of Allah: Ali Ibne Hilal narrates from his
father: I came to the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) as he was in his
terminal illness. Fatima was at his head and she was crying profusely
until her sobs rose. The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) raised his head
to her and said: “My darling, what is making you cry?” She said: “I fear
the loss after you.” He said: “My darling, don’t you know that Allah,
the Exalted, looked down on earth and selected your father. He sent him
with His message. Then he looked down and selected your husband and sent
me revelation to marry you to him.

O Fatima, Allah, the Exalted, has given us, Ahle Bayt, seven
characteristics, which He has not given to anyone before us nor will He
give to anyone after us. I am the Seal of the Messengers and the most
dignified of the apostles before Allah, the Exalted, and the most
cherished of the creation to Allah, the Exalted, and I am your father.
My successor is the best of the successors, and the most cherished of
them to Allah, the Exalted, and he is your husband.

Our martyr is the best of the martyrs and the most cherished of them to
Allah, the Exalted, and he is Hamzah Ibne Abdul Muttalib, your father’s
and your husband’s uncle. Ours is the one who has two wings and flies in
Paradise with angels wherever he wishes, and he is the cousin of your
father and the brother of your husband. Ours are the two princes of this
Ummah, and they are your sons, Hasan and Husain, and they are the chiefs
of the youths of Paradise-dwellers, and their father, by the One Who
sent me with the Truth, is better than them.

“O Fatima, by the One Who sent me with Truth, from their offspring is
the Mahdi of this Ummah. When the world is in anarchy and chaos, when
mischief manifests and roadways are blocked, when people loot each
other, with no elder pitying any youngster, nor any youngster respecting
an elder, at that time, Allah will send from the progeny of these two
the one who will conquer the fortresses of misguidance and open sealed
hearts. He will establish religion in the latter days as I established
it. He will fill the earth with equity as it will be full of oppression.

O Fatima, grieve not and cry not, for Allah, the Exalted, is more
compassionate and more benevolent to you than I am; and that is due to
your position from me and your station in my heart. Allah married you to
your husband, who is the greatest of all people in stature, the most
dignified of them in position, the most compassionate of them to the
public, the fairest of them in equity, and the wisest of them in
judgment. I beseeched my Lord, the Exalted, that you be the first one to
join me from my family.” Amirul Momineen (a.s.) says, “Fatima did not
live after that but for seventy-five days until Allah united her with
her father.”

6. The Mahdi is from the Progeny of Husain (a.s.): Huzaifah bin Yaman
says: The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) addressed us and recounted
things that will happen in the future. Then he said: “If there should
not remain from the world but a single day, Allah, the Exalted, will
prolong that day until He sends a man from my progeny, whose name is my
name.” Salman (a.s.) stood up and asked: “O Messenger of Allah, from
which of your sons?” “From this son of mine,” said he, putting his hand
on Husain (a.s.).

7. The Village from which the Mahdi Will Rise: Abdullah Ibne Umar says:
Said the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.), “The Mahdi will rise from a
village called Kara.”

8. Mahdi’s Visage: Also Huzaifah says: Said the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.), “The Mahdi is from my offspring. His face is like
a*glittering star.”*

9. Complexion and Physique: Huzaifah also narrates: The Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.s.) said: “The Mahdi is a man from my progeny. His
complexion is Arabic and his body is Israelite. There is a mole on his
right cheek, like a glittering star. He will fill the earth with equity
and justice as it will be full of oppression. The dwellers of the
heavens and the earth and birds of the sky will be happy in his rule.”

10. His Forehead: Abu Saeed Khudri says: Said the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.), “The Mahdi is from us, with an open forehead and a high
nose.”

11. His Nose: Abu Saeed Khudri narrates from the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.) that he said: “The Mahdi is from us the Ahle Bayt, a man from
my Ummah. He has a high nose. He will fill the earth with equity as it
will be full of corruption.”

12. Mole on the Right Cheek: Abu Amama Bahili says: The Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.s.) said: “There will be four truces between you and the
Romans. The fourth one will be on the hands of a man from the house of
Hercules and it will last for seven years.” “O Messenger of Allah,”
called a man from the tribe of Abdul ­Qais, who was called Mustawrid
Ibne Ghayalan, “who will be the Imam of the people that day?” “The Mahdi
from

my offspring, a man of forty years and with a face like a glittering
star. There will be a black mole on his right cheek. He will be wearing
two Qatari cloaks, seeming as he was from the men of the children of
Israel. He will extricate treasures and conquer the cities of
polytheism.”

13. His Teeth: Abdur Rahman Ibne Auf says: The Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.) said: “Allah will verily send a man from my household whose
teeth will be at distance from one another and whose forehead will be
broad. He will fill the earth with equity and distribute wealth
bountifully.”

14. The Virtuous Imam: Abu Amama says: The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.)
addressed us and mentioned Dajjal. He said: “Medina will expel
uncleanness like mill’s melting furnace purges uncleanness out of iron.
That day will be proclaimed the day of salvation.” Umme Sharik asked,
“Where are the believers on that day, O Messenger of Allah?” “They are
few on that day,” he said. “The majority of them will be at Jerusalem.
Their Imam will be the Mahdi, a virtuous man.”

15. Allah sends him openly: Abu Saeed Khudri says that the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.s.) said: “The Mahdi will rise in my Ummah. Allah will send
him openly. The Ummah will enjoy and the cattle will rejoice. The earth
will bring forth its plants and he will distribute wealth equally.”

16. Cloud shades him: Abdullah Ibne Umar says: Said the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.s.), ‘The Mahdi will rise while there will be a cloud over
his head from which a caller will be calling:*This is the Mahdi, the
Vicegerent of Allah; follow him.”*

17. Angel Over his head: Abdullah Ibne Umar says: Said the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.s.), “The Mahdi will rise while an angel will be over him,
calling:*This is the Mahdi, follow him.”*

18. Glad Tidings of the Prophet about Mahdi: Abu Saeed Khudri says: The
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said: “I give you the glad tidings of the
Mahdi. He will be sent to my Ummah during a time of peoples’ dispute and
concussions. He will fill the earth with equity and justice as it will
be full of oppression and tyranny. The dwellers of the heaven and the
earth will be happy from him. He will distribute wealth*sahaha.”* A man
asked him, “What is*sahaha?”* He said: “Equality between the people.”

19. Mahdi’s Name: Abdullah Ibne Umar says: The Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.) said: “The Hour shall not come until a man from my progeny
will rule. His name is like my name. He will fill the earth with equity
and justice as it will be full of oppression and tyranny.”

20. His Patronymic: Huzaifah says: The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.)
said: “If there should not remain but a single day from the world, Allah
will send a man therein whose name is my name, his character my
character, and his patronymic is Abu Abdullah.”

21. Name of Mahdi: Ibne Umar says: Said the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.), “The world will not go away until Allah sends a man from my
household. His name will be like my name, and his father’s name like my
father’s. He will fill it with equity and justice as it will be full of
tyranny and oppression.”

22. His Equity: Abu Saeed Khudri says: Said the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.), “Verily the earth will be beset with oppression and
hostility. Then a man will arise from my Ahle Bayt, who will fill it
with equity and justice, as it will be replete with tyranny, hostility
and oppression.”

23. His Character: Abdullah Ibne Umar says: The Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.) said: “A man will rise from Ahle Bayt; his name will be like
mine and his character will be like mine. He will fill the earth with
equity and justice.”

24. His Magnificence: Abu Saeed Khudri says: The Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.) said: “In latter days when mischief manifests, a man will
come who is called the Mahdi. His grants will be so very pleasant.”

25. His Knowledge of the Prophet’s Conduct: Abu Saeed Khudri says: The
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said: “A man will rise from my Ahle Bayt
and act upon my conduct. Allah will send down for him blessings from the
heavens. The earth will bring forth its bliss. Through him the earth
will be beset by equity and justice, as it will be replete with
oppression and tyranny. He will rule over this Ummah for seven years and
will disembark at Jerusalem.”

26. His advent with standards: Thawban says: The Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.) said: “When you see black standards coming from Khurasan,
then come to them even if you have to crawl on snow, for the Vicegerent
of God, the Mahdi is amidst them.”

27. His coming from East: Abdullah bin Umar said: We were sitting with
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) when a group of Bani Hashim youths
came. When the Prophet saw them, his eyes filled with tears and his
color changed. The companions said: “O Messenger of Allah, we see in
your visage something which we dislike.” He said: “We, the Ahle Bayt,
Allah have chosen the hereafter over this world. My Household will see
trials, banishment and ostracism after me, until a people comes from the
east carrying black standards. They will demand the right and will be
denied. So they will wage wars and will be victorious and will be given
what they asked for. But they do not accept it until they proffer it to
a man from my Household. He will fill the earth with equity and justice,
as they have beset it by tyranny. Whoever reaches that time from amongst
you must come to them even if he has to crawl over ice.”

28. Revival of Islam’s Honorability through the Mahdi: Huzaifah says: I
heard the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) say, “Pity for this Ummah from
tyrannical rulers! How will they be murdering and frightening the pious
until one has to acknowledge obedience to them! The God-fearing believer
will put on with them on his tongue and run away from them in his heart.
When Allah, the Exalted, desires to render Islam honorable again, He
will break every hostile tyrant. And He is All-Powerful over anything He
desires and to set this Ummah right after its corruption.”

He said: “O Huzaifah, even if there should not remain but a single day
from the world, Allah will prolong that day until a man from my
Household rules. Fights will be waged on his hands and Islam will become
manifest. He will not violate His promise*and He* is*Swift in
reckoning.”*

29. Prosperity of Muslims during Mahdi’s Rule: Abu Saeed Khudri narrates
that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said: “My Ummah will enjoy a
leisure in the time of the Mahdi (a.s.) the like of which they have
never

enjoyed. The heavens will shower over them bountifully and the earth
will not leave any vegetation but to bring it forth.”

30. Mahdi is a Chief of Paradise: Anas Ibne Malik says: The Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.s.) said: “We, the sons of Abdul Muttalib are the chiefs of
Paradise: I, my brother Ali, my uncle, Hamzah, Ja’far, Hasan, Husain and
the Mahdi.”

31. Mahdi’s Kingdom: Abu Huraira says: The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.)
said: “If there should not remain but one night for the world, a man
from my Household will rule therein.”

32. Mahdi’s Caliphate: Thawban says: Said the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.), “Three men, all of them sons of a caliph, will be killed
before your treasure, which will not go to anyone of them. Then black
standards will come and they will massacre them, a massacre never done
by any nation. Then the Caliph of God, the Mahdi, will come. When you
hear him, come to him and pledge allegiance to him, for he is the Caliph
of God, the Mahdi.”

33. Pledging Allegiance to Mahdi: Thawban says: The Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.) said: “Black standards will come from the east. As if their
hearts are iron ingots. Whoever hears about them must come to them and
pledge them allegiance, even if they have to crawl over ice.”

34. Mahdi will bring the hearts together: Amirul Momineen (a.s.) says, I
said: “O Messenger of Allah, is the Mahdi from us Ahle Bayt (a.s.) or
from the others?” He said: “Rather, he is ours. Allah will complete the
religion through him, as He opened it through us. Through us, they are
rescued from mischief, as they were rescued from polytheism. Through us,
Allah will bring their hearts together as brothers after the hostility
of mischief, as He brought them together as brothers in their religion
after the hostility of polytheism.”

35. No use of living after the Mahdi: Abdullah Ibne Masud says: The
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said: “Even if there should not remain for
this world but a single night, Allah will prolong that night until a man
from my Household becomes the ruler. His name is like my name and his
father’s name is like my father’s. He will fill it with equity and
justice as it will be beset by oppression and tyranny. He will
distribute wealth equally. Allah will cast contentment in the hearts of
this Ummah. He will rule for seven or nine years. There is no pleasure
in life after the Mahdi.”

36. His Conquest of Constantinople: Abu Huraira says: The Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.s.) said: “The Hour shall not rise until a man from my
Household rules over. He will conquer Constantinople and Mount Dailam.
Even if there should not remain but one day from the tenure of this
world, Allah will prolong that day until he conquers it.”

37. He will appear after tyrant rulers: Qais Ibne Jabir narrates from
his father, from his grandfather that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.)
said: “After me there will be caliphs, and after the caliphs emirs, and
after the emirs tyrant kings. Then a man from my Household will rise who
will fill the earth with justice after it will be beset with tyranny.”

38. Isa (a.s.) prays in his lead: Abu Saeed Khudri says: The Messenger
of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said: “Ours is the one that Isa Ibne Maryam will
pray behind him.”

39. He converses with Isa bin Maryam (a.s.): Jabir Ibne Abdullah Ansari
says: The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said: “Isa Ibne Maryam (a.s.)
will descend. Their leader, the Mahdi will say, ‘Come lead our prayers.’
He will say, ‘Behold, there is a certain leader over us, as a token of
dignity from Allah, the Exalted, for this Ummah.”

40. Abdullah Ibne Abbas says: The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said:
“Never shall perish an Ummah in the beginning of which I am, in the end
of which is Isa Ibne Maryam and at the middle of which is the Mahdi.”

38-***Kashful Ghummah:*** It is mentioned in*Kashful Ghummah* that
Shaykh Abu Abdullah Muhammad Ibne Yusuf Ibne Muhammad Shafi has brought
the following in his book*Kifayatut Talib fi Manaqib Ali Ibne Abi Talib*
, in the beginning of which he has said: “I have compiled this book
without relying on Shia sources, to make the argument stronger.” He has
this to say about the Mahdi:

Chapter 1: His advent in the last period of time
------------------------------------------------

Abu Dawood narrates in his*Sunan from* Zarr from Abdullah that he said:
The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said: “The world will not cease to
exist until a man from my Household governs over the Arabs. His name is
like my name.”

Abu Dawood also narrates in*Sunan that* Amirul Momineen (a.s.) narrates
from the Prophet (s.a.), “Even if not more than one day is left from the
world, Allah will send a man from my Household. He will fill it with
justice as it will be full of corruption.”

Through several narrators from Asim Abiri in*Manaqib Shafi,* in which
the aforementioned tradition is recorded with the following addition,
“Even if there should not remain from the world but one day, Allah will
prolong that day until He sends a man from me - or from my Household -
his name will be like my name and his father’s name will be like my
father’s name. He will fill the earth with justice and equity as it will
be beset with oppression and injustice.”

Kanji says: Tirmidhi has mentioned the tradition in his book of*Jame,*
but has not recorded, “His father’s name will be like my father’s.”

Abu Dawood has mentioned it though. In the majority of the traditions,
narrated by memorizers of traditions and reliable narrators, it has
only, “his name is my name.” The narration “his father’s name is like my
father’s name,” is an addition to it. Even if it is correct, it means
“his father’s name has my father’s name,” that is, Husain’s patronymic
is Abu Abdullah, which comprises the name of the Prophet’s father,
indicating that he will be from the progeny of Husain, not Hasan. It is
also possible that it is a mistake of transcribers, who have
recorded*ibni (* my son) as*abi (* my father). It must be interpreted on
these grounds in order to remove any contradiction amongst the
traditions.

The author of*Kashful Ghummah* says: Our Shia scholars do not endeavor
to interpret this tradition differently than what it literally means,
because the name of the Hujjah and his father’s name are recorded in
their

books. The Ahle Sunnat, however, has suggested that if there is a
segment that adds something to the traditions, then it is necessary to
suggest that it is an addition, so there may be harmony amongst the
traditions.

Chapter 2: Mahdi is from my progeny and from the Progeny of Fatima
------------------------------------------------------------------

Saeed Ibne Musayyab says: We were in the presence of Umme Salama and
talked about the Mahdi. She said: I heard the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.) say, “The Mahdi is from my Household from the offspring of
Fatima.”

Ibne Majah has also narrated this in his*Sunan.* The same narrator
narrates from her: I heard the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) say, “The
Mahdi is from my Household from the offspring of Fatima (a.s.).” Abu
Dawood narrates this in his*Sunan.* Amirul Momineen (a.s.) says: Said
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.), “The Mahdi is from us Ahle Bayt.
Allah will straighten his affair in one night.”

Chapter 3: Mahdi is a leader of Paradise
----------------------------------------

Anas Ibne Malik says: I heard the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) say, “We
the children of Abdul Muttalib are the chiefs of the dwellers of
Paradise - I, Hamzah, Ali, Ja’far, Hasan, Husain and the Mahdi.”

Chapter 4: Allegiance to the Mahdi
----------------------------------

Ibne Majah has recorded in his*Sahih that* Thawban says: The Messenger
of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said: “Three people will be killed before your
treasury; all of them will be sons of a caliph and the treasury will not
become of anyone of them. Then black standards will rise from the east.
They will kill you in a massacre that no nation has killed like it.”
Then he said something I do not remember. The Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.) said: “When you see him, pledge allegiance to him, even if
you have to crawl over ice, because he is the Caliph of Allah, the
Mahdi.”

Chapter 5: People of the east will support the Mahdi
----------------------------------------------------

In the same way, Ibne Majah has narrated in his*Sunan* from Abdullah bin
Harith bin Jaza Zubaidi that he said: The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.)
said: “People will come from the east and will prepare for the Mahdi.”

Abdullah bin Masud says: We were with the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.)
when a group of youths from Bani Hashim came…Ibne Asim Kufi narrates
in*Kitab Futuh* from Amirul Momineen (a.s.) that he said: “Bliss for
Taliqan!

Because Allah, the Exalted, has treasures therein, which are neither of
gold nor silver. Rather, there are believing men who know Allah with
thorough cognition. They are also the aides of the Mahdi in the last
period of time.”

Chapter 6: Duration of his rule
-------------------------------

Tirmidhi has narrated from Abu Saeed Khudri that he said: We feared that
something may happen after the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.), so we
asked him about it. He said: The Mahdi will be in my Ummah. He will rise
and live for five or seven or nine. The doubt is narrators. Abu Saeed
says:

We asked him, “What is that?” He said: “Years.” He said: “A man will
come to him and say: O Mahdi give me wealth.’ He will throw into his
sheet so much as he can carry.” At the end of the report, Tirmidhi says
that it is a good tradition.

On the authority of others as well as Abu Saeed the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.) said: “The Mahdi will be in my Ummah, if short for seven
years, otherwise for nine years. During this period, my people will
rejoice a leisure the like of which they have never seen. The earth will
give its blessings and will not forbid anything from them. Wealth on
that day will be like grains. Men would rise and ask, ‘O Mahdi, give me
something.’ He would say, ‘Take.’”

It is narrated on the authority of Umme Salama, wife of Prophet (s.a.)
that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said: “At a dispute that will
occur at a caliph’s death, a man from the people of Medina will come out
fleeing to Mecca.

Some Meccans will come to him and will have him rise, while he is not
fond of it. They will pledge allegiance to him between*Rukn* and*Maqam.*
A Syrian army will be dispatched towards him, which will be swallowed
into the earth at Baidha, a locality between Mecca and Medina. When
people see this, saints of Syria groups of Iraq come to him and pledge
allegiance to him.

Then a man will come whose maternal uncles will be from the tribe of
Kalb. He will send an army to them and will be victorious over them.
This will be an army of the Kalb. Disappointment is for the one who does
not witness the booties of Kalb. He will distribute the wealth and will
rule over the people on the conduct of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.)
and will elevate Islam to its pinnacle all over the earth. He will stay
for seven years, then he will pass away and Muslims will pray over him.”

Chapter 7: Isa bin Maryam (a.s.) prays behind the Mahdi
-------------------------------------------------------

Abu Huraira narrates from the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) that he
said: “How would it be like when Isa Ibne Maryam (a.s.) will come down
to you and your Imam is yours?”

Shaykh Abu Abdullah Muhammad Ibne Yusuf Ibne Muhammad Shafi says: This
tradition is*Hasan* and*Sahih,* and there is a consensus on its
authenticity narrated by Muhammad Ibne Shahab Zuhri. Bukhari and Muslim
have narrated it in their*Sahihs.*

It is narrated from Jabir Ibne Abdullah that he said: I heard the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) say, “An assembly of my Ummah will
ceaselessly wage wars in the cause of righteousness and purity until
Judgment Day. Then Isa Ibne Maryam will come down. Their leader will say
to him, ‘Come and lead our prayers.’ He will say, ‘Behold, one of
yourselves is the leader for the rest, as a token of dignity from Allah
for this Ummah.”

Shaykh Abu Abdullah Muhammad Ibne Yusuf Ibne Muhammad Shafi Kanji says:
This is a*Hasan* and*Sahih* tradition, narrated by Muslim in his*Sahih.*

If the former tradition is subject to a different interpretation, it is
not possible to interpret this tradition in a different manner, as it
explicitly

declares that Isa (a.s.) will accept the leadership of the Imam of the
Muslims, who at that day will be Mahdi (a.s.). Therefore, to interpret
Isa saying, “Your Imam is from you” to mean “he leads you according to
your book” is unjustified. The following is conceivable to be asked:
Considering these traditions are valid, which state that Isa will pray
behind the Mahdi (a.s.), will fight under his command and kill Dajjal,
and considering leadership in prayers as well as leadership in Jihad
obviously denotes superiority, and as the narrators and validity of
these traditions are authentic before the Sunni, just as the Shia
narrate them in a parallel manner - which is the valid form of consensus
of Muslims, since the belief and stance of any other group other than
the Shia and the Sunni is discarded and not worthy of attention - the
question rises that who is higher, the Imam or his follower.

The answer to this query is that they both are leaders, one a prophet
and the other an imam. And when one of them is the leader of the other
when they are together, the Imam is the leader of the prophet. Both are
above the reproach of any reproacher. They are both infallible from
committing disdainful acts, hypocrisy, and pretending what they are not.
None of the two call to anything that is outside the boundaries of the
Shariah.

Having said this, the Imam is better than his follower for the Shariah
has brought a strong proof with that regard, which is the saying of the
Prophet (s.a.), “A person will lead the congregation who is the best of
them in the recitation of the Quran; and should they be equal in that,
their most knowledgeable will lead; and should they be equal in that,
their most wise will lead; and should they be equal in that, the one who
has preceded them all in migration will lead; and should they be equal
in that, the one who has the most beautiful face will lead. “Should the
Imam know that Isa is better than him, it will not be permissible for
him to lead Isa, for he knows the Shariah well and for Allah, the High,
has made him beyond every abominable act.

Likewise, should Isa know that he is better than him, it will not be
permissible for him to follow the Imam, for Allah has made him clean
from hypocrisy and pretension. Rather, since it is established that the
Imam is more knowledgeable than Isa, it is permissible for him to lead
him. Likewise, as Isa knows that the Imam is more knowledgeable than
him, he follows him and prays behind him.

Should this not be the case, it will not be allowed for anyone to wage
Jihad under the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) or under anyone. What
substantiates our position is the holy verse:

<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّ اللّهَ اشْتَرَى مِنَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ أَنفُسَهُمْ وَأَمْوَالَهُم
بِأَنَّ لَهُمُ الجَنَّةَ يُقَاتِلُونَ فِي سَبِيلِ اللّهِ فَيَقْتُلُونَ
وَيُقْتَلُونَ وَعْدًا عَلَيْهِ حَقًّا فِي التَّوْرَاةِ وَالإِنجِيلِ
وَالْقُرْآنِ وَمَنْ أَوْفَى بِعَهْدِهِ مِنَ اللّهِ فَاسْتَبْشِرُواْ
بِبَيْعِكُمُ الَّذِي بَايَعْتُم بِهِ وَذَلِكَ هُوَ الْفَوْزُ الْعَظِيمُ
</p>

***“Surely Allah has bought of the believers their persons and their
property for this, that they shall have the garden; they fight in
Allah’s way, so they slay and are slain; a promise which is binding on
Him in the Taurat and the Injeel and the Quran; and who is more faithful
to his***

***covenant than Allah? Rejoice therefore in the pledge which you have
made; and that is the mighty achievement.” (Surah Taubah 9:111)***

Since the Imam is the representative of the Prophet in his Ummah and it
is not permissible for Isa (a.s.) to get ahead of the Prophet, likewise
is the case with respect to his representative.

This is further strengthened by Ibne Majah’s long narration about the
descent of Isa (a.s.): Umme Sharik binte Abi Akar said: “O Messenger of
Allah, where will be the Arabs on that day?”

The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) replied, “They will be few at that
time. Most of them will be at Baitul Maqdas. Their Imam will be in front
of them leading them for Morning Prayers when Isa Ibne Maryam (a.s.)
descends. That Imam will move back to have Isa move in the front to lead
the prayers of the people. Isa will put his hand between his shoulders
and say to him, ‘Lead us.’” This is a*Sahih* and confirmed tradition
narrated by Ibne Majah in his book from Abu Amama Bahili.

Chapter 8: His looks
--------------------

Abu Saeed Khudri says: The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said: “The
Mahdi is mine. He is of broad forehead and high and slightly curved
nose. He will fill the earth with equity and justice as it will be full
of oppression and injustice. He will rule for seven years.” Shaykh Abu
Abdullah Muhammad Ibne Yusuf Ibne Muhammad Shafi says, this is a*Hasan
and Sahih* tradition narrated by Abu Dawood and many others such as
Tibrani.

Ibne Shirawaih Dailami narrates in*Kitab Firdos* from Ibne Abbas: The
Messenger of Allah (a.s.) said: “The Mahdi is the peacock of the folks
of Paradise.”

The former source also narrates from Huzaifah Ibne Yaman that the
Messenger of Allah (a.s.) said: “The Mahdi is from my offspring. His
face is like the glittering moon. The color is an Arabic color and the
body is an Israelite body. He will fill the earth with equity as it will
be replete with injustice. The dwellers of the heavens and the earth and
the birds in the air will be pleased with his caliphate. He will rule
for twenty years.”

Chapter 9: Mahdi is from the progeny of Imam Husain (a.s.)
----------------------------------------------------------

Darqutni has mentioned in*Al-Jarah wa Tadil* narrating from Abu Harun
Abdi that he said: I came to Abu Saeed Khudri and asked him, “Did you
witness the Battle of Badr?” “Yes,” he said. “Would you please speak to
me of something you heard from the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) about
Ali and his excellence?” I entreated him. “Yes, I will relate it to
you,” he said. “The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) was in a malady from
which he eventually recovered. As I was sitting on the right side of the
Messenger (a.s.), Fatima came to visit him. When she saw the weakness in
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) a cry smothered her throat and her
tears trickled down her cheeks. The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said
to her, “What is letting you weep, O Fatima?” “I fear the loss, O
Messenger of Allah,” she said. “Don’t you know, O Fatima, that Allah
looked down on earth and chose your father from them and sent him as an
apostle; and then He looked down at the earth again and chose your
husband from them and

sent me a revelation, on the virtue of which I married you to him and
took him as my successor?

Don’t you know that you are in the grandeur of Allah? He married you to
the greatest of them in knowledge, the most forbearing of them in
clemency, and the foremost of them in Islam.” She became extremely
happy. Desiring further insight into the virtues, all the virtues, which
Allah has ordained for Muhammad and his Household, he said to her, “Ali
has eight great praises: Belief in Allah and His Messenger, his wisdom,
his wife, his sons Hasan and Husain, his call to the virtue, and his
forbiddance from the wrong.

O Fatima, we, Ahle Bayt (a.s.) have been given six qualities, none of
the predecessors has been given one of them, nor anyone of the coming
ones will attain them. Our apostle is the best of the apostles, and he
is your father; our successor is the best of the successors, and he is
your husband; our martyr is the best of the martyrs, and he is Hamzah,
your father’s uncle.

From us are the two heirs of this Ummah, and they are your sons, Hasan
and Husain; and from us is the Mahdi of the Ummah, behind whom Isa will
pray.” Then he touched Husain’s shoulder and said: “From him is the
Mahdi of the Ummah.”

Chapter 10: Munificence of the Mahdi
------------------------------------

It is mentioned in*Sahih Muslim* that Abu Nadhira says, We were with
Jabir Ibne Abdullah. He said: “It is near that no harvest or money will
reach the people of Iraq.” “By whom would that be?” We asked, “By the
non-Arabs.” Then he said: “It is near that no money or crop will reach
the people of Syria.” “By whom would that be?” “By the Romans.” Then he
remained silent for a while and then said: “Said the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.): ‘There will be a caliph at the end time of my Ummah who will
dispense wealth as by scattering it.” Abu Nadhira and Abul Aala Rayyani
were asked, “Is he Umar Ibne Abdul Aziz?” “No,” they said. Abu Nadhira
narrates from Abu Saeed Khudri, saying: Said the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.), “One of your caliphs will disperse wealth with extreme
generosity and without counting it.”

It is mentioned in*Musnad Ahmad bin Hanbal* that Abu Saeed Khudri says:
Said the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.), “I give you the glad tiding of
the coming of the Mahdi. He will be sent to my Ummah when people will be
in disputes and concussions. He will fill the earth with equity and
justice, as it will be beset by oppression and injustice. The dwellers
of the heavens and the dwellers of the earth will be pleased with him.
He will distribute wealth correctly.” Someone asked, “What is
correctly?” He said: “Equally between the people.

Allah will instill lack of need in the hearts of the Ummah of Muhammad
(a.s.) and will stretch His equity so much so that a caller will call,
‘Who is there who has a need for wealth?’ And no one rises from the
people except one man, who says. The caller says, ‘Go to the treasurer
and tell him that the Mahdi orders you to give me riches.’ He says to
the treasurer:*Throw,* while he is collecting the riches in the skirt of
his shirt. Remorse overwhelms him and he says, ‘I have been the
greediest soul from the Ummah of Muhammad and have failed the
contentment that dominates them. He returns the riches but they are not
taken back from him. It is said to him, ‘We do not take back

something we have given away. ‘This will be for seven or eight or nine
years. Then there is no pleasure in life after the Mahdi.” Abu Saeed
Khudri says: Said the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.), “After a great
passage of time and the appearance of mischief there will be a man
called Mahdi. His grants will be so much very pleasurable.”

Shaykh Abu Abdullah Muhammad bin Yusuf Ibne Muhammad Kanji Shafi says,
“This is a*Hasan (good)* tradition, recorded by Abu Naeem Hafiz.”

Chapter 11: Mahdi is not Isa Ibne Maryam (a.s.)
-----------------------------------------------

Ibne Majah has narrated from Amirul Momineen (a.s.) that he said: I
said: “O Messenger of Allah, is the Mahdi from us, Aale Muhammad (a.s.)
or from the others?” The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said: “No, he is
from us. Allah will make the religion perfect through him as He
initiated it through us. Through us, they will be saved from mischief,
as they were saved from polytheism. Through us Allah will bring their
hearts together after the hostility of the mischief, as He brought their
hearts together after the hostility of polytheism. They will become
through us, brothers after the hostility of the mischief: as they became
brothers in their religion after the hostility of polytheism.”

Shaykh Abu Abdullah Muhammad Ibne Yusuf Ibne Muhammad Shafi says: This
is a highly*good* tradition recorded by narrators in their books, such
as Tibrani, Abu Naeem and Abdur Rahman Ibne Himad.

Ibne Majah has also narrated from Jabir bin Abdullah Ansari that the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said: “When Isa Ibne Maryam will come
down. Their leader, the Mahdi, will say, ‘Come and lead our prayers.’
Isa will reply, ‘One of yourselves is the leader of you, as a token of
dignity from Allah, the High, to this Ummah.”

Ibne Majah says: This is a*Sahih and Hasan* tradition. These explicit
statements clearly indicate that the Mahdi is other than Isa. The
narration, “There is no Mahdi except Isa Ibne Maryam,” is solely
narrated by Ali Ibne Muhammad Ibne Khalid Jundi, the*Muezzin* of Jund.

Shafi Matlabi says about him, “He was careless in narrating.” Narrations
from the Apostle about the Mahdi are in inordinate numbers with
multitudes of narrators, describing that he will rule for seven years
and will fill the earth with justice, that Isa Ibne Maryam will come
with him and will assist him in killing Dajjal at the gate of Ladd in
Palestine, that he will be the leader of this Ummah on that day and that
Isa will pray behind him, and all the other details of his enterprise.

Shafi has mentioned this in the book*Risala* that our chain of narration
connects to it. If we narrate it, however, the chain of narration will
be long. At any rate, it is a matter of consensus that should the
narrator of a tradition be known for indifference and lack of care in
narrating, his narrations do not have credibility and are rejected.

Chapter 12: The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) is the first, Isa (a.s.) is the last and the Mahdi is in the middle
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Ibne Abbas narrates that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said: “This
Ummah will not perish and that I am in its beginning, Isa is in its end
and

the Mahdi is in its middle.” Shaykh Abu Abdullah Muhammad Ibne Yusuf
Ibne Muhammad Shafi says, This is a*Hasan* tradition narrated by Abu
Naeem and Ahmad Ibne Hanbal.

Chapter 13: His name and his looks
----------------------------------

Huzaifah said: Said the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.), “Even if not more
than one day remains from this world, Allah will send a man whose name
is my name, his physique is my physique and his patronymic is Abu
Abdullah.” Shaykh Abu Abdullah Muhammad Ibne Yusuf Ibne Muhammad Shafi
says, This is a*Hasan* tradition.

Chapter 14: Village from where he will rise
-------------------------------------------

Abdullah Ibne Umar says: The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said: “The
Mahdi will rise from a village called Kuraa.” Abu Naeem in*Awali* says
that it is a*Hasan* tradition.

Chapter 15: Clouds will shade him
---------------------------------

Abdullah Ibne Umar says: The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said: “The
Mahdi will rise and there will be a cloud over his head, from which a
caller will be calling:*This is the Mahdi, the Caliph of Allah.* ”

Chapter 16: The angel that will come with the Mahdi
---------------------------------------------------

Abdullah Ibne Umar says: The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said: “The
Mahdi will rise while there is an angel over his head calling:*This is
the Mahdi! Follow him!”* This*Hasan* tradition is narrated by numerous
scholars like Abu Naeem, Tibrani etc.

Chapter 17: His Complexion and Physique
---------------------------------------

Huzaifah says: The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said: “The Mahdi is a
man from my progeny, his color is an Arabic color and his physique is an
Israeli physique. On his right cheek there is a mole like a glittering
star. He will fill the earth with equity as it will be full of
oppression. The dwellers of the earth and the dwellers of the heavens
and the birds in the air will be pleased with his rule.” Numerous
tradition scholars have narrated this tradition.

Chapter 18: His right cheek mole
--------------------------------

Abu Amama Bahili says: The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said: “There
will be four truces between you and the Romans. The fourth one will be
on the hands of a man from the house of the Hercules and it will last
for seven years.” “O Messenger of Allah,” called a man from the tribe of
Abdul Qais, who was called Mustawrid Ibne Ghayalan, “who will be the
Imam of the people that day?”

“The Mahdi from my offspring, a man of forty years and with a face like
a glittering star. There will be a black mole on his right cheek. He
will be wearing two light white cloaks from Qatwan, seeming as he were
from Bani Israel. He will extricate treasures and conquer the cities of
polytheism.” Tibrani has narrated this tradition in*Mojam Kabeer* .

Chapter 19: Mahdi’s teeth
-------------------------

Hafiz Abu Naeem has written in*Awali* that Abdur Rahman Ibne Auf says:
The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said: “Allah will send a man from my
household whose teeth will be at a distance from one another and whose
forehead will be broad. He will fill the earth with equity. He will
grant riches in grants.”

Chapter 20: Conquest of Constantinople
--------------------------------------

Abu Naeem has narrated that Abu Huraira narrates that the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.s.) said: “The Hour shall not rise until a man from my
Household reigns. He will conquer Constantinople and Mount Dailam. If
there should not remain more than a day, Allah will prolong that day
until he conquers it.”

Chapter 21: His rule comes after tyrant rulers
----------------------------------------------

]Abu Naeem has written in*Fawaid* and Tibrani in*Mojam Akbar* that Jabir
Ibne Abdullah says: Said the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.), “There will
be caliphs after me, and after caliphs, emirs, and after emirs tyrant
kings. Then the Mahdi from my Household will rise. He will fill the
earth with justice as it will be replete with oppression.

Chapter 22: Mahdi is a virtuous Imam
------------------------------------

Hafiz Abu Naeem Isfahani has mentioned that Abu Amama narrates: The
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) addressed us and mentioned Dajjal and
said: “Medina will expel its uncleanness like melting furnace purges
impurities out of iron. That day will be proclaimed the day of
salvation.” Umme Sharik asked, “Where are the believers on that day, O
Messenger of Allah?” “They are few on that day,” he said. “The majority
of them will be at Jerusalem. Their Imam will be the Mahdi, a virtuous
man.”

Chapter 23: Prosperity of the Ummah during his rule
---------------------------------------------------

Abu Saeed Khudri says: The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said: “My Ummah
will enjoy leisure in the time of the Mahdi (a.s.) the like of which
they have never enjoyed. The heavens will shower over them bountifully
and the earth will not leave any of its vegetation but that it brings it
forth.”

Chapter 24: Mahdi is the Caliph of Allah
----------------------------------------

Thawban says: The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said: “Three men, all of
them sons of a caliph, will be killed at your treasure, which will not
go to anyone of them. Then black standards will come and they will
massacre them, a massacre never done by any nation. Then the Caliph of
God, the Mahdi, comes. When you hear him, come to him and pledge
allegiance to him, for he is the Caliph of God, the Mahdi.”

Chapter 25: Mahdi is living and alive
-------------------------------------

He is alive and living since the time of his occultation until now and
there is no impossibility therein, as Isa, Khizr and Ilyas, all divine
saints, and Dajjal and Satan, both enemies of Allah are alive. The fact
that they are all living is proved by the Book and the Sunnah. While the
adversaries agree on this, they deny the possibility of Mahdi’s being
alive. They deny it for two reasons: First, the length of his life and
second, for he lives in the

underground cellar, according to their understanding, while no one
provides him food and water.

After that the author Muhammad Ibne Yusuf Kanji Shafei makes the
following argument: Isa (a.s.) is still alive on the basis of the verse:

<p dir="rtl">
وَإِن مِّنْ أَهْلِ الْكِتَابِ إِلاَّ لَيُؤْمِنَنَّ بِهِ قَبْلَ مَوْتِهِ
</p>

***“And there is not one of the followers of the Book but most certainly
believes in this before his death…” (Surah Nisa 4:159)***

Not all of them have believed in him since the revelation of this verse
to this day. Therefore, this belief in him must take place in the last
period of the world. The proof for Isa’s life from the Sunnah is the
narration of Muslim in his*Sahih* on the authority of Nawas Ibne Saman.
In a long tradition about the story of Isa, it is stated, “Then Isa Ibne
Maryam will descend by the eastern white minaret of Damascus wearing two
garments, placing the palm of his hand over the wings of angels.” Also
the tradition mentioned earlier, “How would you be like when the son of
Maryam comes down and the Imam is from yourselves.” Khizr and Ilyas are
alive on the virtue of the assertion of Ibne Jarir Tabari, “Khizr and
Ilyas are living and walking on earth.”

There is also the narration of Muslim in his*Sahih* on the authority of
Abu Saeed Khudri, saying: The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) gave us a
long address about Dajjal. Amongst the things he said was, “He will come
while it is forbidden for him to enter the interior of Medina. He will
end up near a suburb of Medina. Then a man will come to him who is of
the best of the people and will say, ‘I bear witness that you are Dajjal
about whom the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) has spoken to us.’

Dajjal will say, ‘If you kill this man and then bring him back to life,
what do you say, would you doubt me?’ They will say, ‘No.’ “So Dajjal
kills him and then brings him to life. The man says as he is brought
back to life, ‘By Allah, you do not possess any more skill than I do.’
Dajjal wants to kill him, but cannot overpower him.”

Abu Ishaq Ibrahim Ibne Saad says: It is said that this man is ­Khizr
(a.s.). These were the words of Muslim in his*Sahih* , as we narrated.

The proof that Dajjal is alive is the tradition of Tamim Dari and the
tradition of Jasasa and the beast that spoke to them. It is a reliable
narration, which Muslim has registered in his*Sahih* and has said: This
clearly establishes that Dajjal is alive.

The proof of the existence of the accursed Iblis is the many verses of
the Divine Book, such as, Satan said:

قَالَ فَأَنظِرْنِي إِلَى يَوْمِ يُبْعَثُونَ {14} قَالَ إِنَّكَ مِنَ
المُنظَرِينَ

***“He said: Respite me until the day when they are raised up. He said:
Surely you are of the respited ones.” (Surah Araaf 7:14-15)***

The proofs of the existence of the Promised Mahdi (a.s.) have come in
the Book and Sunnah. Saeed Ibne Jubair says in the Tafsir of the holy
verse:

<p dir="rtl">
لِيُظْهِرَهُ عَلَى الدِّينِ كُلِّهِ وَلَوْ كَرِهَ الْمُشْرِكُونَ
</p>

***“…that He might cause it to prevail over all religions, though the
polytheists may be averse.” (Surah Baraat 9:34)”***

“He is the Mahdi from the progeny of Fatima. As for someone who says
that he is Isa, there is no contradiction between the two views, because
Isa will be an aide to the Imam.” Maqatil Ibne Sulaiman and those
interpreters who have followed him have said in the Tafsir of the holy
verse:

<p dir="rtl">
وَإِنَّهُ لَعِلْمٌ لِّلسَّاعَةِ
</p>

***“And most surely it is a knowledge of the hour…” (Surah Zukhruf
43:61)***

“He is the Mahdi, who will be in the last period of time and after whose
rise there will be Judgment Day and its signs.”

The answer to the question with respect to the length of his life can be
on the basis of narration or rationality. As for the traditions, it was
just mentioned that the three definitely exist in the last period of
time and none of the three is to be followed but the Mahdi, because he
is the Imam of the Ummah in the last period of time and because Isa
(a.s.) will pray behind him, as narrated in the reliable books of
hadith, and will certify the veracity of his claim. The third of the
three is the accursed Dajjal, who is alive and existent. As for the
rational argument for their existence, it is as follows: Either their
existence is within the bounds of Divine power or it is not. It is
impossible to be outside the bounds of Divine power, because the Essence
Who initiated the creation from nothing and then perishes it and then
brings it back to existence after destruction, must have the power to
keep it in existence. Then it is either that this continuous existence
is the subject of Divine Will or the subject of the Ummah’s choice. It
cannot be the subject of the Ummah’s choice, because if it were so, then
it should be possible for anyone of us to choose such a lengthy life for
himself and his progeny. This is not within our power and therefore,
must be the subject of God’s power. On the same token, the existence of
these three entities is either for a reason or not for a reason. If it
is without any reason, it would be an act devoid of wisdom, which cannot
be the work of God.

Therefore, it must be for a reason indicated by the Divine Wisdom. We
will mention the reason of the existence of each one of the three. The
reason Isa is still alive is the verse:

<p dir="rtl">
وَإِن مِّنْ أَهْلِ الْكِتَابِ إِلاَّ لَيُؤْمِنَنَّ بِهِ قَبْلَ مَوْتِهِ
</p>

***“And there is not one of the followers of the Book but most certainly
believes in this before his death…” (Surah Nisa 4:159)***

They have not all believed in him until this day, and this must happen
until the last period of time. The accursed Dajjal has not done anything
since the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) told us, “The One Eyed Dajjal
will come to you. A mountain of bread is going to be with him, which
will travel with him.” And the other signs of his. Therefore, this must
occur in the last period of time.

Imam Mahdi exists, because since the beginning of his Occultation until
this day of ours, he has not filled the earth with justice and equity,
as predicted in the narrations, therefore, this must happen in the last
period of time. These reasons have all combined to fulfill the declared
destiny. Therefore, the reason of the existence of the three - Isa,
Mahdi and Dajjal is for the clear mission lying ahead. They are two
virtuous men, a Prophet and

an Imam, and an enemy of God, Dajjal. We narrated the traditions from
the Sahih books of Hadith about the existence of Isa (a.s.) and Dajjal,
so what makes the existence of Mahdi (a.s.) impossible? Whereas his
existence is in the bounds of God’s power and he is the sign of the
Prophet (s.a.). Therefore, he comes first to exist then the other two,
because if the Mahdi (a.s.) exists, he is the Imam of the Age, who will
fill the earth with justice and equity; therefore, his existence is
prudent and a favor for the people.

Dajjal on the other hand, if he lives, he will create mischief in the
world, as he will claim godhood and will assault the Ummah. However, his
existence is a test from God so the obedient servants are purged out
from the disobedient ones and the good from the evil.

The reason that Isa is living is that the followers of the Injeel and
the Torah believe in him and that he will verify the Prophethood of the
Master of the prophets, Prophet Muhammad (a.s.) and will explain the
message of the Imam to the believers and certify his claims, by praying
behind him and helping him and calling the people to the Muslim faith.

Therefore, the existence of the two is secondary to the existence of the
Imam. So how can the two who are secondary exist while the one who is
prior to the two does not? If that is possible then an effect should
also be able to exist without its cause, which is rationally impossible.
We said that the existence of the Mahdi (a.s.) is the reason for the
existence of the two, because the existence of Isa (a.s.) lonely by
himself and not in his capacity as an aide to the religion of Islam and
as a witness of the truth of Imam is impossible, because if it were
possible, he would be independent in his governance and his call, and
this will invalidate the call of Islam.

The Prophet of Islam said: “There is no prophet after me. Permissible is
what Allah has rendered permissible on my tongue until Judgment Day and
forbidden is what Allah has made forbidden on my tongue until Judgment
Day.” Therefore, Isa must be an aide and a supporter for him. Likewise
is the case of Dajjal. He cannot exist in the last period of time if
there is no Imam for the Ummah to whom they shall refer, because if it
were so, Islam will be subjugated forever and its call will be false.
Therefore, the existence of the Imam is principal and prior to the
existence of Dajjal. The rejection that the Imam remains in the cellar
(sardab) without anyone serving him water and food can be answered in
two ways.

One is that Isa (a.s.) is in the heavens without anyone serving him food
and drinks and he is a man like the Mahdi (a.s.). If he can stay like
that in the heavens, likewise the Mahdi (a.s.) can in the cellar. Then
Shaykh Abu Abdullah Muhammad bin Yusuf bin Muhammad Shafei narrates some
traditions.

**39-** ***Kashful Ghumma:*** It is mentioned in*Kashful Ghumma* that
Muhammad bin Talha says: Of the authentic traditions about the Mahdi
narrated from the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) is the report of Abu
Dawood and Tirmidhi from Abu Saeed Khudri that he said: I heard the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) say: “The Mahdi is from me. He has a broad
forehead, a high nose that has a slight curve, and will fill the earth
with equity and

justice just as it will be replete with oppression and tyranny. He will
rule for seven years.”

One of such traditions is the report of Abu Dawood from Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) that he said: The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said: “Even if a
single day remains from the world, Allah will send a man from my Ahle
Bayt, who will fill the earth with justice just as it will be full of
injustice.”

One of such traditions is the report of Abu Dawood from Umme Salma, wife
of the Prophet that she said: The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said:
“The Mahdi is from my Ahle Bayt, from the progeny of Fatima.”

One of such traditions is the report of Baghawi, Bukhari and Muslim from
Abu Huraira who said: The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said: “How would
you be like when the son of Maryam comes down and your Imam is from
yourselves?”

One of such traditions is the report of Abu Dawood and Tirmidhi from
Abdullah bin Masud that he said: The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said:
“Even if a single day remains from the world, Allah will prolong that
day until He sends a man from me, or from my Ahle Bayt; his name will be
like my name and his father’s name like my father’s; he will fill the
earth with equity and justice just as it will be full of injustice and
oppression.”

In another report, the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) has said: “A man
comes from my Ahle Bayt, his name is like my name.” These traditions are
from Abu Dawood and Tirmidhi.

One of such traditions is the report of Abu Ishaq Ahmad bin Muhammad
Thalabi from Anas bin Malik that he said: The Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.) said: “We, the descendants of Abdul Muttalib are the lieges
of Paradise; I, Hamza, Ja’far, Ali, Hasan, Husain and the Mahdi.”

The author says: Sayyid Ibne Tawus has narrated the same in*Taraif,* on
the authority of*Manaqib Ibne Maghazali* .

Muhammad bin Talha says: If it should be said: One of these attributes
do not correspond to the Imam of the Age, as his father’s name is not
the same as the Prophet’s father’s name. Then he answers this after
laying out two premises: One, it is prevalent in the Arabic language to
use the word father with respect to great grandfather, as in the verse,
The path of your father Ibrahim, and the verse, I followed the religion
of my fathers Ibrahim… In the tradition of the Meraj, Jibraeel says,
“This is your father, Ibrahim.”

Secondly, the word of ‘ism’ or name many a time is used to refer to
patronymic. For instance, Bukhari and Muslim have narrated that the
Messenger of Allah, bliss be for him and his kin, named Ali Abu Turab
and that he was not fond of another name more than Abu Turab, using
‘ism’ to refer to patronymic. The poet, Mutanabbi says:*It is the
grandeur of your position to be ‘named’ Munabbah. Whoever gives you a
patronymic, he has given you a name amongst the Arabs.*

Then he says, Since the Hujjah is from the offspring of Abu Abdullah
Husain (a.s.), the Prophet referred to the patronymic as*ism* or name,
alluding succinctly to the fact that he will be from the progeny of
Husain (a.s.).

The author says: These narrations quoted by us are taken from the
manuscripts of Bukhari and Muslim that are in our possession. We also
have in our possession an old manuscript of*Sharh Sunnah* of Baghawi
from which we mention the following traditions:

It is mentioned on the authority of Abu Tufayl that Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) said: The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said: “Even if a single
day remains from the world, Allah will send a man from my Ahle Bayt, who
will fill the earth with justice just as it will be full of corruption.”

It is mentioned on the authority of Abu Saeed Khudri that the Messenger
of Allah (s.a.w.s.) mentioned the trials befalling this Ummah so much so
that a man will not find a refuge from tyranny and then Allah will send
a man from Ahle Bayt (a.s.) who will fill the earth with equity and
justice, as it shall be beset by injustice and oppression. The dwellers
of the heavens and the earth will be happy from him. The heaven will not
leave any of its blessings, but send it generously, the earth will not
leave any of its plants but to bring it forth, so much so that the
living ones will wish the dead. He will live in that for seven or eight
or nine years.

It is mentioned on the authority of Umme Salma that the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.s.) said: “The Mahdi is from my Ahle Bayt from the progeny
of Fatima. He will act among the people according to the conduct of the
Prophet. He will remain seven years and then he will die and Muslims
will pray over him.”

It is mentioned on the authority of Abu Saeed Khudri that the Messenger
of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said with regard to the event of the Mahdi: Then a
man will come and say: O Mahdi, give me, give me. He will throw to him
all that man can carry. Abu Saeed says: The Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.) said: “A Caliph will come in the last period of time who will
distribute unaccountable wealth.”

The author says: Ibne Athir has narrated on the authority of a number of
companions ten traditions about the Mahdi, his name, personality and
that Isa (a.s.) will pray behind him, which we have omitted to maintain
brevity. What we have recorded is sufficient for the man of reason to
prove the point.

**40-** ***Taraif:*** Thalabi has mentioned in the interpretation of Haa
Meem Ain Seen Qaaf that Seen refers to Sana or the lofty position of the
Mahdi and Qaaf refers to the Quwwa (power) of Isa (a.s.) when he comes
down and eliminates the Christians and destroys the Churches. He also
narrates that the Prophet said with reference to the story of the people
of the cave that the Mahdi will greet them and Allah, the Exalted will
bring them back to life for him and then they will go back to their
resting places and will not rise until Judgment Day.

**41-** ***Taraif:*** Ibne Shiruwayh has mentioned in*Firdos* , quoting
through his chains from Abbas from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) that he
said: Mahdi is the peacock of the people of Paradise.

**42-** ***Kifayatul Athar:*** It is narrated from Muhammad Ibne
Hanafiyyah on the authority of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) from the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.s.), “O Ali, you belong to me and I belong to you. You
are my brother and my support. When I die, loathing hidden in the
breasts of the people will manifest at you. There will be a dumb dark
mischief after me in which every secret and close relation will be
dropped. That will happen when the Shia will lose the Fifth from the
sons of the Seventh. The dwellers of the heavens and the earth will
grieve his departure.

How abundant will be the believing men and women who will be sorry,
grieved, and confused for missing him.” Then he lowered his head in
contemplation for a moment and then raised his head and said: “My father
and mother be the ransom of my namesake, my look-alike, and the
look-alike of Musa Ibne Imran. There are garments of light over him,
which shine with glitter of sanctity. As if I see them in their utmost
despair when they are called with a cry that is heard from faraway as it
is heard from the near. This will be a call of benevolence for the
believers and a cry of chastisement for the hypocrites.”

I asked, “What is that call?” He said: “Three calls in Rajab. The first
will be: Behold, the curse of God be on the oppressors. The Second will
be: The Near Event draws nigh. The Third will be that they will see an
obvious body with the sun, calling: ‘Behold, God has sent so-and-so,
recounting his lineage until Ali, peace be with him. This will entail
the destruction of the oppressors. Then relief will come and Allah will
heal the breasts of the believers and He will take away the rage of
their hearts.”

I asked, “O Messenger of Allah, how many Imams are there going to be
after me?” He said: “Nine after Husain. Their ninth is their Qaim.”


