7
=

Chapter Seven: Narrations of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) in this regard
==================================================================

<p dir="rtl">
الشَّيْبَانِيُّ عَنِ الْأَسَدِيِّ عَنْ سَهْلٍ عَنْ عَبْدِ الْعَظِيمِ
الْحَسَنِيِّ عَنْ أَبِي جَعْفَرٍ الثَّانِي عَنْ آبَائِهِ عَنْ أَمِيرِ
الْمُؤْمِنِينَ ع قَالَ لِلْقَائِمِ مِنَّا غَيْبَةٌ أَمَدُهَا طَوِيلٌ
كَأَنِّي بِالشِّيعَةِ يَجُولُونَ جَوَلَانَ النَّعَمِ فِي غَيْبَتِهِ
يَطْلُبُونَ الْمَرْعَى فَلَا يَجِدُونَهُ أَلَا فَمَنْ ثَبَتَ مِنْهُمْ
عَلَى دِينِهِ [وَ] لَمْ يَقْسُ قَلْبُهُ لِطُولِ أَمَدِ غَيْبَةِ
إِمَامِهِ فَهُوَ مَعِي فِي دَرَجَتِي يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ ثُمَّ قَالَ ع
إِنَّ الْقَائِمَ مِنَّا إِذَا قَامَ لَمْ يَكُنْ لِأَحَدٍ فِي عُنُقِهِ
بَيْعَةٌ فَلِذَلِكَ‏ تَخْفَى وِلَادَتُهُ وَ يَغِيبُ شَخْصُهُ
</p>

**1-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaibani has narrated from Asadi from Sahal
from Abdul Azeem Hasani from Imam Ali Naqi (a.s.) from his honorable
forefathers from Amirul Momineen (a.s.) that he said:

“Our Qaim will have an occultation, the duration of which is long. As if
I see the Shia, roving about like cattle searching for pasture and not
finding it. Behold, whoever from them stays firm on his religion and
will not become stone-hearted because of delay in occultation of his
Imam, he will be with me in my rank on Judgment Day.” Then he said:
“When he rises, our Qaim will not have allegiance to anyone on his
shoulders. For this reason, his birth will be concealed and his person
will be hidden.”

**2-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Hamadani from Ali from his
father from Ali bin Mabad from Husain bin Khalid from Imam Reza (a.s.)
from Amirul Momineen (a.s.), that he said to Imam Husain (a.s.):

“The ninth from your sons, O Husain, is the Establisher of the
Right*(Qaim bil-Haqq),* the Manifester of the Religion and the Deliverer
of Justice.” Husain (a.s.) says, “I said: O Amirul Momineen (a.s.), is
that to happen?” He said: “Verily so, by the One Who sent Muhammad with
Prophethood and chose him over all of creation! It will happen, however,
after an occultation and a bewilderment in which no one remains on his
religion, but the sincere ones who are touched by the spirit of
certainty, people from whom Allah has taken covenant for our
guardianship and*inscribed faith in their hearts and has endorsed them
with a spirit from Himself.”*

**3-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq narrates from his father from Ali
bin Ibrahim from Muhammad bin Sinan from Ziyad Makfuf from Abdullah Ibne
Abi Afif, the poet that he said:

I heard Amirul Momineen Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) say, “It is as if I
see, O congregation of Shia, you will be striding like camel herds
searching for a pasture, yet you will not find him.”

*Ikmaaluddin* narrates this tradition again through another chain of
narration.

**4-** ***Muqtadhib:*** It is narrated from Ayyash from Shaykh Thiqa
Abul Hasan bin Abdus Samad bin Ali in Sunnat Khamsa wa Thamaneen wa
Miyatain with Ubaid bin Kathir from Nuh bin Darraj from Yahya from Amash
from Zaid bin Wahab from Abu Jahifa and Harith bin Abdullah Hamadani and
Harith Ibne Sharb that:

They were all with Amirul Momineen (a.s.). It was customary that when
his son Hasan would come, he would say, “Blessed be you, O son of
Allah’s Messenger.” And when his son Husain would come, he would say,
“My father be the ransom of you, O father of the son of the best of bond
maids.” He was asked, “O Chief of believers, why do you address Hasan
this way and Husain that way? And who is the son of the best of slave
girls?” He said: “He is the lost one, the fugitive, the abandoned one,
MHMD Ibne Hasan Ibne Ali Ibne Muhammad Ibne Ali Ibne Musa Ibne Ja’far
Ibne Muhammad Ibne Ali Ibne Husain,” putting his hand on Husain’s head.

**5-** ***Ghaibat*** ***Tusi:*** It is narrated from Ja’far bin Muhammad
from Muhammad bin Husain from Ibne Yazi from Asim from Ibne Siyabah from
Imran bin Mitham from Abaya Asadi that he says: I heard Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) say:

“How would you be like when you are left without an Imam of guidance or
a visible standard, when some of you are turning away one from the other
with disdain!”

**6-** ***Irshad*** : Shaykh Mufeed has narrated from Masada Ibne
Sadaqah that he said: I heard Abu Abdullah Ja’far Ibne Muhammad (a.s.)
say, Amirul Momineen (a.s.) addressed people in Kufa. He praised and
extolled Allah and then said:

“I am the doyen of the aged people. In me is a mark from Ayyub and Allah
will gather for me my household as He brought together the scattered
house of Prophet Yaqub. That will happen when the ages pass and you
say:*He is lost or has perished.*

Behold, before it happens, seek understanding through fortitude and
repent to Allah from sins, as you have already thrown your sanctity
away, extinguished your torches and have pinned your guidance in people
who do not have, neither for themselves nor for you, any hearing nor any
vision. By Allah, weak are the invoker and the invoked.

“If you do not entrust your fate on one another, and do not abandon one
another in the cause of helping the right amongst you, and do not faint
from weakening the falsity, those who will be unlike you, will not
become bold against you and those who will overpower you, will not
become strong. “Due to your breach of obedience and desisting it from
those who deserve to be obeyed amongst you, you will wander astray like
the Israelites who wandered astray at the time of Musa.

Truthfully do I say, for forsaking and oppressing my progeny, your
wandering will be increased double folds to the wandering of the
Israelites. If you feed and drink and saturate from the lineage that is
accursed in the Quran, verily you will have gathered on the cry of
misguidance, received falsity running headlong towards it, have betrayed
the caller of Truth, have

ill-treated the best from the warriors of Badr, and have tended for the
worst from the sons of Abu Sufyan’s father.

Behold, if what is in their hand goes away, purity for the reward and
removal of the veil will be nearer. The promise will be near and the
Star will appear to you from the east and your moon will shine over you
like a full moon in a full night.

When that appears, return to repentance and forsake grief and sorrow and
know that if you obey the riser from the east, he will lead you on the
path of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) so you would avert deafness
and find cure from dumbness and stay away from the labors of roving and
wandering and searching and throw away the loads of burdens from your
necks. Allah does not chase away anyone except the one who rejects mercy
and divorces chastity.***Those who do wrong will know what to what
return they shall be turned to.***

**7-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Hamam from Ja’far
bin Muhammad bin Malik from Ishaq bin Sinan from Ubaid bin Kharja from
Ali bin Uthman from Harab bin Ahnaf from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) from
his forefathers, saying:

“Euphrates swelled at the time of Amirul Momineen (a.s.). At this time,
he and his two sons, Hasan and Husain (a.s.) rode their courses and
passed by the tribe of Thaqif. They said: Ali is coming. He will made
the water recede.’ Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said: ‘By Allah, I and these
two sons of mine will be killed and Allah will send a man from my
progeny in the last period of time, who will avenge our blood. He will
go into hiding from them in order to be away from the people of
misguidance, so the ignorant would say, Allah does not have any need to
Ahle Bayt (a.s.).”

**8-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Hamam and
Muhammad bin Hasan bin Muhammad bin Jamhur together from Hasan bin
Muhammad bin Jamhur from his father from some of his men from Mufaddal
Ibne Umar that he said: Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said:

“One tradition, which*you* comprehend well, is better than ten you
narrate. Verily, every truth has a reality and every veracity has an
illumination.” Then he said: “We, by Allah, do not consider a man from
our Shia to be a*Faqih* unless when he is addressed through hints and
allusions, he understands them.

Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said on the pulpit of Kufa, ‘Dark, blind and
gloomy mischiefs are ahead of*you.* None will be rescued from it, but
the*nauma.’* He was asked, ‘What is*nauma, O* Chief of believers?’ He
said: ‘He is the one who does not know the people and people do not know
him. Behold, the earth does not remain without a Hujjah of Allah;
however, Allah will blind His creation from him due to their oppression,
injustice and their excesses on themselves. If the earth would remain
one hour without a Hujjah of Allah, the earth will be injested along
with its dwellers. However, the Hujjah will know the people and the
people will not know him, as Yusuf knew the people,*while they knew him
not.’*

Then he recited this verse:

<p dir="rtl">
يَا حَسْرَةً عَلَى الْعِبَادِ مَا يَأْتِيهِم مِّن رَّسُولٍ إِلاَّ
كَانُوا بِهِ يَسْتَهْزِؤُون
</p>

***“Alas for the servants! there comes not to them an apostle but they
mock at him.” (Surah Yasin 36:30)***

**9-** ***Nahjul Balagha:*** Amirul Momineen (a.s.) says in a tradition:

“When it will be like that, the Master of the Religion will journey
along with the trail of his followers. They will gather around him like
the clouds of autumn. And he and his followers will be steadfast.”

The author says: This statement is on the basis of unseen knowledge of
the Imam with regard to the Mahdi.

**10-** ***Nahjul Balagha:*** Amirul Momineen (a.s.) says in one of his
sermons:

“He has appareled himself with the garment of wisdom, and has seized it
with all*of* its protocols by proclivity towards it and cognition of it
and dedication to it. For him, wisdom is his lost commodity which he
seeks, and it is his wish for which he yearns. He will go far away at a
time when Islam disappears like a feeble camel leaves while beating the
end of its tail and dragging its neck*on* the earth. He is the heir of
the heirs of His Hujjah and a vicegerent from the vicegerents of His
apostles.”

Opinion of Ibne Abil Hadid about the promised Mahdi
---------------------------------------------------

The author says*:* Ibne Abil Hadid says in explanation of this sermon:
Imamiyah believe that this passage refers to the Awaited Qaim (a.s.).
The Sufis maintain that it refers to the Wali of Allah. They maintain
that the world does not remain devoid from*Abdal* , who are forty,
and*Awtad* , who are seven, and*Qutb* , who is*one.* Philosophers say
this refers to*Arif* . The Sunni maintain that he is the Mahdi, who will
be created. All Muslims dominations agree that the world and religious
laws will not end but at after the Mahdi (a.s.), “He will go faraway”
means that he will hide himself when corruption and mischief manifest
and Islam disappears with the desertion of equity and virtue. This is a
proof of the veracity of the Imamiyah’s belief.

**11-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Husain from
Muhammad bin Yahya from Muhammad bin Hasan Raazi from Muhammad bin Ali
Kufi from Isa bin Abdullah Alawi from his father from his grandfather
from his father from Amirul Momineen Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) that he
said:

“The Master of this Affair is from my offspring. He is the one about
whom it will be said: He has died, perished, no rather, has threaded to
some valley.”

**12-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Husain from
Muhammad Attar from Muhammad bin Hasan Raazi from Muhammad bin Ali Kufi
from Muhammad bin Sinan from Abul Jarud from Muzahim Abadi from Akrama
bin Saasa from his father that Amirul Momineen (a.s.) used to say:

“The Shia will continuously be the like of goats that a grabber does not
know which one of them should he put his hand on. They will neither have
any dignity to be dignified with nor a source of support to refer to.”

**13-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated through the same chains
from Abul Jarud from Abdullah the poet that Ibne Abi Afif said: I heard
Amirul Momineen (a.s.) say:

“As if I see you roving about like camel herds seeking pastures and not
finding it, congregation of the Shia.”

**14-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Ahmad from
Ubaidullah bin Musa from Musa bin Harun bin Isa Abadi from Abdullah bin
Muslim bin Qanab from Sulaiman bin Hilal from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
from his forefathers from Imam Husain Ibne Ali (a.s.) that he said:

A man came to Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and said: “O Chief of believers,
inform us about your Mahdi.” Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said: “When
generations come and perish, and believers become few, and the followers
of righteousness and supporters of the religion go, then he shall be.”

He said: “O Chief of believers, peace be unto you, whose son is he going
to be?” Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said: “From Bani Hashim, from the summit
of the Arab mountain. He is an ocean who will water a world of oases and
will not run short, a man abused when he comes to his folks, and an
abode of purity when all will degenerate. He will not fear when deaths
charge, and will not recede when the faithful surround him, and will not
hesitate when warriors struggle. He will be prepared, far-reaching, a
victorious lion, a reaper, an injurer, a warrior, a sword from the
swords of Allah, generous, and adventurous. His head will be high in
dignity, his nobility firmly rooted in the most distinguished character.
No discouraging leader - who will be moving towards mischief, who if
speaks, is the worst speaker and if remains silent, possesses evil -
should mislead you from following him.”

Then he talked about the Mahdi and said: “He is the best refuge, the
most knowledgeable, and the kindest of you all. O Allah, make the pledge
of allegiance to him the occasion of exit from affliction, and unite the
dispersion of the Ummah through him. When it is permissible for you, do
it, but do not turn away from him if you find your way to him. “Ah,”
said Amirul Momineen (a.s.), pointing to his chest, expressing his
eagerness to see the Mahdi.”

The author said: The copy from which we have quoted this report has been
tempered with and most of its statements are interpolated. Hence the
researcher should compare the text with that of*Ghaibat Nomani* .

**15-** ***Taraif:*** Sayyid Ibne Tawus has quoted in Taraif from
Al-Jama Bainas Sihah Sitta from Abi Ishaq that he said: Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) glanced at his son, Husain and remarked:

“This son of mine is your master, as the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.)
has named him so. A man will rise from his progeny with the name of your
Apostle, similar to him in his character, and not so similar to him in
his looks. He will fill the earth with equity.”

**16-** ***Nahjul Balagha:*** Amirul Momineen (a.s.) has remarked*:*
“They went right and left, following the pathways of error and leaving
the traditions of guidance. Do not make haste to what is going to happen
and is expected. Do not consider slow what is coming to you tomorrow.
How many are a haster about something that should it reach him, he would
wish it had not! How near is today to the beginnings of tomorrow! O
People, this is the time of the coming of every promise and the nearing
of the figure whom you do not know. Behold, the one from us who will be
then, he will stride in these hard times with a luminous light and will
be following the examples of the virtuous to free a captive and
emancipate a slave and disperse a misguided nation and unite the
followers of righteousness, while he is in hiding from the people,
tracers not seeing his footprints, even if they search. A nation will be
whetted like an ironsmith whets an arrowhead - their eyes bright with
revelation, their ears saturated with exegesis and chalices of wisdom
are presented to them day and night.”

**17-** ***Amali Tusi:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Ahmad alias Ibne
Hamami from Muhammad bin Ja’far Qari from Muhammad bin Ismail bin Yusuf
from Saeed bin Abi Maryam from Muhammad bin Ja’far bin Kathir from Musa
bin Uqbah from Abu Ishaq from Asim bin Zumra from Amirul Momineen (a.s.)
that he said:

“The earth will become full of oppression and injustice, so much so that
no one will be able to utter God’s name but secretly. Then Allah will
bring a virtuous congregation, who will fill it with equity and justice,
as it will be full of oppression and injustice.”

**18-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq has narrated from his father and
Ibne Walid together from Saad and Himyari and Muhammad Attar and Ahmad
bin Idris together from Ibne Abil Khattab from Ibne Isa and Barqi and
Ibne Hashim together from Ibne Faddal from Thalaba from Malik Jahni that
narrated to us Ibne Walid from Saffar and Saad together from Tayalisi
from Zaid bin Muhammad bin Qabus from Nadhr bin Abi Sari from Abu Dawood
Mustaraq from Thalaba from Malik Jahni from Harith bin Mughira from
Asbagh bin Nubatah that he said:

I came to Amirul Momineen Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) and found him
thoughtful. He was drawing lines on the ground. I said: “O Chief of
believers, why do I see you thoughtful and you are making lines on the
earth? Is it out of desire for the earth?” He said: “No, by Allah, I
have never desired it, nor for what is in the world even for one day. I
was thinking about the son who will be born from my seed - the eleventh
from my sons. He is the Mahdi and he will fill the earth with equity as
it will be full of oppression and injustice. There will be a perplexity
and occultation related to him in which communities will go astray and
communities will be guided.” I said: “O Chief of believers, is this to
happen?” “Yes,” he said: “as he will be created. How would you know
this, Asbagh! They are the best of this Ummah and the companions of the
righteous of this Household.” I said:

“What will happen after that?” He said:*“Allah will do what He desires,*
for He has wills and purposes and outcomes.”

In*Ghaibat Tusi* an identical tradition is mentioned through two other
chains of narration.

In*Ghaibat Nomani* an identical tradition is mentioned through another
chain of narration.

In*Ikhtisaas* of Mufeed, it is narrated through another reporter.

**19-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq has narrated from Ibne Walid
from Ahmad bin Idris from Ja’far bin Muhammad Fazari from Ishaq bin
Muhammad Sairafi from Abu Hashim from Furat bin Ahnaf from Ibne Taraif
from Ibne Nubatah that Amirul Momineen (a.s.) mentioned the Qaim (a.s.)
and said:

“He will go into hiding, so the ignorant will say that Allah does not
have any need of Aale Muhammad (a.s.).”

**20-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Ibne Idris from his
father from Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Malik from Ibad bin Yaqub from Hasan
bin Muhammad from Abu Jarud from Yazid Dhakhim that he says: I heard
Amirul Momineen (a.s.) say:

“As if I can see you are roving like cattle searching for the pasture
and not finding it.”

**21-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Ibne Musa from Asadi from
Saad from Muhammad bin Abdul Hamid and Abdus Samad bin Muhammad together
from Hannan bin Sudair from Ali bin Hazur from Ibne Nubatah that he
said: I heard Amirul Momineen (a.s.) say:

“The Master of this Affair is the runaway, the fugitive, the loner and
the forlorn.”

**22-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from a group from Talakbari
from Ahmad bin Ali from Ahmad bin Idris from Ibne Qutaibah from Fadhl
from Ibrahim bin Hakam from Ismail bin Ayyash from Amash from Abu Wail
that he says, Amirul Momineen (a.s.) looked at his son, Husain (a.s.)
and said:

“This son of mine is a master as the Messenger of Allah named him a
master. Allah will bring forth from his seed a man with the name of your
Apostle - who will be similar to him in his character as well as his
looks - in a time of oblivion of the people and death of righteousness
and manifestation of injustice. By Allah, if he should not rise, his
neck will be struck. The dwellers and inhabitants of the heavens will
rejoice his rise. He will fill the earth with equity as it will be
replete with injustice and oppression.”

**23-** ***Nahjul Balagha:*** In a sermon, Amirul Momineen (a.s.) says:

“Then you remain after him (meaning himself, peace be unto him) for so
long as Allah wills until Allah raises for you someone who will unite
you and pull you together from your dispersion...” as it was mentioned
in

*Kitabul Fitan (the Book of Trials from Biharul Anwar).* Ibne Maitham
(a.s.) says that one of his sermons contains a segment that is a sort of
explanation for this promise, where Amirul Momineen (a.s.) says, “Be
certain that what faces our Qaim is on the virtue of your
pagan*(Jahiliyya)* order. Because the entire Ummah on that day will be
pagans, except the ones who are shown Divine mercy. Do not make haste so
fear hastens to you. Beware that gentleness is fortune and equanimity is
leisure and endurance. The Imam knows better what is right and what is
wrong. He will tear out the evil judges from you, cut away your dangers,
and dismiss your unjust rulers, and will clean the earth from the
dishonest. He will act with equity and establish amongst you a fair
scale of justice. Your dead ones will wish they could return shortly
once more and live again. This is to happen. For the sake of Allah, you
are in your dreams! Safeguard your tongues and be after your livelihood,
for depravity will come to you. And if you wait, you will be rewarded
and you will find out with certainty that he is the avenger of your
victimization and retriever of your rights. I take a true oath by Allah
that*Allah is verily with the people who are pious and who perform good
deeds.”*

Ibne Abil Hadid in explanation of this, says: Sayyid Razi has mentioned
this sermon in*Nahjul Balagha* . This sermon is with regard to the
condition of Bani Umayyah. A group of historians have also narrated it
and it is widespread and narrated through inordinate sources. It has
many parts, which Sayyid Razi has not narrated.

One of such parts asserts, “Look at the Household of your Apostle, if
they remain silent, you remain silent, and if they should ask for your
help, help them. Allah will bring relief through a man from us, Ahle
Bayt.

My father be the ransom of the son of the best of the slave girls! He
will not give them but the sword in anarchy, putting the sword on his
shoulder for eight months; so much so that the Quraish will say: If he
were from the progeny of Fatima, he would pity us. Then Allah will
incite him over the Umayyads until he leaves them broken bits and mortal
remains and*accursed they are, wherever they are come upon, they will be
seized and massacred in a complete massacre. Such is Allah’s practice
with those who have passed on before: you will never find any change in
Allah’s conduct.”*

Then Ibne Abil Hadid says: If it should be asked who this promised man
is, the answer would be that the Imamiyah believe he is their Twelfth
Imam and son of a slave girl called Narjis. However, our scholars
maintain he is a man from the progeny of Fatima who will be born in the
future and does not exist now. If it should be asked who shall be from
the Umayyads in that time that this man will take revenge from, the
answer is that the Imamiyah say it is through*Rajah.* They believe that
certain people from the Umayyads and others will be brought back with
their very physiques when their awaited Imam comes and that he will
amputate hands and feet of many men, gouge out eyes of many, crucify
many more, and will take revenge from the enemies of Aale Muhammad
(a.s.), both enemies of the past and enemies who will come in the
future.

Our scholars, nonetheless, believe that Allah, the High, will create in
the period of time a man from the progeny of Fatima (a.s.) who does not
exist now, and He will avenge through him; and he will fill the earth
with equity

as it shall be replete with oppression and injustice of the oppressors;
and that he will chastise them in a much severe manner.

**24-** ***Al-Kafi:*** It is narrated from Ahmad bin Muhammad Kufi from
Ja’far bin Abdullah Hamdi from Abu Ruh Faraj bin Qurra from Ja’far bin
Abdullah from Masada Ibne Sadaqah from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) saying
that:

Amirul Momineen (a.s.) delivered a sermon. He praised and extolled Allah
and invoked blessings for the Prophet and his House and then said:
“Allah, the Holy and the High, has not broken the tyrants of the ages
but after giving a respite and leisure. He has not healed the breakage
of a bone of a nation but after severity and trial. O people, there are
lessons in the destructions that are awaiting you and the affairs you
have left behind.

However, not everyone who has a heart is sagacious, nor everyone who has
an ear listens, nor everyone who has eyes observes. Servants of Allah,
have a good look at what matters to you and then look at the scenes of
the people whom Allah gave command through His knowledge and they
followed the conduct of the House of the Firon and enjoyed*gardens and
springs, and crops and splendid positions.* Then look at what finality
did Allah lead them to after a period of deferment and gaiety, and
command and forbiddance. Whoever upholds patience, he will end up in
Paradise, by Allah, forever and ever,*and Allah holds the destiny of
things.*

How odd! How do I wonder from the errors of these sects with the
disparity of their proofs in their religion. Neither they follow the
footprints of a prophet, nor do they defer to the actions of a
successor. Neither they believe in an unseen, nor do they forgive a
fault. Virtue for them is what they themselves consider virtuous and
vice is what they themselves consider vice. Every man of them is his own
Imam, following himself without strong proofs and undeniable reasons.
They continue dwelling with injustice and ever increase in errors, never
reaching proximity and ever increasing their distance from Allah, the
Exalted.

Their affinity with one another and their endorsement of one another,
all of that is on the virtue of their fear from what the Apostle has
bequeathed and to flee from the message of the Creator of the heavens
and the earth, which the Apostle has brought to them.

They are people of contrition, cavities of doubts, and dwellers of
illusion and misguidance and doubts. A person who is left by Allah,
abandoned to himself and his own opinion, he is only seen secure by
someone who does not know him and is not suspected by someone who does
not recognize him. How similar are these people to the cattle whose
shepherd has disappeared from them!

Alas from the deeds of our Shia after their today’s close love!

How they will disgrace one another after me and will kill each other
dispersedly tomorrow ­while they are removed from the principal and are
holding on to the inferior hopes of an opening. Each party of them will
hold a certain branch and will lean to whichever direction the branch
will lean to.

However, Allah, glory to His name, will gather them for the worst day of
the Umayyads, as autumn collects clouds. Allah will then bring them

together on love and then will gather them in masses like masses of
clouds. Then He will open gateways for them. They will spring out from
their ambushes like the flood of the two gardens [of Saba’] - the flood
of the mighty dam of Iram, when a rat made a hole in it and neither
highlands withstood against it, nor did strong mountains repulse its
flow. Allah will then scatter them in the valleys and will make them
flow as*springs on earth.* He will take the rights of one nation through
them from another. He will settle a nation through them in the place of
another nation to chase away the Umayyads and that they may not continue
to usurp what they have usurped.

Allah will destroy through them pillars and will destruct through them
the mighty structures of Iram and inhabit with them the midlands of
Zaytun.

“I take a solemn oath by the Soul Who split the seed and created the
nations, this will happen. As if I hear the neighing of their horses. By
Allah, all the treasures in their hands after their rise and might in
the lands will dissolve as fat melts on fire. Whoever of them dies, will
die a pagan and to God, the Exalted, will be eventually taken whoever of
them remains. And Allah, the Exalted, will forgive anyone who repents.
Perchance, Allah will bring together my Shia after dispersion for their
worst day. The choice is for none; rather, Allah makes the choice and
determines all destinies.

“O people, claimants of Imamate who do not deserve it are many. If you
do not abandon the bitter truth and do not faint from disparaging the
wrong, those who are not like you will not be bold against you and those
who are showing strength over you will not become strong over you in
order to end and sideline obedience to God.

However, you went astray as did Bani Israel during the time of Prophet
Musa (a.s.). By my life, your perplexity and misguidance will increase
after me manifolds compared to that of Bani Israel. By my life, if you
outlive me and the rule of the Umayyads, you will then be subjected to
the rule of the caller to misguidance and you will revive the wrong and
will leave the right behind your backs. You will sever your relation
with the near relations, the warriors of Badr, and will look up to the
aliens from the progeny of the fighters against the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.).

By my life, if they lose their scepter, the purging for the sake of
requitals will come near. The promise will be near and the period will
be ending. The bright comet will appear to you from east and that bright
moon will shine to you. When that happens, turn to repentance and beware
that if you follow the Star from the East, he will lead you on the path
of the Messenger (a.s.). He will heal your blind, dumb and deaf. He will
save you the toils of search and misguidance. The great burdens will be
removed from your necks. Allah does not cast away anyone but the one who
defies and oppresses and goes astray and takes what does not belong to
him.*And soon will know those who acted unjustly, which final end they
will turn to.”*

**25-** ***Nahjul Balagha:*** In another sermon of Nahjul Balagha, the
Imam says:

“When our Qaim reappears, he will direct desires to guidance, when
people have turned to avarice. He will direct views to the Quran, when
they

have directed the Quran to their views.” He says, “So much so until wars
are waged at you, which grin at you with their fangs while their breasts
are filled with a milk that tastes sweet but leads to bitter ends.

Beware of tomorrow, and tomorrow shall come with what you do not know.
The ruler will call unjust rulers to account for their evil acts. The
earth will bring out the treasures of its heart to him and submit him
their keys. He will show you the equity of character. He will revive the
dead teachings of the Book and Sunnah.”

Another discussion of Ibne Abil Hadid
-------------------------------------

The author says: Commentator of*Nahjul Balagha* , Ibne Abil Hadid
narrates from his teacher, Abu Uthman that he said: Abu Ubaidah has
narrated a longer version of this tradition on the authority of Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) through his forefathers, “Behold the righteous men
from my Household and the pure men of my family are the forbearing of
all people in their youths and the most knowledgeable of all people in
their old age.

We, the Ahle Bayt, know through Divine knowledge, judge through Divine
commands, and the words of the Truthful we follow. If you follow our
words, you will be guided through our light, and if you do not do that,
Allah will destroy you at our hands. With us is the standard of
truthfulness. Whoever follows it, will find salvation and whoever falls
behind, will be destroyed.

Behold, through us the faults of the believers are undone and through us
the dress of dishonor is removed from your necks. Through us is the
initiation and through us, not you, is the finality.”

Ibne Abil Hadid says, “Through us, not you is the finality” is an
allusion to the Mahdi who will rise in the last period of time. The
majority tradition scholars believe that he is from the progeny of
Fatima (a.s.). Our Mutazilte scholars do not reject him and they have
mentioned him in their books and their scholars have acknowledged him.
However, we believe that he has not been created yet and that he will be
created, which is also the belief of Ahle Sunnat.

The Chief Justice has narrated on the authority of Ismail Ibne Ibad
(a.s.) from Amirul Momineen (a.s.) that he mentioned the Mahdi and said:
“He is from the progeny of Husain (a.s.).” He mentioned his facial
features and said: “He is a man of broad forehead, high nose, thick
abdomen, bulky legs, and his front teeth are apart from one another.
There is a mark on his right leg.” Abdullah bin Qutaibah has also
mentioned this tradition in*Gharibul Hadith.*

The author says: The following poem is from the book of poetry
attributed to Amirul Momineen (a.s.):

**My son, when the Turks make turmoil, then expect**

**The governance of the Mahdi, who will rise and establish justice**

**The kings of the earth will be humbled to Bani Hashim And they will
pledge allegiance to them**

**A child from the children without insight**

**Neither he has a high aim nor does he have wisdom**

**Then will rise your Qaim of Truth**

**He will bring you the Truth and act on the Truth**

**The namesake of the Prophet, my soul be his ransom. My sons, do not
abandon him and make haste for him.**


