


Authenticity of the Qur'an How It Came To Be Written Authenticity of the
Qur'an How It Came To Be Written

Thanks to its undisputed authenticity, the text of the Qur'an holds a
unique place among the books of Revelation, shared neither by the Old
nor the New Testament. In the first two sections of this work, a review
was made of the alterations undergone by the Old Testament and the
Gospels before they were handed down to us in the form we know today.
The same is not true for the Qur'an for the simple reason that it was
written down at the time of the Prophet; we shall see how it came to be
written, i.e. the process involved.

In this context, the differences separating the Qur'an from the Bible
are in no way due to questions essentially concerned with date. Such
questions are constantly put forward by certain people without regard to
the circumstances prevailing at the time when the Judeo-Christian and
the Qur'anic Revelations were written; they have an equal disregard for
the circumstances surrounding the transmission of the Qur'an to the
Prophet. It is suggested that a Seventh century text had more likelihood
of coming down to us unaltered than other texts that are as many as
fifteen centuries older. This comment, although correct, does not
constitute a sufficient reason ; it is made more to excuse the
alterations made in the Judeo- Christian texts in the course of
centuries than to underline the notion that the text of the Qur'an,
which was more recent, had less to fear from being modified by man.

In the case of the Old Testament, the sheer number of authors who tell
the same story, plus all the revisions carried out on the text of
certain books from the pre- Christian era, constitute as many reasons
for inaccuracy and contradiction. As for the Gospels, nobody can claim
that they invariably contain faithful accounts of Jesus's words or a
description of his actions strictly in keeping with reality. We have
seen how successive versions of the texts showed a lack of definite
authenticity and moreover that their authors were not eyewitnesses.

Also to be underlined is the distinction to be made between the Qur'an,
a book of written Revelation, and the hadiths, collections of statements
concerning the actions and sayings of Muhammad. Some of the Prophet's
companions started to write them down from the moment of his death. As
an element of human error could have slipped in, the collection had to
be resumed later and subjected to rigorous criticism so that the
greatest credit is in practise given to documents that came along after
Muhammad. Their authenticity varies, like that of the Gospels. Not a
single Gospel was written down at the time of Jesus (they were all
written long after his earthly mission had come to an end), and not a
single collection of hadiths was compiled during the time of the
Prophet.

The situation is very different for the Qur'an. As the Revelation
progressed, the Prophet and the believers following him recited the text
by heart and it was also written down by the scribes in his following.
It therefore starts off with two elements of authenticity that the
Gospels do not possess. This continued up to the Prophet's death. At a
time when not everybody could write, but everyone was able to recite,
recitation afforded a considerable advantage because of the double-
checking possible when the definitive text was compiled.

The Qur'anic Revelation was made by Archangel Gabriel to Muhammad. It
took place over a period of more than twenty years of the Prophet's
life, beginning with the first verses of Sura 96, then resuming after a
three-year break for a long period of twenty years up to the death of
the Prophet in 632 A.D., i.e. ten years before Hegira and ten years
after Hegira.[^50]

The following was the first Revelation (sura 96, verses 1 to 5)[^51].

"Read: In the name of thy Lord who created,
Who created man from something which clings
Read! Thy Lord is the most Noble
Who taught by the pen
Who taught man what he did not know."

Professor Hamidullah notes in the Introduction to his French
translation of the Qur'an that one of the themes of this first
Revelation was the 'praise of the pen as a means of human knowledge'
which would 'explain the Prophet's concern for the preservation of the
Qur'an in writing.'

Texts formally prove that long before the Prophet left Makka for Madina
(i.e. long before Hegira), the Qur'anic text so far revealed had been
written down. We shall see how the Qur'an is authentic in this. We know
that Muhammad and the Believers who surrounded him were accustomed to
reciting the revealed text from memory. It is therefore inconceivable
for the Qur'an to refer to facts that did not square with reality
because the latter could so easily be checked with people in the
Prophet's following, by asking the authors of the transcription.

Four suras dating from a period prior to Hegira refer to the writing
down of the Qur'an before the Prophet left Makka in 622 (sura 80, verses
11 to 16):

"By no means! Indeed it is a message of instruction Therefore whoever
wills, should remember On leaves held in honor Exalted, purified In the
hands of scribes Noble and pious."

Yusuf Ali, in the commentary to his translation, 1934, wrote that when
the Revelation of this sura was made, forty-two or forty-five others had
been written and were kept by Muslims in Makka (out of a total of
114).

--Sura 85, verses 21 and 22: "Nay, this is a glorious reading[^52] On a
preserved tablet" --Sura 56, verses 77 to 80:

"This is a glorious reading[^52] In a book well kept Which none but the
purified teach. This is a Revelation from the Lord of the
Worlds." --Sura 25, verse 5:

"They said: Tales of the ancients which he has caused to be written and
they are dictated to him morning and evening." Here we have a reference
to the accusations made by the Prophet's enemies who treated him as an
imposter. They spread the rumour that stories of antiquity were being
dictated to him and he was writing them down or having them transcribed
(the meaning of the word is debatable, but one must remember that
Muhammad was illiterate). However this may be, the verse refers to this
act of making a written record which is pointed out by Muhammad's
enemies themselves.

A sura that came after Hegira makes one last mention of the leaves on
which these divine instructions were written: --Sura 98, verses 2 and
3:

"An (apostle) from God recites leaves Kept pure where are decrees right
and straight."

The Qur'an itself therefore provides indications as to the fact that it
was set down in writing at the time of the Prophet. It is a known fact
that there were several scribes in his following, the most famous of
whom, Zaid Ibn Thâbit, has left his name to posterity.

In the preface to his French translation of the Qur'an (1971),
Professor Hamidullah gives an excellent description of the conditions
that prevailed when the text of the Qur'an was written, lasting up until
the time of the Prophet's death:

"The sources all agree in stating that whenever a fragment of the
Qur'an was revealed, the Prophet called one of his literate companions
and dictated it to him, indicating at the same time the exact position
of the new fragment in the fabric of what had already been received . .
. Descriptions note that Muhammad asked the scribe to reread to him what
had been dictated so that he could correct any deficiencies . . .
Another famous story tells how every year in the month of Ramadan, the
Prophet would recite the whole of the Qur'an (so far revealed) to
Gabriel . . ., that in the Ramadan preceding Muhammad's death, Gabriel
had made him recite it twice . . . It is known how since the Prophet's
time, Muslims acquired the habit of keeping vigil during Ramadan, and of
reciting the whole of the Qur'an in addition to the usual prayers
expected of them. Several sources add that Muhammad's scribe Zaid was
present at this final bringing-together of the texts. Elsewhere,
numerous other personalities are mentioned as well."

Extremely diverse materials were used for this first record: parchment,
leather, wooden tablets, camels' scapula, soft stone for inscriptions,
etc. At the same time however, Muhammad recommended that the faithful
learn the Qur'an by heart. They did this for a part if not all of the
text recited during prayers. Thus there were Hafizun who knew the whole
of the Qur'an by heart and spread it abroad. The method of doubly
preserving the text both in writing and by memorization proved to be
extremely precious.

Not long after the Prophet's death (632), his successor Abu Bakr, the
first Caliph of Islam, asked Muhammad's former head scribe, Zaid Ibn
Thâbit, to make a copy, this he did. On Omar's initiative (the future
second Caliph), Zaid consulted all the information he could assemble at
Madina: the witness of the Hafizun, copies of the Book written on
various materials belonging to private individuals, all with the object
of avoiding possible errors in transcription. Thus an extremely faithful
copy of the Book was obtained.

The sources tell us that Caliph Omar, Abu Bakr's successor in 634,
subsequently made a single volume (mushaf) that he preserved and gave on
his death to his daughter Hafsa, the Prophet's widow.

The third Caliph of Islam, Uthman, who held the caliphate from 644 to
655, entrusted a commission of experts with the preparation of the great
recension that bears his name. It checked the authenticity of the
document produced under Abu Bakr which had remained in Hafsa's
possession until that time. The commission consulted Muslims who knew
the text by heart. The critical analysis of the authenticity of the text
was carried out very rigorously. The agreement of the witnesses was
deemed necessary before the slightest verse containing debatable
material was retained. It is indeed known how some verses of the Qur'an
correct others in the case of prescriptions: this may be readily
explained when one remembers that the Prophet's period of apostolic
activity stretched over twenty years (in round figures). The result is a
text containing an order of suras that reflects the order followed by
the Prophet in his complete recital of the Qur'an during Ramadan, as
mentioned above.

One might perhaps ponder the motives that led the first three Caliphs,
especially Uthman, to commission collections and recensions of the text.
The reasons are in fact very simple: Islam's expansion in the very first
decades following Muhammad's death was very rapid indeed and it happened
among peoples whose native language was not Arabic. It was absolutely
necessary to ensure the spread of a text that retained its original
purity. Uthman's recension had this as its objective.

Uthman sent copies of the text of the recension to the centres of the
Islamic Empire and that is why, according to Professor Hamidullah,
copies attributed to Uthman exist in Tashkent and Istanbul. Apart from
one or two possible mistakes in copying, the oldest documents known to
the present day, that are to be found throughout the Islamic world, are
identical; the same is true for documents preserved in Europe (there are
fragments in the Bibliothèque Nationale in Paris which, according to the
experts, date from the Eighth and Ninth centuries A.D., i.e. the Second
and Third Hegirian centuries). The numerous ancient texts that are known
to be in existence all agree except for very minor variations which do
not change the general meaning of the text at all. If the context
sometimes allows more than one interpretation, it may well have to do
with the fact that ancient writing was simpler than that of the present
day.[^53]

The 114 suras were arranged in decreasing order of length; there were
nevertheless exceptions. The chronological sequence of the Revelation
was not followed. In the majority of cases however, this sequence is
known. A large number of descriptions are mentioned at several points in
the text, sometimes giving rise to repetitions. Very frequently a
passage will add details to a description that appears elsewhere in an
incomplete form. Everything connected with modern science is, like many
subjects dealt with in the Qur'an, scattered throughout the book without
any semblance of classification.

\* It is imporatnt to say that Qua'an was collected during the
Prophet's lifetime. The Prophet, and before his death, had showed the
collection of Qur'an scrolls to Gabriel many times. So, what is said in
regard to collecting of Qur'an during the ruling period of the Caliphs
after the Prophet means copying the same original copy written in the
Prophet's life which later were sent to different countries, and it does
not mean the recording or writing of Qur'an through oral sources as it
may be thought. Yet, many of the Companions have written the Qur'an
exactly during the lifetime of the Prophet. One of those was Imam Ali's
copy. He, because of his close relation with the Prophet, his long
companionship, didn't only collect the dispersed scrolls of the Qur'an,
but he rather could accompany it with a remarkable Tafseer, mentioning
the occasion of each verse's descension, and was regarded the first
Tafseer of Qur'an since the beginning of the Islamic mission.

Ibn Abi Al-Hadeed says," All the scholars agree that Imam Ali is the
first one who collected the Qur'an," (see Sharhul Nahj, 271). Another
one, Kittani, says that Imam Ali could arrange the Qur'an according to
each surah's order of descension, (see Strategic Administration, 461).
Ibn Sireen Tabe'ee relates from'Ikrimeh, who said that 'Imam Ali could
collect the Qur'an in a manner that if all mankind and jinn gathered to
do that, they could not do it at all,'(see al-Itqan 1157-58). Ibn Jizzi
Kalbi also narrates, "If only we could have the Qur'an which was
collected by Ali then we could gain a lot of knowledge," (see
al-Tasheel, 114).

That was only a brief note about the benefits of Imam Ali's Mus'haf, as
Ibn Sireen had declared, "I searched so long for Imam Ali's Mus'haf and
I corresponded with Medina, but all my efforts gone in vain.' (see
al-Itqan, 1/58, al-Tabaqat,2/338). Thus; it becomes certain that Qur'an
has been collected by Imam Ali without simple difference between it and
other known copies, except in the notes mentioned by Him which renders
it as the most excellent copy has ever been known. Unfortunately, the
inconvenient political conditions emerged after the demise of the
Prophet, (i.e after the wicked issue of Saqeefah) was a main obstacle to
get benefits from that remarkable copy of the Qur'an.

The Creation of the Heavens and the Earth.

**DIFFERENCES FROM AND RESEMBLANCES TO THE BIBLICAL DESCRIPTION.**

In contrast to the Old Testament, the Qur'an does not provide a unified
description of the Creation. Instead of a continuous narration, there
are passages scattered all over the Book which deal with certain aspects
of the Creation and provide information on the successive events marking
its development with varying degrees of detail. To gain a clear idea of
how these events are presented, the fragments scattered throughout a
large number of suras have to be brought together.

This dispersal throughout the Book of references to the same subject is
not unique to the theme of the Creation. Many important subjects are
treated in the same manner in the Qur'an: earthly or celestial
phenomena, or problems concerning man that are of interest to
scientists. For each of these themes, the same effort has been made here
to bring all the verses together.

For many European commentators, the description of the Creation in the
Qur'an is very similar to the one in the Bible and they are quite
content to present the two descriptions side by side. I believe this
concept is mistaken because there are very obvious differences. On
subjects that are by no means unimportant from a scientific point of
view, we find statements in the Qur'an whose equivalents we search for
in vain in the Bible. The latter contains descriptions that have no
equivalent in the Qur'an.

The obvious resemblances between the two texts are well known; among
them is the fact that, at first glance, the number given to the
successive stages of the Creation is identical: the six days in the
Bible correspond to the six days in the Qur'an. In fact however, the
problem is more complex than this and it is worth pausing to examine
it.

The Six Periods of the Creation.

There is absolutely no ambiguity whatsoever in the Biblical[^54]
description of the Creation in six days followed by a day of rest, the
sabbath, analogous with the days of the week. It has been shown how this
mode of narration practiced by the priests of the Sixth century B.C.
served the purpose of encouraging the people to observe the sabbath. All
Jews were expected to rest[^55] on the sabbath as the Lord had done after
he had laboured during the six days of the week.

The way the Bible interprets it, the word 'day' means the interval of
time between two successive sunrises or sunsets for an inhabitant of the
Earth. When defined in this way, the day is conditioned by the rotation
of the Earth on its own axis. It is obvious that logically-speaking
there can be no question of 'days' as defined just now, if the mechanism
that causes them to appear-i.e. the existence of the Earth and its
rotation around the Sun-has not already been fixed in the early stages
of the Creation according to the Biblical description. This
impossibility has already been emphasized in the first part of the
present book.

When we refer to the majority of translations of the Qur'an, we read
that- analogous with the Biblical description-the process of the
Creation for the Islamic Revelation also took place over a period of six
days. It is difficult to hold against the translators the fact that they
have translated the Arabic word by its most common meaning. This is how
it is usually expressed in translations so that in the Qur'an, verse 54,
sura 7 reads as follows:

"Your Lord is God Who created the heavens and the earth in six days."

There are very few translations and commentaries of the Qur'an that
note how the word 'days' should really be taken to mean 'periods'. It
has moreover been maintained that if the Qur'anic texts on the Creation
divided its stages into 'days', it was with the deliberate intention of
taking up beliefs held by all the Jews and Christians at the dawn of
Islam and of avoiding a head-on confrontation with such a widely-held
belief.

Without in any way wishing to reject this way of seeing it, one could
perhaps examine the problem a little more closely and scrutinize in the
Qur'an itself, and more generally in the language of the time, the
possible meaning of the word that many translators themselves still
continue to translate by the word 'day' yaum, plural ayyam in
Arabic.[^56]

Its most common meaning is 'day' but it must be stressed that it tends
more to mean the diurnal light than the length of time that lapses
between one day's sunset and the next. The plural ayyam can mean, not
just 'days', but also 'long length of time', an indefinite period of
time (but always long). The meaning 'period of time' that the word
contains is to he found elsewhere in the Qur'an. Hence the following:

--sura 32, verse 5:

". . . in a period of time (yaum) whereof the measure is a thousand
years of your reckoning."

(It is to be noted that the Creation in six periods is precisely what
the verse preceding verse 5 refers to).

--sura 70, verse 4:

". . . in a period of time (yaum) whereof the measure is 50,000 years."
The fact that the word , yaum' could mean a period of time that was
quite different from the period that we mean by the word 'day' struck
very early commentators who, of course, did not have the knowledge we
possess today concerning the length of the stages in the formation of
the Universe. In the Sixteenth century A.D. for example, Abu al Su'ud,
who could not have had any idea of the day as defined astronomically in
terms of the Earth's rotation, thought that for the Creation a division
must be considered that was not into days as we usually understand the
word, but into 'events' (in Arabic nauba).

Modern commentators have gone back to this interpretation. Yusuf Ali
(1934), in his commentary on each of the verses that deals with the
stages in the Creation, insists on the importance of taking the word,
elsewhere interpreted as meaning 'days', to mean in reality 'very long
Periods, or Ages, or Aeons'. It is therefore possible to say that in the
case of the Creation of the world, the Qur'an allows for long periods of
time numbering six. It is obvious that modern science has not permitted
man to establish the fact that the complicated stages in the process
leading to the formation of the Universe numbered six, but it has
clearly shown that long periods of time were involved compared to which
'days' as we conceive them would be ridiculous.

One of the longest passages of the Qur'an, which deals with the
Creation, describes the latter by juxtaposing an account of earthly
events and one of celestial events. The verses in question are verses 9
to 12, sura 41:

(God is speaking to the Prophet)

"Say. Do you disbelieve Him Who created the earth in two periods? Do
you ascribe equals to Him. He is the Lord of the Worlds. "He set in the
(earth) mountains standing firm. He blessed it. He measured therein its
sustenance in four periods, in due proportion, in accordance with the
needs of those who ask for (sustenance? or information?). "Moreover
(tumma) He turned to heaven when it was smoke and said to it and to the
earth: come willingly or unwillingly! They said: we come in willing
obedience.

"Then He ordained them seven heavens in two periods, and He assigned to
each heaven its mandate by Revelation. And We adorned the lower heaven
with luminaries and provided it a guard. Such is the decree of the All
Mighty, the Full of Knowledge." These four verses of sura 41 contain
several points to which we shall return. the initially gaseous state of
celestial matter and the highly symbolic definition of the number of
heavens as seven. We shall see the meaning behind this figure. Also of a
symbolic nature is the dialogue between God on the one hand and the
primordial sky and earth on the other. here however it is only to
express the submission of the Heavens and Earth, once they were formed,
to divine orders.

Critics have seen in this passage a contradiction with the statement of
the six periods of the Creation. By adding the two periods of the
formation of the Earth to the four periods of the spreading of its
sustenance to the inhabitants, plus the two periods of the formation of
the Heavens, we arrive at eight periods. This would then be in
contradiction with the six periods mentioned above.

In fact however, this text, which leads man to reflect on divine
Omnipotence, beginning with the Earth and ending with the Heavens,
provides two sections that are expressed by the Arabic word tumma',
translated by 'moreover', but which also means 'furthermore' or 'then'.
The sense of a 'sequence' may therefore be implied referring to a
sequence of events or a series of man's reflections on the events
mentioned here. It may equally be a simple reference to events
juxtaposed without any intention of bringing in the notion of the one
following the other.

However this may be, the periods of the Creation of the Heavens may
just as easily coincide with the two periods of the Earth's creation. A
little later we shall examine how the basic process of the formation of
the Universe is presented in the Qur'an and we shall see how it can be
jointly applied to the Heavens and the Earth in keeping with modern
ideas. We shall then realize how perfectly reasonable this way is of
conceiving the simultaneous nature of the events here described.

There does not appear to be any contradiction between the passage
quoted here and the concept of the formation of the world in six stages
that is to be found in other texts in the Qur'an.

**THE QUR'AN DOES NOT LAY DOWN A SEQUENCE FOR THE CREATION OF THE EARTH
AND HEAVENS**

In the two passages from the Qur'an quoted above, reference was made in
one of the verses to the Creation of the Heavens and the Earth (sura 7,
verse 54), and elsewhere to the Creation of the Earth and the Heavens
(sura 41, verses 9 to 12). The Qur'an does not therefore appear to lay
down a sequence for the Creation of the Heavens and the Earth.

The number of verses in which the Earth is mentioned first is quite
small, e.g. sura 2, verse 29 and sura 20, verse 4, where a reference is
made to "Him Who created the earth and the high heavens". The number of
verses where the Heavens are mentioned before the Earth is, on the other
hand, much larger: (sura 7, verse 54; sura 10, verse 3; sura 11, verse
7; sura 25, verse 59; sura 32, verse 4; sura 50, verse 38; sura 57,
verse 4; sura 79, verses 27 to 33; sura 91, verses 5 to 10).

In actual fact, apart from sura 79, there is not a single passage in
the Qur'an that lays down a definite sequence; a simple coordinating
conjunction (wa) meaning 'and' links two terms, or the word tumma which,
as has been seen in the above passage, can indicate either a simple
juxtaposition or a sequence. There appears to me to be only one passage
in the Qur'an where a definite sequence is plainly established between
different events in the Creation. It is contained in verses 27 to 33,
sura 79:

"Are you the harder to create Or. is it the heaven that (God) built? He
raised its canopy and fashioned it with harmony. He made dark the night
and he brought out the forenoon. And after that (ba' da dalika) He
spread it out. Therefrom he drew out its water and its pasture. And the
mountains He has fixed firmly. Goods for you and your cattle."

This list of earthly gifts from God to man, which is expressed In a
language suited to farmers or nomads on the Arabian Peninsula, is
preceded by an invitation to reflect on the creation of the heavens. The
reference to the stage when God spreads out the earth and renders it
arable is very precisely situated in time after the alternating of night
and day has been achieved. Two groups are therefore referred to here,
one of celestial phenomena, and the other of earthly phenomena
articulated in time.

The reference made here implies that the earth must necessarily have
existed before being spread out and that it consequently existed when
God created the Heavens. The idea of a concomitance therefore arises
from the heavenly and earthly evolutions with the interlocking of the
two phenomena. Hence, one must not look for any special significance in
the reference in the Qur'anic text to the Creation of the Earth before
the Heavens or the Heavens before the Earth: the position of the words
does not influence the order in which the Creation took place, unless
however it is specifically stated.

**THE BASIC PROCESS OF THE FORMATION OF THE UNIVERSE AND THE RESULTING
COMPOSITION OF THE WORLDS.**

The Qur'an presents in two verses a brief synthesis of the phenomena
that constituted the basic process of the formation of the
Universe. --sura 21, verse 30:

"Do not the Unbelievers see that the heavens and the earth were joined
together, then We clove them asunder and We got every living thing out
of the water. Will they not then believe?" --sura 41, verse 11. God
orders the Prophet to speak after inviting him to reflect on the subject
of the earth's creation: "Moreover (God) turned to the Heaven when it
was smoke and said to it and to the earth . . ." There then follow the
orders to submit, referred to on page 136.

We shall come back to the aquatic origins of life and examine them
along with other biological problems raised by the Qur'an. The important
things to remember at present are the following. a) The statement of the
existence of a gaseous mass with fine particles, for this is how the
word 'smoke' (dukan in Arabic) is to be interpreted. Smoke is generally
made -up of a gaseous substratum, plus, in more or less stable
suspension, fine particles that may belong to solid and even liquid
states of matter at high or low temperature;

b) The reference to a separation process (fatq) of an primary single
mass whose elements were initially fused together (ratq). It must be
noted that in Arabic 'fatq' is the action of breaking, diffusing,
separating, and that 'ratq' is the action of fusing or binding together
elements to make a homogenous whole.

This concept of the separation of a whole into several parts is noted
in other passages of the Book with reference to multiple worlds. The
first verse of the first sura in the Qur'an proclaims, after the opening
invocation, the following: "In the name of God, the Beneficent, the
Merciful", "Praise be to God, Lord of the Worlds."

The terms 'worlds' reappears dozens of times in the Qur'an. The Heavens
are referred to as multiple as well, not only on account of their plural
form, but also because of their symbolic numerical quantity. 7.

This number is used 24 times throughout the Qur'an for various
numerical quantities. It often carries the meaning of 'many' although we
do not know exactly why this meaning of the figure was used. The Greeks
and Romans also seem to have used the number 7 to mean an undefined idea
of plurality. In the Qur'an, the number 7 refers to the Heavens
themselves (samawat). It alone is understood to mean 'Heavens'. The 7
roads of the Heavens are mentioned once:

--sura 2, verse 29: "(God) is the One Who created for you all that is
on the earth. Moreover He turned to the heaven and fashioned seven
heavens with harmony. He is Full of Knowledge of all things."

--sura 23, verse 17: "And We have created above you seven paths. We
have never been unmindful of the Creation."

--sura 67, verse 3: "(God) is the One Who created seven heavens one
above an other. Thou canst see no fault in the creation of the
Beneficent. Turn the vision again! Canst thou see any rift?"

--sura 71, verse 15-16: "Did you see how God created seven heavens one
above another and made the moon a light therein and made the sun a
lamp?[^57]"

--sura 78, verse 12: "We have built above you seven strong (heavens)
and placed a blazing lamp."

Here the blazing lamp is the Sun.

The commentators on the Qur'an are in agreement on all these verses:
the number 7 means no more than plurality.[^58] There are therefore many
Heavens and Earths, and it comes as no small surprise to the reader of
the Qur'an to find that earths such as our own may be found in the
Universe, a fact that has not yet been verified by man in our time.

Verse 12 of sura 65 does however predict the following:

"God is the One Who created seven heavens and of the earth (ard) a
similar number. The Command descends among them so that you know that
God has power over all things and comprehends all things in His
knowledge."

Since 7 indicates an indefinite plurality (as we have seen), it is
possible to conclude that the Qur'anic text clearly indicates the
existence of more than one single Earth, our own Earth (ard); there are
others like it in the Universe. Another observation which may surprise
the Twentieth century reader of the Qur'an is the fact that verses refer
to three groups of things created, i.e.

--things in the Heavens.
--things on the Earth
--things between the Heavens and the Earth

Here are several of these verses: --sura 20, verse 6; "To Him (God)
belongs what is in the heavens, on earth, between them and beneath the
soil."

--sura 25, verse 59: ". . . the One Who created the heavens, the earth
and what is between them in six periods."

--sura 32, verse 4: "God is the One Who created the heavens, the earth
and what is between them in six periods."

--sura 50, verse 38: "We created the heavens, the earth .and what is
between them in six periods, and no weariness touched Us."[^59]

The reference in the Qur'an to 'what is between the Heavens and the
Earth' is again to be found in the following verses: sura 21, verse 16;
sura 44, verses 7 and 38 ; sura 78, verse 37; sura 15, verse 85; sura
46, verse 3; sura 43, Verse 85. This Creation outside the Heavens and
outside the Earth, mentioned several times, is a priori difficult to
imagine. To understand these verses, reference must be made to the most
recent human observations on the existence of cosmic extra-galactic
material and one must indeed go back to ideas established by
contemporary science on the formation of the Universe, starting with the
simplest and proceeding to the most complex. These are the subject of
the following paragraph.

Before passing on to these purely scientific matters however, it is
advisable to recapitulate the main points on which the Qur'an gives us
information about the Creation. According to the preceding quotations,
they are as follows:

1) Existence of six periods for the Creation in general.
2) Interlocking of stages in the Creation of the Heavens and the
Earth.
3) Creation of the Universe out of an initially unique mass forming a
block that subsequently split up.
4) Plurality of the Heavens and of the Earths. 5) Existence of an
intermediary creation 'between the Heavens and the Earth'.

**SOME MODERN SCIENTIFIC DATA CONCERNING THE FORMATION OF THE
UNIVERSE.**

The Solar System.

The Earth and planets rotating around the Sun constitute an organized
world of dimensions which, to our human scale, appear quite colossal.
The Earth is, after all, roughly 93 million miles from the Sun. This is
a very great distance for a human being, but it is very small in
comparison to the distance separating the Sun from the furthermost
planet from it in the solar system (Pluto); in round numbers it is 40
times the distance from the Earth to the Sun, i.e. approximately 3,672
million miles away. This distance, when doubled, represents the largest
dimension of our solar system. The Sun's light takes nearly 6 hours to
reach Pluto, and yet the journey is made at the terrifying speed of over
186,000 miles per second. The light coming from stars on the very
confines of the known celestial world therefore takes billions of years
to reach us.

The Galaxies.

The Sun, of which we are a satellite like the other planets surrounding
it, is itself an infinitesmally small element among a hundred billion
stars that form a whole, called a galaxy. On a fine summer night, the
whole of space seems to be filled with stars that make up what is known
as the Milky Way. This group has extremely large dimensions. Whereas
light could cross the solar system in units of one hour, it would
require something like 90,000 years to go from one extreme to the other
of the most compact group of stars that make up our galaxy.

The galaxy that we belong to however, even though it is so incredibly
huge, is only a small part of the Heavens. There are giant agglomerates
of stars similar to the Milky Way that lie outside our galaxy. They were
discovered a little over fifty years ago, when astronomy was able to
make use of an optical instrument as sophisticated as the one that made
possible the construction of the Mount Wilson telescope in the United
States. Thus a very large number indeed of isolated galaxies and masses
of galaxies have been discovered that are so far away that it was
necessary to institute a special unit of light-years, the 'parsec' (the
distance light travels in 3.26 years at 186,000 miles per second).

Formation and Evolution of Galaxies, Stan and Planetary Systems.

What was there originally in the immensely large space the galaxies now
occupy? Modern science can only answer this question as of a certain
period in the evolution of the Universe; it cannot put into numbers the
length of time that separates this period from us.

At the earliest time it can provide us with, modern science has every
reason to maintain that the Universe was formed of a gaseous mass
principally composed of hydrogen and a certain amount of helium that was
slowly rotating. This nebula subsequently split up into multiple
fragments with very large dimensions and masses, so large indeed, that
specialists in astrophysics are able to estimate their mass from 1 to
100 billion times the present mass of the Sun (the latter represents a
mass that is over 300,000 times that of the Earth). These figures give
an idea of the large size of the fragments of primary gaseous mass that
were to give birth to the galaxies.

A new fragmentation was to form the stars. There then followed the
intervention of a condensing process where gravitational forces came
into play, (since these bodies were moving and rotating more and more
quickly), along with pressures and the influence of magnetic fields and
of radiations. The stars became shiny as they contracted and transformed
the gravitational forces into thermal energy. Thermonuclear reactions
came into play, and heavier atoms were formed by fusion at the expense
of others that were lighter; this is how the transition was made from
hydrogen to helium, then to carbon and oxygen, ending with metals and
metalloids. Thus the stars have a life of their own and modern astronomy
classifies them according to their present stage of evolution. The stars
also have a death; in the final stage of their evolution, the violent
implosion of certain stars has been observed so that they become
veritable 'corpses'.

The planets, and in particular the Earth, originated in a separation
process starting from an initial constituent that in the beginning was
the primary nebula. A fact that has no longer been contested for over
twenty-five years is that the Sun condensed inside the single nebula and
that the planets did the same inside the surrounding nebular. disc. One
must stress-and this is of prime importance for. the subject in
hand-that there was no sequence in the formation of the celestial
elements such as the Sun nor in the formation of an earthly. element.
There is an evolutionary parallelism with the identity of origin.

Here, science can give us information on the period during which the
events just mentioned took place. Having estimated the age of our galaxy
at roughly ten billion years, according to this hypothesis, the
formation of the solar. system took place a little over five billion
years later'. The study of natural radio activity makes it possible to
place the age of the Earth and the time the Sun was formed at 4.5
billion years ago, to within a present-day accuracy of 100 million
years, according to some scientists' calculations. This accuracy is to
be admired, since 100 million years may represent a long time to us but
the ratio 'maximum error/total time-to-be -measured' is 0.1/4.5, i.e.
2.2%.

Specialists in astrophysics have therefore attained a high degree of
knowledge concerning the general process involved in the formation of
the solar system. It may be summarized as follows: condensation and
contraction of a rotating gaseous mass, splitting up into fragments that
leave the Sun. and planets in their places, among them the Earth.[^60]
The knowledge that science has gained on the primary nebula and the way
it split up into an incommensurable quantity of stars grouped into
galaxies leaves absolutely no doubt as to the legitimacy of a concept of
the plurality of worlds. It does not however provide any kind of
certainty concerning the existence in the Universe of anything that
might, either closely or vaguely, resemble the Earth.

The Concept of the Plurality of the Worlds.

In spite of the above, modern specialists in astrophysics consider it
highly likely that planets similar to Earth are present in the Universe.
As far as the solar system is concerned, nobody seriously entertains the
possibility of finding general conditions similar to those on Earth on
another planet in this system. We must therefore seek for them outside
the solar system. The likelihood of their existing outside it is
considered quite probable for the following reasons:

It is thought that in our galaxy half of the 100 billion stars must,
like the Sun, have a planetary system. The fifty billion stars do
indeed, like the Sun, rotate very slowly. a characteristic which
suggests that they are surrounded by planets that are their satellites.
These stars are so far away that the possible planets are unobservable,
but their existence is thought to be highly probable on account of
certain trajectory characteristics ; a slight undulation of the star's
trajectory indicates the presence of a companion planetary satellite.
Thus the Barnard Star probably has at least one planetary companion with
a mass greater than that of Jupiter and may even have two satellites. As
P.

Guérin writes: "All the evidence points to the fact that planetary
systems are scattered in profusion all over the universe. The solar
system and the Earth are not unique." And as a corollary. "Life, like
the planets that harbour it, is scattered throughout the universe, in
those places where the physico-chemical conditions necessary for its
flowering and development are to be found."

Interstellar Material.

The basic process in the formation of the Universe therefore lay in the
condensation of material in the primary nebula followed by its division
into fragments that originally constituted galactic masses. The latter
in their turn split up into stars that provided the sub-product of the
process, i.e. the planets. These successive separations left among the
groups of principle elements what one might perhaps call 'remains'.
Their more scientific name is 'interstellar galactic material'. It has
been described in various ways; there are bright nebulae that reflect
the light received from other stars and are perhaps composed of 'dusts'
or 'smokes', to use the terminology of experts in astrophysics, and then
there are the dark nebulae that are less dense, consisting of
interstellar material that is even more modest,

known for its tendency to interfere with photometric measurements in
astronomy. There can be no doubt about the existence of 'bridges' of
material between the galaxies themselves. Although these gases may be
very rarefied, the fact that they occupy such a colossal space, in view
of the great distance separating the galaxies, could make them
correspond to a mass possibly greater than the total mass of the
galaxies in spite of the low density of the former. A. Boichot considers
the presence of these intergalactic masses to be of prime importance
which could "considerably alter ideas on the evolution of the
Universe."

We must now go back to the basic ideas on the Creation of the Universe
that were taken from the Qur'an and look at them in the light of modern
scientific data.

CONFRONTATION WITH THE DATA IN THE OUR'AN CONCERNING THE CREATION.

We shall examine the five main points on which the Qur'an gives
information about the Creation. 1) The six periods of the Creation of
the Heavens and the Earth covered, according to the Qur'an, the
formation of the celestial bodies and the Earth, and the development of
the latter until (with its 'sustenance') it became inhabitable by man.
In the case of the Earth, the events described in the Qur'an happened
over four periods. One could perhaps see in them the four geological
periods described by modern science, with man's appearance, as we
already know, taking place in the quaternary era. This is purely a
hypothesis since nobody has an answer to this question.

It must be noted however, that the formation of the heavenly bodies and
the Earth, as explained in verses 9 to 12, sura 41 (see page 136)
required two phases. If we take the Sun and its subproduct the Earth as
an example (the only one accessible to us), science informs us that
their formation occurred by a process of condensation of the primary
nebula and then their separation. This is exactly what the Qur'an
expresses very clearly when it refers to the processes that produced a
fusion and subsequent separation starting from a celestial 'smoke'.
Hence there is complete correspondence between the facts of the Qur'an
and the facts of science.

2) Science showed the interlocking of the two stages in the formation
of a star (like the Sun) and its satellite (like the Earth). This
interconnection is surely very evident in the text of the Qur'an
examined. 3) The existence at an early stage of the Universe of the
'smoke' referred to in the Qur'an, meaning the predominently gaseous
state of the material that composes it, obviously corresponds to the
concept of the primary nebula put forward by modern science. 4) The
plurality of the heavens, expressed in the Qur'an by the number 7, whose
meaning we have discussed, is confirmed by modern science due to the
observations experts in astrophysics have made on galactic systems and
their very large number. On the other hand the plurality of earths that
are similar to ours (from certain points of view at least) is an idea
that arises in the text of the Qur'an but has not yet been demonstrated
to be true by science; all the same, specialists consider this to be
quite feasible.

5) The existence of an intermediate creation between 'the Heavens' and
'the Earth' expressed in the Qur'an may be compared to the discovery of
those bridges of material present outside organized astronomic
systems.

Although not all the questions raised by the descriptions in the Qur'an
have been completely confirmed by scientific data, there is in any case
absolutely no opposition between the data in the Qur'an on the Creation
and modern knowledge on the formation of the Universe. This fact is
worth stressing for the Qur'anic Revelation, whereas it is very obvious
indeed that the present-day text of the Old Testament provides data on
the same events that are unacceptable from a scientific point of view.
It is hardly surprising, since the description of the Creation in the
Sacerdotal version of the Bible[^61] was written by priests at the time
of the deportation to Babylon who had the legalist intentions already
described and therefore compiled a description that fitted their
theological views.

The existence of such an enormous difference between the Biblical
description and the data in the Qur'an concerning the Creation is worth
underlining once again on account of the totally gratuitous accusations
leveled against Muhammad since the beginnings of Islam to the effect
that he copied the Biblical descriptions. As far as the Creation is
concerned, this accusation is totally unfounded. How could a man living
fourteen hundred years ago have made corrections to the existing
description to such an extent that he eliminated scientifically
inaccurate material and, on his own initiative, made statements that
science has been able to verify only in the present day? This hypothesis
is completely untenable. The description of the Creation given in the
Qur'an is quite different from the one in the Bible.

**ANSWERS TO CERTAIN OBJECTIONS**

Indisputably, resemblances do exist between narrations dealing with
other subjects, particularly religious history, in the Bible and in the
Qur'an. It is moreover interesting to note from this point of view how
nobody holds against Jesus the fact that he takes up the same sort of
facts and Biblical teachings. This does not, of course, stop people in
the West from accusing Muhammad of referring to such facts in his
teaching with the suggestion that he is an imposter because he presents
them as a Revelation. As for the proof that Muhammad reproduced in the
Qur'an what he had been told or dictated by the rabbis, it has no more
substance than the statement that a Christian monk gave him a sound
religious education. One would do well to re-read what R. Blachère in
his book, The Problem of Muhammad (Le Problème de Mahomet)[^62], has to
say about this 'fable'.

A hint of a resemblance is also advanced between other statements in
the Qur'an and beliefs that go back a very long way, probably much
further in time than the Bible.

More generally speaking, the traces of certain cosmogonic myths have
been sought in the Holy Scriptures; for example the belief held by the
Polynesians in the existence of primeval waters that were covered in
darkness until they separated when light appeared; thus Heaven and Earth
were formed. This myth is compared to the description of the Creation in
the Bible, where there is undoubtedly a resemblance. It would however be
superficial to then accuse the Bible of having copied this from the
cosmogonic myth.

It is just as superficial to see the Qur'anic concept of the division
of the primeval material constituting the Universe at its initial
stage-a concept held by modern science - as one that comes from various
cosmogonic myths in one form or another that express something
resembling it.

It is worth analysing these mythical beliefs and descriptions more
closely. Often an initial idea appears among them which is reasonable in
itself, and is in some cases borne out by what we today know (or think
we know) to be true, except that fantastic descriptions are attached to
it in the myth. This is the case of the fairly widespread concept of the
Heavens and the Earth originally being united then subsequently
separated. When, as in Japan, the image of the egg plus an expression of
chaos is attached to the above with the idea of a seed inside the egg
(as for all. eggs), the imaginative addition makes the concept lose all
semblance of seriousness. In other countries,

the idea of a plant is associated with it; the plant grows and in so
doing raises up the sky and separates the Heavens from the Earth. Here
again, the imaginative quality of the added detail lends the myth its
very distinctive character. Nevertheless a common characteristic
remains, i.e. the notion of a single mass at the beginning of the
evolutionary process leading to the formation of the Universe which then
divided to form the various 'worlds. that we know today.

The reason these cosmogonic myths are mentioned here is to underline
the way they have been embroidered by man's imagination and to show the
basic difference between them and the statements in the Qur'an on the
same subject. The latter are free from any of the whimsical details
accompanying such beliefs; on the contrary, they are distinguished by
the sober quality of the words in which they are made and their
agreement with scientific data.

Such statements in the Qur'an concerning the Creation, which appeared
nearly fourteen centuries ago, obviously do not lend themselves to a
human explanation.


