


The Animal and Vegetable Kingdoms The Animal and Vegetable Kingdoms

Numerous verses describing the origins of life have been assembled in
this chapter, along with certain aspects of the vegetable kingdom and
general or specific topics relating to the animal kingdom. The grouping
of verses scattered throughout the Book affords a general view of the
data the Qur'an contains on these subjects.

In the case of the subject of this and the following chapter, the
examination of the Qur'anic text has sometimes been particularly
delicate on account of certain difficulties inherent in the vocabulary.
These have only been overcome through the fact that scientific data
which have a bearing on the subject have been taken into consideration.
It is particularly so in the case of living beings, i.e. animal,
vegetable and human, where a confrontation with the teachings of science
is shown to be indispensable in the search for the meaning of certain
statements on these topics contained in the Qur'an.

It will become clear that numerous translations of these passages in
the Qur'an, made by men of letters, must be deemed inaccurate by the
scientist. The same holds true for commentaries made by those who do not
possess the scientific knowledge necessary for an understanding of the
text.

**A. THE ORIGINS OF LIFE.**

This question has always preoccupied man, both for himself and for the
living things around him. It will be examined here from a general point
of view. The case of man, whose appearance on Earth and reproduction
processes are the subject of lengthy exposés, will be dealt with in the
next chapter.

When the Qur'an describes the origins of life on a very broad basis, it
is extremely concise. It does so in a verse that also mentions the
process of the formation of the Universe, already quoted and commented
on:

--sura 21, verse 30: "Do not the Unbelievers see that the heavens and
the earth were joined together, then We clove them asunder and We got
every living thing out of the water. Will they then not believe?"

The notion of 'getting something out of something' does not give rise
to any doubts. The phrase can equally mean that every living thing was
made of water (as its essential component) or that every living thing
originated in water. The two possible meanings are strictly in
accordance with scientific data. Life is in fact of aquatic origin and
water is the major component of all living cells. Without water, life is
not possible. When the possibility of life on another planet is
discussed, the first question is always: does it contain a sufficient
quantity of water to support life?

Modern data lead us to think that the oldest living being must have
belonged to the vegetable kingdom: algae have been found that date from
the pre-Cambrian period, i.e. the time of the oldest known lands.
Organisms belonging to the animal kingdom probably appeared slightly
later. they too came from the sea.

What has been translated here by 'water' is the word ma' which means
both water in the sky and water in the sea, plus any kind of liquid. In
the first meaning, water is the element necessary to all vegetable
life:

--sura 20, verse 53. "(God is the One Who) sent water down from the sky
and thereby We brought forth pairs of plants each separate from the
other."

This is the first reference to the notion of a pair in the vegetable
kingdom. We shall return to this later.

In the second meaning, a liquid without any further indication of what
kind, the word is used in its indeterminate form to designate what is at
the basis of the formation of all animal life:

-sura 24, verse 45: "God created every animal from water."

We shall see further on how this word may also be applied to seminal
fluid[^70]. Whether it deals therefore with the origins of life in
general, or the element that gives birth to plants in the soil, or the
seed of animals, all the statements contained in the Qur'an on the
origin of life are strictly in accordance with modern scientific data.
None of the myths on the origins of life that abounded at the time the
Qur'an appeared are mentioned in the text.

B. THE VEGETABLE KINGDOM.

It is not possible to quote in their entirety all the numerous passages
in the Qur'an in which divine Beneficence is referred to concerning the
salutary effect of the rain which makes vegetation grow. Here are just
three verses on this subject:

--sura 16, verses 10 and 11: "(God) is the One Who sends water down
from the sky. For you this is a drink and out of it (grow) shrubs in
which you let (cattle) graze freely. Therewith for you He makes sown
fields, olives, palm-trees, vineyards and all kinds of fruit grow."

--sura 6, verse 99: "(God) is the One Who sent water down from the sky.
Therewith We brought forth plants of all kinds and from them the verdure
and We brought forth from it the clustered grains, and from the
palm-tree its spathes with bunches of dates (hanging) low, the gardens
of grapes, olives and pomegranates similar and different. Look at their
fruit, when they bear it, and their ripening. Verily, in that there are
signs for people who believe."

--sura 50, verses 9-11: "We sent down from the sky blessed water
whereby We caused to grow gardens, grains for harvest, tall palm-trees
with their spathes, piled one above the other- sustenance for (Our)
servants. Therewith We give (new) life to a dead land. So will be the
emergence (from the tombs)."

The Qur'an adds to these general data others that refer to more
specialized subjects:

**Balance in the Vegetable Kingdom**

--sura 15, verse 19: "The earth . . . We caused all kinds of things to
grow therein in due balance." The Different Qualities of Various Foods

--sura 13, verse 4: "On the earth are adjacent parts; vineyards, sown
fields, palm-trees, similar and not similar, watered with the same
water. We make some of them more excellent than others to eat and verily
in this are signs for wise people."

It is interesting to note the existence of these verses because they
show the sober quality of the terms used, and the absence of any
description that might highlight the beliefs of the times, rather than
fundamental truths. What particularly attracts our attention however,
are the statements in the Qur'an concerning reproduction in the
vegetable kingdom.

Reproduction in the Vegetable Kingdom

One must bear in mind that there are two methods of reproduction in the
vegetable kingdom: one sexual, the other asexual. It is only the first
which in fact deserves the term 'reproduction', because this defines a
biological process whose purpose is the appearance of a new individual
identical to the one that gave it birth.

Asexual reproduction is quite simply multiplication. It is the result
of the fragmentation of an organism which has separated from the main
plant and developed in such a way as to resemble the plant from which it
came. It is considered by Guilliermond and Mangenot to be a 'special
case of growth'. A very simple example of this is the cutting. a cutting
taken from a plant is placed in suitably watered soil and regenerated by
the growth of new roots. Some plants have organs specially designed for
this, while others give off spores that behave like seeds, as it were,
(it should be remembered that seeds are the results of a process of
sexual reproduction).

Sexual reproduction in the vegetable kingdom is carried out by the
coupling of the male and female parts of the generic formations united
on a same plant or located on separate plants.

This is the only form that is mentioned in the Qur'an.

-aura 20, verse 53: "(God is the One Who) sent water down from the sky
and thereby We brought forth pairs of plants each separate from the
other."

'One of a pair' is the translation of zauj (plural azwaj) whose
original meaning is: 'that which, in the company of another, forms a
pair'; the word is used just as readily for a married couple as for a
pair of shoes.

--sura 22, verse 5: "Thou seest the grounds lifeless. When We send down
water thereon it shakes and grows and puts forth every magnificent pair
(of plants)."

--sura 31, verse 10: "We caused to grow (on the earth) every noble pair
(of plants)."

--sura 13, verse 3: "Of all fruits (God) placed (on the earth) two of a
pair."

We know that fruit is the end-product of the reproduction process of
superior plants which have the most highly developed and complex
organization. The stage preceding fruit is the flower, which has male
and female organs (stamens and ovules). The latter, once pollen has been
carried to them, bear fruit which in turn matures and frees it seeds.
All fruit therefore implies the existence of male and female organs.
This is the meaning of the verse in the Qur'an.

It must be noted that for certain species, fruit can come from
non-fertilized flowers (parthenocarpic fruit), e.g. bananas, certain
types of pineapple, fig, orange, and vine. They can nevertheless also
come from plants that have definite sexual characteristics.

The culmination of the reproductive process comes with the germination
of the seed once its outside casing is opened (sometimes it is compacted
into a fruit-stone). This opening allows roots to emerge which draw from
the soil all that is necessary for the plant's slowed-down life as a
seed while it grows and produces a new plant.

A verse in the Qur'an refers to this process of germination:

--sura 6, verse 95: "Verily, God splits the grain and the
fruit-stone."

The Qur'an often restates the existence of these components of a pair
in the vegetable kingdom and brings the notion of a couple into a more
general context, without set limits:

--sura 36, Verse 36: "Glory be to Him Who created the components of
couples of every kind: of what the ground caused to grow, of themselves
(human beings) and of what you do not know."

One could form many hypotheses concerning the meaning of the 'things
men did not know' in Muhammad's day. Today we can distinguish structures
or coupled functions for them, going from the infinitesimally small to
the infinitely large, in the living as well as the non-living world. The
point is to remember these clearly expressed ideas and note, once again,
that they are in perfect agreement with modern science.

C. THE ANIMAL KINGDOM

There are several questions in the Qur'an concerning the animal kingdom
which are the subject of comments that call for a confrontation with
modern scientific knowledge. Here again, however, one would gain an
incomplete view of all that the Qur'an contains on this subject if one
were to leave out a passage such as the extract which follows. In this
passage, the creation of certain elements in the animal kingdom is
described with the purpose of making man reflect upon the divine
Beneficence extended to him. It is quoted basically to provide an
example of the way in which the Qur'an describes the harmonious
adaptation of Creation to man's needs; it relates in particular the case
of those people who live in a rural setting, since there is nothing that
could be examined from a different point of view.

-sura 16, verses 5 to 8: "(God) created cattle for you and (you find)
in them warmth, useful services and food, sense of beauty when you bring
them home and when you take them to pasture. They bear your heavy loads
to lands you could not reach except with great personal effort. Verily,
your Lord is Compassionate and Merciful; (He created) horses, mules and
donkeys for you to ride and for ornament. And He created what you do not
know."

Alongside these general remarks, the Qur'an sets out certain data on
highly diversified subjects:


--reproduction in the animal kingdom.
--references to the existence of animal communities.
--statements concerning bees, spiders and birds.
--remarks on the source of constituents of animal milk.

1. Reproduction in the Animal Kingdom.

This is very summarily dealt with in verses 45 and 46, sura 53:

"(God) fashioned the two of a pair, the male and the female, from a
small quantity of liquid when it is poured out." The 'pair' is the same
expression that we have already encountered in the verses which deal
with reproduction in the vegetable kingdom. Here, the sexes are given.
The detail which is absolutely remarkable is the precision with which it
is stated that a small quantity of liquid is required for reproduction.
The word itself signifying 'sperm' is used. The relevance of this remark
will be commented upon in the next chapter.

2. References to the Existence of Animal Communities.

--sura 6, Verse 38: "There is no animal on earth, no bird which flies
on wings, that (does not belong to) communities like you. We have not
neglected anything in the Book (of Decrees). Then to their Lord they
will be gathered."

There are several points in this verse which require comment. Firstly,
it would seem that there is a description of what happens to animals
after their death: Islam does not apparently, have any doctrine on this
point. Then there is predestination in general[^71] which would seem to
be mentioned here. It could be conceived as absolute predestination or
relative, i.e. limited to structures and a functional organization that
condition modes of behaviour: the animal acts upon various exterior
impulses in terms of a particular conditioning.

Blachère states that an older commentator, such as Razi, thought that
this verse only referred to instinctive actions whereby animals worship
God. Sheik Si Boubakeur Hamza, in the commentary to his translation of
the Koran, speaks of "the instinct which, according to Divine Wisdom,
pushes all beings to group together, so that they demand that the work
of each member serve the whole group."

Animal behaviour has been closely investigated in recent decades, with
the result that genuine animal communities have been shown to exist. Of
course, for a long time now the results of a group or community's work
have been examined and this has led to the acceptance of a community
organization. It has only been recently however, that the mechanisms
which preside over this kind of organization have been discovered for
certain species. The most studied and best known case is undoubtedly
that of bees, to whose behaviour the name von Frisch is linked. Von
Frisch, Lorenz and Tinbergen received the 1973 Nobel Prize for their
work in this field.

3. Statements Concerning Bees, Spiders and Birds.

When specialists on the nervous system wish to provide striking
examples of the prodigious organization directing animal behaviour,
possibly the animals referred to most frequently are bees, spiders and
birds (especially migratory birds). Whatever the case, there is no doubt
that these three groups constitute a model of highly evolved
organization.

The fact that the text of the Qur'an refers to this exemplary trio in
the animal kingdom is in absolute keeping with the exceptionally
interesting character that each of these animals has from a scientific
point of view.

Bees

In the Qur'an, bees are the subject of the longest commentary:

--Sura 16, verses 68 and 69:[^72] "Thy Lord inspired the bees: Choose
your dwelling in the hills, in the trees and in what (man) built. Eat of
all fruit and follow the ways of your Lord in humility. From within
their bodies comes a liquor of different colours where is a remedy for
men."

It is difficult to know what exactly is meant by the order to follow
the ways of the Lord in humility, unless it is to be seen in general
terms. All that may be said, with regard to the knowledge that has been
gained of their behaviour, is that here-as in each of the three animal
eases mentioned as examples in the Qur'an-there is a remarkable nervous
organization supporting their behaviour. It is known that the pattern of
a bee's dance is a means of communication to other bees; in this way,
bees are able to convey to their own species the direction and distance
of flowers from which nectar is to be gathered. The famous experiment
performed by von Frisch has shown the meaning of this insect's movement
which is intented to transmit information between worker bees.

Spiders

Spiders are mentioned in the Qur'an to stress the flimsiness of their
dwelling which is the most fragile of all. They have a refuge that is as
precarious, according to the Qur'an, as the dwelling of those who have
chosen masters other than God.

--sura 29, verse 41: "Those who choose masters other than God are like
the spider when it takes for itself a dwelling. Verily, the flimsiest
dwelling is the dwelling of the spider. If they but knew." A spider's
web is indeed constituted of silken threads secreted by the animal's
glands and their calibre is infinitely fine. Its fragility cannot be
imitated by man. Naturalists are intrigued by the extraordinary pattern
of work recorded by the animal's nervous cells, which allows it to
produce a geometrically perfect web.

Birds

Birds are frequently mentioned in the Qur'an. They appear in episodes
in the life of Abraham, Joseph, David, Solomon and Jesus. These
references do not however have any bearing on the subject in hand.

The verse concerning the existence of animal communities on the ground
and bird communities in the sky has been noted above:

--sura 6 verse 38: "There is no animal on the earth, no bird which
flies on wings, that (does not belong to) communities like you. We have
not neglected anything in the Book (of Decrees) . Then to their Lord
they will be gathered."

Two other verses highlight the birds' strict submission to God's
Power.

--sura 16, verse 79: "Do they not look at the birds subjected in the
atmosphere of the sky? None can hold them up (in His Power) except
God." --sura 67, verse 19:

"Have they not looked at the birds above them spreading their wings out
and folding them? None can hold them up (in his Power) except the
Beneficent." The translation of one single word in each of these verses
is a very delicate matter. The translation given here expresses the idea
that God holds the birds up in His Power. The Arabic verb in question is
amsaka, whose original meaning is 'to put one's hand on, seize, hold,
hold someone back'.

An illuminating comparison can be made between these verses, which
stress the extremely close dependence of the birds' behavior on divine
order, to modern data showing the degree of perfection attained by
certain species of bird with regard to the programming of their
movements. It is only the existence of a migratory programme in the
genetic code of birds that can account for the extremely long and
complicated journeys which very young birds, without any prior
experience and without any guide, are able to accomplish. This is in
addition to their ability to return to their departure point on a
prescribed date. Professor Hamburger in his book, Power and Fragility
(La Puissance et la Fragilité)[^73], gives as an example the well-known
case of the 'mutton-bird' that lives in the Pacific, with its journey of
over 16,500 miles in the shape of the figure 8[^74]. It must be
acknowledged that the highly complicated instructions for a journey of
this kind simply have to be contained in the bird's nervous cells. They
are most definitely programmed, but who is the programmer?

4. The Source of the Constituents of Animal Milk.

This is defined in the Qur'an in strict accordance with the data of
modern knowledge (sura 16, verse 66). The translation and interpretation
of this verse given here is my own because even modern translations
habitually give it a meaning which is, in my opinion, hardly acceptable.
Here are two examples:

--R. Blachère's translation:[^75] "Verily, in your cattle there is a
lesson for you! We give you a pure milk to drink, excellent for its
drinkers; (it comes) from what, in their bellies, is between digested
food and blood."

--Professor Hamidullah's translation:[^76] "Verily, there is food for
thought in your cattle. From what is in their bellies, among their
excrement and blood, We make you drink pure milk, easy for drinkers to
imbibe."

If these texts were shown to a physiologist, he would reply that they
were extremely obscure, the reason being that there hardly appears to be
much agreement between them and modern notions, even on a very
elementary level. These translations are the work of highly eminent
Arabists. It is a well known fact however, that a translator, even an
expert, is liable to make mistakes in the translation of scientific
statements, unless he happens to be a specialist in the discipline in
question.

The most valid translation seems to me to be the following:

"Verily, in cattle there is a lesson for you. We give you to drink of
what is inside their bodies, coming from a conjunction between the
contents of the intestine and the blood, a milk pure and pleasant for
those who drink it." (sura 16, verse 66) This interpretation is very
close to the one given in the Muntakab, 1973, edited by the Supreme
Council for Islamic Affairs, Cairo, which relies for its support on
modern physiology.

From the point of view of its vocabulary, the proposed translation may
be justified as follows: I have translated «inside their bodies' and
not, as R. Blachère and Professor Hamidullah have done, 'inside their
bellies'. This is because the word batn also means 'middle', «interior
of something', as well as 'belly'. The word does not here have a meaning
that is anatomically precise. 'Inside their bodies' seems to concur
perfectly with the context.

The notion of a 'primary origin' of the constituents of milk is
expressed by the word min (in English 'from') and the idea of a
conjunction by the word baini. The latter not only signifies «among' but
also 'between' in the other translations quoted. It is however also used
to express the idea that two things or two people are brought
together.

From a scientific point of view, physiological notions must be called
upon to grasp the meaning of this verse. The substances that ensure the
general nutrition of the body come from chemical transformations which
occur along the length of the digestive tract. These substances come
from the contents of the intestine. On arrival in the intestine at the
appropriate stage of chemical transformation, they pass through its wall
and towards the systemic circulation. This passage is effected in two
ways: either directly, by what are called the 'lymphatic vessels', or
indirectly, by the portal circulation. This conducts them first to the
liver, where they undergo alterations, and from here they then emerge to
join the systemic circulation. In this way everything passes through the
bloodstream.

The constituents of milk are secreted by the mammary glands. These are
nourished, as it were, by the product of food digestion brought to them
via the bloodstream. Blood therefore plays the role of collector and
conductor of what has been extracted from food, and it brings nutrition
to the mammary glands, the producers of milk, as it does to any other
organ.

Here the initial process which sets everything else in motion is the
bringing together of the contents of the intestine and blood at the
level of the intestinal wall itself. This very precise concept is the
result of the discoveries made in the chemistry and physiology of the
digestive system. It was totally unknown at the time of the Prophet
Muhammad and has been understood only in recent times. The discovery of
the circulation of the blood, was made by Harvey roughly ten centuries
after the Qur'anic Rev elation.

I consider that the existence in the Qur'an of the verse referring to
these concepts can have no human explanation on account of the period in
which they were formulated.


