


Human Reproduction Human Reproduction

From the moment ancient human writings enter into detail (however
slight) on the subject of reproduction, they inevitably make statements
that are inaccurate. In the Middle Ages-and even in more recent
time-reproduction was surrounded by all sorts of myths and
superstitions. How could it have been otherwise, considering the fact
that to understand its complex mechanisms, man first had to possess a
knowledge of anatomy, the discovery of the microscope had to be made,
and the so-called basic sciences had to be founded which were to nurture
physiology, embryology, obstetrics, etc.

The situation is quite different in the Qur'an. The Book mentions
precise mechanisms in many places and describes clearly-defined stages
in reproduction, without providing a single statement marred by
inaccuracy. Everything in the Qur'an is explained in simple terms which
are easily understandable to man and in strict accordance with what was
to be discovered much later on.

Human reproduction is referred to in several dozen verses of the
Qur'an, in various contexts. It is explained through statements which
deal with one or more specific points. They must be assembled to give a
general idea of the verses as a whole, and here, as for the other
subjects already examined, the commentary is in this way made easier.

**REMINDER OF CERTAIN BASIC CONCEPTS.**

It is imperative to recall certain basic concepts which were unknown at
the time of the Qur'anic Revelation and the centuries that followed.
Human reproduction is effected by a series of processes which we share
in common with mammals. The starting point is the fertilization of an
ovule which has detached itself from the ovary.

It takes place in the Fallopian tubes half-way through the menstrual
cycle. The fertilizing agent is the male sperm, or more exactly, the
spermatozoon, a single fertilizing cell being all that is needed. To
ensure fertilization therefore, an infinitely small quantity of
spermatic liquid containing a large number of spermatozoons (tens of
millions at a time) is .required. This liquid is produced by the
testicles and temporarily stored in a system of reservoirs and canals
that finally lead into the urinary tract; other glands are situated
along the latter which contribute their own additional secretions to the
sperm itself.

The implantation of the egg fertilized by this process takes place at a
precise spot in the female reproductive system: it descends into the
uterus via a Fallopian tube and lodges in the body of the uterus where
it soon literally implants itself by insertion into the thickness of the
mucosa and of the muscle, once the placenta has been formed and with the
aid of the latter. If the implantation of the fertilized egg takes
place, for example, in the Fallopian tubes instead of in the uterus,
pregnancy will be interrupted.

Once the embryo begins to be observable to the naked eye, it looks like
a small mass of flesh at the centre of which the appearance of a human
being is at first indistinguishable. It grows there in progressive
stages which are very well known today; they lead to the bone structure,
the muscles, the nervous system, the circulation, and the viscerae, etc.
These notions will serve as the terms of reference against which the
statements in the Qur'an on reproduction are to be compared.

**HUMAN REPRODUCTION IN THE QUR'AN.**

It is not easy to gain an idea of what the Qur'an contains on this
subject. The first difficulty arises from the fact already mentioned,
i.e. that the statements dealing with this subject are scattered
throughout the Book. This is not however a major difficulty. What is
more likely to mislead the inquiring reader is, once again, the problem
of vocabulary.

In fact there are still many translations and commentaries in
circulation today that can give a completely false idea of the Qur'anic
Revelation on this subject to the scientist who reads them. The majority
of translations describe, for example, man's formation from a 'blood
clot' or an 'adhesion'. A statement of this kind is totally unacceptable
to scientists specializing in this field. In the paragraph dealing with
the implantation of the egg in the maternal uterus, we shall see the
reasons why distinguished Arabists who lack a scientific background have
made such blunders.

This observation implies how great the importance of an association
between linguistic and scientific knowledge is when it comes to grasping
the meaning of Qur'anic statements on reproduction.

The Qur'an sets out by stressing the successive transformations the
embryo undergoes before reaching its destination in the maternal
uterus. --sura 82, verses 6 to 8:

"O Man! Who deceives you about your Lord the Noble, Who created you and
fashioned you in due proportion and gave you any form He willed." --sura
71, verse 14: "(God) fashioned you in (different) stages."

Along with this very general observation, the text of the Qur'an draws
attention to several points concerning reproduction which might be
listed as follows:

1) fertilization is performed by only a very small volume of liquid.
2) the constituents of the fertilizing liquid.
3) the implantation of the fertilized egg.
4) the evolution of the embryo.

1. Fertilization is Performed by Only a Very Small Volume of Liquid.

The Qur'an repeats this concept eleven times using the following
expression: --sura 16, verse 4: "(God) fashioned man from a small
quantity (of sperm)."

The Arabic word nutfa has been translated by the words 'small quantity
(of sperm)' because we do not have the terms that are strictly
appropriate. This word comes from a verb signifying 'to dribble, to
trickle'; it is used to describe what remains at the bottom of a bucket
that has been emptied out. It therefore indicates a very small quantity
of liquid. Here it is sperm because the word is associated in another
verse with the word sperm.

--sura 75, verse 37: "Was (man) not a small quantity of sperm which has
been poured out?"

Here the Arabic word mani signifies sperm. Another verse indicates that
the small quantity in question is put in a 'firmly established lodging'
(qarar) which obviously means the genital organs.

--sura 23, verse 13. God is speaking: "Then We placed (man) as a small
quantity (of sperm) in a safe lodging firmly established."

It must be added that the adjective which in this text refers to the
'firmly established lodging' makin is, I think, hardly translatable. It
expresses the idea of a firmly established and respected place. However
this may be, it refers to the spot where man grows in the maternal
organism. It IS important to stress the concept of a very small quantity
of liquid needed in the fertilization process, which is strictly in
agreement with what we know on this subject today.

2. The Constituents of the Fertilizing Liquid.

The Qur'an describes the liquid enabling fertilization to take place in
terms which it is interesting to examine:

a) 'sperm', as has been stated precisely (sura 75, verse 37)
b) 'a liquid poured out'. "Man was fashioned from a liquid poured out"
(sura 86, verse 6)
c) 'a despised liquid' (sura 32, verse 8 and sura 77, verse 20)

The adjective 'despised' (mahin) would, it seems, be interpreted not so
much on account of the nature of the liquid itself, as more the fact
that it is emitted through the outlet of the urinary tract, using the
channels that are employed for passing urine. d) 'Mixtures' or 'mingled
liquids' (amsaj): "Verily, we fashioned man from a small quantity of
mingled liquids" (sura 76, verse 2) Many commentators, like professor
Hamidullah, consider these liquids to be the male and female agents. The
same view was shared by older commentators, who could not have had any
idea of the physiology of fertilization, especially its biological
conditions in the case of the woman. They thought that the word simply
meant the unification of the two elements.

Modern authors however, like the commentator of the Muntakab edited by
the Supreme Council for Islamic Affairs, Cairo, have corrected this view
and note here that the 'small quantity of sperm' is made up of various
component parts. The commentator in the Muntakab does not go into
detail, but in my opinion it is a very judicious observation.

What are the components parts of sperm?

Spermatic liquid is formed by various secretions which come from the
following glands:

a) the testicles: the secretion of the male genital gland contains
spermatozoons, which are elongated cells with a long flagellum; they are
bathed in a sero-fluid liquid.
b) the seminal vesicles. these organs are reservoirs of spermatozoons
and are placed near the prostate gland; they also secrete their own
liquid but it does not contain any fertilizing agents.
c) the prostate gland: this secretes a liquid which gives the sperm its
creamy texture and characteristic odour.
d) the glands annexed to the urinary tract: Cooper's or Méry's glands
secrete a stringy liquid and Littré's glands give off mucous.

These are the origins of the 'mingled liquids' which the Qur'an would
appear to refer to.

There is, however, more to be said on this subject. When the Qur'an
talks of a fertilizing liquid composed of different components, it also
informs us that man's progeny will be maintained by something which may
be extracted from this liquid.

This is the meaning of verse 8, sura 32: "(God) made his progeny from
the quintessence of a despised liquid."

The Arabic word, translated here by the word 'quintessence', is sulala.
It signifies 'something which is extracted, the issue of something else,
the best part of a thing'. In whatever way it is translated, it refers
to a part of a whole. Fertilization of the egg and reproduction are
produced by a cell that is very elongated: its dimensions are measured
in ten thousandths of a millimetre. In normal conditions[^77], only one
single cell among several tens of millions produced by a man will
actually penetrate the ovule; a large number of them are left behind and
never complete the journey which leads from the vagina to the ovule,
passing through the uterus and Fallopian tubes. It is therefore an
infinitesimally small part of the extract from a liquid whose
composition is highly complex which actually fulfills its function.

In consequence, it is difficult not to be struck by the agreement
between the text of the Qur'an and the scientific knowledge we possess
today of these phenomena.

3. The Implantation of the Egg In the Female Genital Organs.

Once the egg has been fertilized in the Fallopian tube it descends to
lodge inside the uterus; this is called the 'implantation of the egg'.
The Qur'an names the lodging of the fertilized egg womb:

-sura 22, verse 5: "We cause whom We[^78] will to rest in the womb for
an appointed term."

The implantation of the egg in the uterus (womb) is the result of the
development of villosities, veritable elongations of the egg, which,
like roots in the soil, draw nourishment from the thickness of the
uterus necessary to the egg's growth. These formations make the egg
literally cling to the uterus. This is a discovery of modern times.

The act of clinging is described five different times in the Qur'an.
Firstly in verses 1 and 2 of sura 96: "Read, in the name of thy Lord Who
fashioned, Who fashioned man from something which clings."

'Something which clings' is the translation of the word 'alaq. It is
the original meaning of the word. A meaning derived from it, 'blood
clot', often figures in translation; it is a mistake against which one
should guard: man has never passed through the stage of being a 'blood
clot'. The same is true for another translation of this term, 'adhesion'
which is equally inappropriate. The original sense of 'something which
clings' corresponds exactly to today's firmly established reality.

This concept is recalled in four other verses which describe successive
transformations from the small quantity of sperm through to the end:

--sura 22, verse 5: "We have fashioned you from . . . something which
clings."

--sura 23, verse 14: "We have fashioned the small quantity (of sperm)
into something which clings."

--sura 40, verse 67: "(God) fashioned you from a small quantity (of
sperm), from something which clings."

-sura 75, verse 37-38: "Was (man) not a small quantity of sperm which
has been poured out? After that he was something which clings; then God
fashioned him in due proportion."

The organ which harbours the pregnancy is qualified in the Qur'an by a
word which, as we have seen, is still used in Arabic to signify the
uterus. In some suras, it is called a 'lodging firmly established' (sura
23, verse 13, quoted above and sura 77, verse 21)[^79].

4. Evolution of the Embryo inside the Uterus.

The Qur'anic description of certain stages in the development of the
embryo corresponds exactly to what we today know about it, and the
Qur'an does not contain a single statement that is open to criticism
from modern science.

After 'the thing which clings' (an expression which is well-founded, as
we have seen) the Qur'an informs us that the embryo passes through the
stage of 'chewed flesh', then osseous tissue appears and is clad in
flesh (defined by a different word from the preceding which signifies
'intact flesh').

--sura 23, verse 14: "We fashioned the thing which clings into a chewed
lump of flesh and We fashioned the chewed flesh into bones and We
clothed the bones with intact flesh."

'Chewed flesh' is the translation of the word mudga; 'intact flesh' is
lahm. This distinction needs to be stressed. The embryo is initially a
small mass. At a certain stage in its development, it looks to the naked
eye like chewed flesh. The bone structure develops inside this mass in
what is called the mesenchyma. The bones that are formed are covered in
muscle; the word lahm applies to them.

Another verse which requires extremely delicate interpretation is the
following:

--sura 39, verse 6: "(God) fashions you inside the bodies of your
mothers, formation after formation, in three (veils of) darkness."
(zulumat) Modern intrepreters of the Qur'an see in this verse the three
anatomical layers that protect the infant during gestation: the
abdominal wall, the uterus itself, and the surroundings of the foetus
(placenta, embryonic membranes, amniotic fluid). I am obliged to quote
this verse for the sake of completeness; the terpretation given here
does not seem to me to be disputable from an anatomical point of view
but is this what the text of the Qur'an really means?

It is known how certain parts appear to be completely out of proportion
during embryonic development with what is later to become the
individual, while others remain in proportion.

This is surely the meaning of the word mukallaq which signifies 'shaped
in proportion' as used in verse 5, sura 22 to describe this phenomenon.
"We fashioned . . . into something which clings . . . into a lump of
flesh in proportion and out of proportion." The Qur'an also describes
the appearance of the senses and the viscerae:

--sura 32, verse 9: "(God) appointed for you the sense of hearing,
sight and the viscerae."

It refers to the formation of the sexual organs:

--sura 53, verses 45-46: "(God) fashioned the two of a pair, the male
and the female, from a small quantity (of sperm) when it is poured
out."

The formation of the sexual organs is described in two sura of the
Qur'an:

--sura 35, verse 11: "God created you from dust, then from a
sperm-drop, then He made you pairs (the male and female)."

--sura 75, verse 39: "And, (God) made of him a pair, the male and
female."

As has already been noted, all statements in the Qur'an must be
compared with today's firmly established concepts: the agreement between
them is very clear. It is however very important to compare them with
the general beliefs On this subject that were held at the time of the
Qur'anic Revelation in order to realize just how far people were in
those days from having views on these problems similar to those
expressed here in the Qur'an. There can be no doubt that they would have
been unable to interpret the Revelation in the way we can today because
we are helped by the data modern knowledge affords us. It was, in fact,
only during the Nineteenth century that people had a slightly clearer
view of this question.

Throughout the Middle Ages, the most diversified doctrines originated
in unfounded myths and speculations: they persisted for several
centuries after this period. The most fundamental stage in the history
of embryology was Harvey's statement (1651) that "all life initially
comes from an egg". At this time however, when nascent science had
nevertheless benefited greatly (for the subject in hand) from the
invention of the microscope, people were still talking about the
respective roles of the egg and the spermatozoon. Buffon, the great
naturalist, was one of those in favor of the egg theory, but Bonnet
supported the theory of the seeds being 'packed together'. the ovaries
of Eve, the mother of the human race, were supposed to have contained
the seeds of all human beings, packed together one inside the other.
This hypothesis came into favor in the Eighteenth century.

More than a thousand years before our time, at a period when whimsical
doctrines still prevailed, men had a knowledge of the Qur'an. The
statements it contains express in simple terms truths of primordial
importance which man has taken centuries to discover.

THE QUR'AN AND SEX EDUCATION.

Our epoch believes that it has made manifold discoveries in all
possible fields. It is thought that great innovations have been made in
the field of sex education, and the knowledge of the facts of life which
has been opened up to young people is regarded as an achievement of the
modern world. Previous centuries were noted for their deliberate
obscurity on this point and many people say that religion- without
stating which religion-is the cause of it.

The information set out above is proof however that fourteen centuries
ago theoretical questions (as it were) on human reproduction were
brought to man's attention. This was done as far as was possible, taking
into account the fact that the anatomical and physiological data needed
for further explanations were lacking. One should also remember that, to
be understood, it was necessary to use simple language suited to the
level of comprehension of those who listened to the Preaching.

Practical considerations have not been silently ignored. There are many
details in the Qur'an on the practical side of life in general, and the
way man should behave in the many situations of his existence. His sex
life is no exception.

Two verses in the Qur'an deal with sexual relations themselves. They
are described in terms which unite the need for precision with that of
decency. When translations and explanatory commentaries are consulted
however, one is struck by the divergences between them. I have pondered
for a long time on the translation of such verses, and am indebted to
Doctor A. K. Giraud, Former Professor at the Faculty of Medicine,
Beirut, for the following:

--sura 86, verse 6 and 7:

"(Man) was fashioned from a liquid poured out. It issued (as a result)
of the conjunction of the sexual area of the man and the sexual area of
the woman." The sexual area of the man is indicated in the text of the
Qur'an by the world sulb (singular). The sexual areas of the woman are
designated in the Qur'an by the word tara'ib (plural).

This is the translation which appears to be most satisfactory. It is
different from the one that is often given by English and French
translators, i.e. " (Man) has been created by a liquid poured out which
issues from between the vertebral column and the bones of the breast."
This would seem more to be an interpretation than a translation. It is
hardly comprehensible.

The behavior of a man in his intimate relationships with his wife is
stated explicitly.

There is the order concerning the menstruation period contained in
verses 222 and 223, sura 2; God gives the following command to the
Prophet: --sura 2, verses 222 and 223:

"They (the Believers) question thee concerning menstruation. Say: This
is an evil. Keep away from women during menstruation and do not approach
them until they are clean. When they have purified themselves, go to
them, as God ordered it to you. "Verily, God loves the repentants and
loves those who purified themselves. "Your wives are a tilth. Go to your
tilth as you will. Do (some good act) for your souls beforehand."

The beginning of this passage is very clear in meaning: it formally
forbids a man to have sexual contact with a woman who has her period.
The second part describes the process of tilling which the sower
performs before sowing the seed which is to germinate and produce a new
plant. Through this image therefore, stress is indirectly laid on the
importance of bearing in mind the final purpose of sexual contact, i.e.
reproduction. The translation of the final phrase is by R. Blachère: it
contains an order which seems to refer to the preliminaries before
sexual contact.

The orders given here are of a very general kind. The problem of
contraception has been raised with regard to these verses: neither here,
nor anywhere else, is reference made to this subject.

Nor is provoked abortion referred to. The numerous passages quoted
above on the successive transformations of the embryo make it quite
clear, however, that man is considered to be constituted as of the stage
described by the existence of 'something which clings'. This being so,
the absolute respect of the individual human being, which is referred to
so often in the Qur'an, brings with it a total condemnation of provoked
abortion. This attitude is today shared by all monotheistic religions.

Sexual relations are permitted at night during the Fast in the month of
Ramadan. The verse concerning Ramadan is as follows: --sura 2, verse
187:

"Permitted to you, on the night of the fast, is to break chastity with
your wives. They are a garment for you and you are a garment for them.
So hold intercourse with them and seek what God has ordained for you."
In contrast to this, no exception to the rule is made for pilgrims in
Makka during the celebration days of the Pilgrimage.

--sura 2, verse 197: "For whom undertakes (the duty of) the Pilgrimage
in its time, no wooing and no license." This prohibition is formal, as
is the fact that other activities are forbidden, e.g. hunting, fighting,
etc. Menstruation is again mentioned in the Qur'an in connection with
divorce. The Book contains the following verse:

--sura 65, verse 4: "For your wives who despair of menstruation, if you
doubt about them, their period of waiting will be three months. For
those who never have their monthly periods and those who are pregnant
their period will be until they lay down their burden." The waiting
period referred to here is the time between the announcement of the
divorce and the time it comes into effect. Those women of whom it is
said 'they despair of menstruation' have reached the menopause. A
precautionary period of three months is envisaged for them. Once this
period is completed, divorced women who have reached the menopause may
remarry.

For those who have not yet menstruated, the pregnancy period has to be
awaited. For pregnant women, divorce only comes into effect once the
child is born.

All these laws are in perfect agreement with physiological data. One
can, furthermore, find in the Qur'an the same judicious legal provision
in the texts dealing with widowhood.

Thus, the theoretical statements dealing with reproduction, and the
practical instructions on the sex life of couples, do not contradict and
cannot be placed in opposition to the data we have from modern
knowledge, nor with anything that can be logically derived from it.


