


Qur'anic and Biblical Narrations Qur'anic and Biblical Narrations

**General Outlines**

A large number of subjects dealt with in the Bible are also found in
the Qur'an. Firstly, there are narrations referring to the Prophets;
Noah, Abraham, Joseph, Elias, Jonah, Job and Moses; the Kings of Israel;
Saul, David, Solomon-to name just some of the main narrations they share
in common. There then follow more specific accounts of great events in
the course of which the supernatural has intervened, e.g. the Creation
of the Earth and Heavens, the Creation of Man, the Flood, the Exodus.
Finally, there is all that has to do with Jesus and His mother Mary as
far as it concerns the New Testament.

What reflections do the subjects dealt with in the two Scriptures
provoke when viewed in the light of our modern knowledge of them from
extra-Scriptural sources? Parallel: Qur'an/Gospel and Modem Knowledge.

With regard to the parallel of Qur'an/Gospels, one must first note that
none of the subjects referred to in the Gospels, which were criticized
from a scientific point of view (see Part Two of this book), is quoted
in the Qur'an.

Jesus is referred to many times in the Qur' an, e.g. Mary's
annunciation of the nativity to his father, the annunciation of the
miraculous nativity to Mary, Jesus's stature as a Prophet of the highest
order, His role as a Messiah, the Revelation He directs to Man which
confirms and modifies the Torah, His preachings, His disciples and
apostles, the miracles, His Ascension to God, His role in the Last
Judgment, etc.

Suras 3 and 19 of the Qur'an (the second of which bears Mary's name)
devote long passages to Jesus's family. They describe His mother Mary's
nativity, her youth and the annunciation of her miraculous motherhood.
Jesus is always called 'Son of Mary'. His ancestry is exclusively given
with regard to His mother's side, which is quite logical since Jesus had
no biological father. Here the Qur'an differs from Matthew's and Luke's
Gospels: as we have already seen, they give the paternal genealogies of
Jesus which are, moreover, different from each other.

In the Qur'an, Jesus is placed according to His maternal genealogy in
the line of Noah, Abraham, and Mary's father (Imran in the
Qur'an): --sura 3, verses 33 and 34: "God chose Adam, Noah, the family
of Abraham and the family of Imran above all His creatures, as
descendants one from another."

So Jesus is descended from Noah and Abraham on His mother Mary's side,
and from her father Imran. The errors made in the naming of the
'ancestors of Jesus' found in the Gospels are not present in the Qur'an,
nor are the impossibilities in the genealogies contained in the Old
Testament of Abraham's ancestry, both of which were examined in the
first and second parts of this book.

Once again, this fact must be noted if one is to be objective, and yet
again its great importance appears very clearly in the face of the
unfounded statements which are made claiming that Muhammad, the author
of the Qur'an, largely copied the Bible. One wonders in that case who or
what reason compelled him to avoid copying the passages the Bible
contains on Jesus's ancestry, and to insert at this point in the Qur'an
the corrections that put his text above any criticism from modern
knowledge. The Gospels and Old Testament texts are quite the opposite;
from this point of view they are totally unacceptable.

Parallel: Qur'an/Old Testament and Modem Knowledge.

In the case of the Old Testament, certain aspects of this parallel have
already been dealt with. The Creation of the world, for example, was the
subject of a critical study made in the Old Testament section of this
book. The same subject was examined with regard to the Qur'anic
Revelation. Comparisons were made and there is no need to cover this
ground again.

It seems that historical knowledge is too vague and archaeological data
too scarce for parallels to be established in the light of modern
knowledge on problems concerning the Kings of Israel, who form the
subject of narrations in both the Qur'an and the Bible.

Whether or not one can tackle the problem of the Prophets in the light
of modern data depends on the extent to which the events described have
left traces which may or may not have come down to us.

There are however two subjects dealt with in both the Qur'an and the
Bible which should command our attention and which need to be examined
in the light of modern knowledge. They are as follows:

--the Flood,
--the Exodus.

--The first because it has not left traces in the history of
civilization which support the Biblical narration, whereas modern data
do not permit us to criticize the narration contained in the
Qur'an. --The second because the Biblical and Qur'anic narrations
evidently complement each other in their broad outlines, and modern data
seem to provide both of them with remarkable historical support.


**The Flood**

The Biblical Narration of the Flood and the Criticism Leveled at It- A
Reminder. The examination of the Old Testament description of the Flood
in the first part of this book led to the following observations: There
is not just one description of the Flood, but two, written at different
times;

--the Yahvist version which dates from the Ninth century B.C.

--the Sacerdotal version dating from the Sixth century B.C., so called
because it was the work of priests of the time. These two narrations are
not juxtaposed, but interwoven so that part of one is fitted in-between
parts of the other, i.e. paragraphs from one source alternate with
passage from the other.

The commentary to the translation of Genesis by Father de Vaux, a
professor at the Biblical School of Jerusalem, shows very clearly how
the paragraphs are distributed between the two sources. The narration
begins and ends with a Yahvist passage. There are ten Yahvist paragraphs
altogether and between each one a Sacerdotal passage has been inserted
(there are a total of nine Sacerdotal paragraphs). This mosaic of texts
is only coherent when read from a point of view which takes the
succession of episodes into account, since there are blatant
contradictions between the two sources. Father de Vaux describes them as
"two accounts of the Flood, in which the cataclysm is caused by
different agents and lasts different lengths of time, and where Noah
receives into the Ark a different number of animals."

When seen in the light of modern knowledge, the Biblical description of
the Flood as a whole is unacceptable for the following reasons:

a) The Old Testament ascribes to it the character of a universal
cataclysm.

b) Whereas the paragraphs from the Yahvist text do not date the Flood,
the Sacerdotal text situates it at a point in time where a cataclysm of
this kind could not have occurred.

The following are arguments supporting this opinion:

The Sacerdotal narration states quite precisely that the Flood took
place when Noah was 600 years old. According to the genealogies in
chapter 5 of Genesis (also taken from the Sacerdotal text and quoted in
the first part of this book), we know that Noah is said to have been
born 1,056 years after Adam. Consequently, the Flood would have taken
place 1,655 years after the creation of Adam. The genealogical table of
Abraham moreover, taken from the same text and given in Genesis (11,
10-32), allows us to estimate that Abraham was born 292 years after the
Flood.

As we know that (according to the Bible) Abraham was alive in roughly
1850 B.C., the Flood would therefore be situated in the Twenty-first or
Twenty-second century B.C. This calculation is in strict keeping with
the information in old editions of the Bible which figures prominently
at the head of the Biblical text.

This was at a time when the lack of human knowledge on the subject was
such that the chronological data contained in the Bible were accepted
without question by its readers-for want of any arguments to the
contrary.[^80]

How is it possible to conceive today of a universal cataclysm in the
Twenty-first or Twenty-second century B.C. which destroyed life on all
the earth's surface (except for the people and animals in the Ark)? By
this time, civilizations had flourished in several parts of the globe,
and their vestiges have now come down to posterity. In Egypt at this
time, for example, the Intermediate Period followed the end of the Old
Kingdom and preceded the beginning of the Middle Kingdom. In view of our
knowledge of the history of this period, it would be absurd to maintain
that the Flood had destroyed all civilization at this time.

Thus It may be affirmed from a historical point of view that the
narration of the Flood as it is presented in the Bible is in evident
contradiction with modern knowledge. The formal proof of man's
manipulation of the Scriptures is the existence of the two texts.

The Narration of the Flood Contained in the Qur'an.

The Qur'an gives a general version which is different from that
contained in the Bible and does not give rise to any criticisms from a
historical point of view.

It does not provide a continuous narration of the Flood. Numerous suras
talk of the punishment inflicted upon Noah's people. The most complete
account of this is in sura 11, verses 25 to 49. Sura 71, which bears
Noah's name, describes above all Noah's preachings, as do verses 105 to
115, sura 26. Before going into the actual course taken by events, we
must consider the Flood as described in the Qur' an by relating it to
the general context of the punishment God inflicted on communities
guilty of gravely infringing His Commandments.

Whereas the Bible describes a universal Flood intended to punish
ungodly humanity as a whole, the Qur'an, in contrast, mentions several
punishments inflicted on certain specifically defined communities.

This may be seen in verses 35 to 39, sura 25:

"We gave Moses the Scripture and appointed his brother Aaron with him
as vizier. We said: Go to the people who have denied Our signs. We
destroyed them completely. When the people of Noah denied the
Messengers, We drowned them and We made of them a sign for mankind. (We
destroyed the tribes) of A^d and Tamud, the companions of Rass and many
generations between them. We warned each of them by examples and We
annihilated them completely."

Sura 7, verses 59 to 93 contains a reminder of the punishments brought
upon Noah's people, the A^d, the Tamud, Lot (Sodom) and Madian
respectively.

Thus the Qur'an presents the cataclysm of the Flood as a punishment
specifically intended for Noah's people: this is the first basic
difference between the two narrations.

The second fundamental difference is that the Qur'an, in contrast to
the Bible, does not date the Flood in time and gives no indication as to
the duration of the cataclysm itself.

The causes of the flooding are roughly the same in both narrations. The
Sacerdotal description in the Bible (Genesis 7, 11) cites two causes
which occurred simultaneously. "On that day all the fountains of the
great deep burst forth, and the windows of the heavens were opened." The
Qur'an records the following in verses 11 and 12, sura 54:

"We opened the Gates of Heaven with pouring water. And We caused the
ground to gush forth springs, so the waters met according to the decree
which has been ordained."

The Qur'an is very precise about the contents of the Ark. The order God
gave to Noah was faithfully executed and it was to do the
following: --sura 11, verse 40: "(In the Ark) load a pair of every kind,
thy family, save this one against whom the word has already gone forth,
and those who believe. But only a few had believed with him."

The person excluded from the family is an outcast son of Noah. We learn
(sura 11, verses 45 and 46) how Noah's supplications on this person's
behalf to God were unable to make Him alter His decision. Apart from
Noah's family (minus the outcast son), the Qur'an refers to the few
other passengers on board the Ark who had believed in God.

The Bible does not mention the latter among the occupants of the Ark.
In fact, it provides us with three different versions of the Ark's
contents: --according to the Yahvist version, a distinction is made
between 'pure' animals and birds, and 'impure' animals (seven[^81] pairs,
i.e. seven males and seven females, of each 'pure' species, was taken
into the Ark and only one pair of each 'impure' species).

-according to a modified Yahvist verse (Genesis 7, 8) there was only
one pair of each species, whether 'pure' or 'impure'. -according to the
Sacerdotal version, there was Noah, his family (with no exceptions) and
a pair taken from each species.

The narration in the Qur'an of the flooding itself is contained in sura
11, verses 25 to 49 and in sura 23, verses 23 to 30. The Biblical
narrative does not present any important differences.

In the Bible, the place where the Ark comes to rest is in the Ararat
Mountains (Genesis 8, 4) and for the Qur'an it is the Judi (sura 11,
verse 44.) This mountain is said to be the highest of the Ararat range
in Armenia, but nothing proves that the names were not changed by man to
tally with the two narratives. This is confirmed by R. Blachère:
according to him there is a peak in Arabia named Judi. The agreement of
names may well be artificial.

In conclusion, it is possible to state categorically what major
differences exist here between the Biblical and Qur'anic narrations.
Some of them escape critical examination because objective data are
lacking. When, however, it is possible to check the statements in the
Scriptures in the light of the established data, the incompatibility
between the Biblical narration-i.e. the information given on its place
in time and geographical extent-and the discoveries that have
contributed to modern knowledge is all too clear.

In contrast to this, the narration contained in the Qur'an is free from
anything which might give rise to objective criticism. One might ask if
it is possible that, between the time of the Biblical narration and the
one contained in the Qur'an, man could have acquired knowledge that shed
light on this event. The answer is no, because from the time of the Old
Testament to the Qur'an, the only document man possessed on this ancient
story was the Bible itself. If human factors are unable to account for
the changes in the narrations which affected their meaning with regard
to modern knowledge, another explanation has to be accepted, i.e. a
Revelation which came after the one contained in the Bible.


