


The Qur'an, Hadith and Modern Science The Qur'an, Hadith and Modern
Science

The Qur'an does not constitute the sole source of doctrine and
legislation in Islam. During Muhammad's life and after his death,
complementary information of a legislative nature was indeed sought in
the study of the words and deeds of the Prophet.

Although writing was used in the transmission of hadith from the very
beginning, a lot of this came also from the oral tradition. Those who
undertook to assemble them in collections made the kind of enquiries
which are always very taxing before recording accounts of past events.
They nevertheless had a great regard for accuracy in their arduous task
of collecting information. This is illustrated by the fact that for all
of the Prophet's sayings, the most venerable collections always bear the
names of those responsible for the account, going right back to the
person who first collected the information from members of Muhammad's
family or his companions.

A very large number of collections of the Prophet's words and deeds
thus appeared under the title of Hadiths. The exact meaning of the word
is 'utterances', but it is also customary to use it to mean the
narration of his deeds.

Some of the collections were made public in the decades following
Muhammad's death. Just over two hundred years were to pass before some
of the most important collections appeared. The most authentic record of
the facts is in the collections of Al Bukhari and Muslim, which date
from over two hundred years after Muhammad and which provide a wider
trustworthy account. In recent years, a bilingual Arabic/English edition
has been provided by Doctor Muhammed Muhsin Khan, of the Islamic
University of Madina.[^102] Al Bukhari's work is generally regarded as
the most authentic after the Qur'an and was translated into French
(1903-1914) by Houdas and Marcais under the title Les Traditions
Islamiques (Islamic Traditions). The Hadiths are therefore accessible to
those who do not speak Arabic. One must, however, be wary of certain
translations made by Europeans, including the French translation,
because they contain inaccuracies and untruths which are often more of
interpretation than of actual translation. Sometimes, they considerably
change the real meaning of a hadith, to such an extent indeed that they
attribute a sense to it which it does not contain.

As regards their origins, some of the hadiths and Gospels have one
point in common which is that neither of them was compiled by an author
who was an eyewitness of the events he describes. Nor were they compiled
until some time after the events recorded. The hadiths, like the
Gospels, have not all been accepted as authentic. Only a small number of
them receive the quasi-unanimous approval of specialists in Muslim
Tradition so that, except al-Muwatta, Sahih Muslim and Sahih al-Bukhari,
one finds in the same book, hadiths presumed to be authentic side by
side with ones which are either dubious, or should be rejected
outright.

In contrast to Canonic Gospels which though questioned by some modern
scholars but which have never been contested by Christian high
authorities, even those hadiths that are most worthy to be considered as
authentic have been the subject of criticism. Very early in the history
of Islam, masters in Islamic thought exercised a thorough criticism of
the hadiths, although the basic book (The Qur'an) remained the book of
reference and was not to be questioned.

I thought it of interest to delve into the literature of the hadiths to
find out how Muhammad is said to have expressed himself, outside the
context of written Revelation, on subjects that were to be explained by
scientific progress in following centuries. Al-though Sahih Muslim is
also an authentic collection, in this study 1 have strictly limited
myself to the texts of the hadiths which are generally considered to be
the most authentic, i.e. those of Al Bukhari. I have always tried to
bear in mind the fact that these texts were compiled by men according to
data received from a tradition which was partially oral and that they
record certain facts with a greater or lesser degree of accuracy,
depending on the individual errors made by those who transmitted the
narrations. These texts are different from other hadiths which were
transmitted by a very large number of people and are unquestionably
authentic.[^103]

I have compared the findings made during an examination of the hadiths
with those already set out in the section on the Qur'an and modern
science. The results of this comparison speak for themselves. The
difference is in fact quite staggering between the accuracy of the data
contained in the Qur'an, when compared with modern scientific knowledge,
and the highly questionable character of certain statements in the
hadiths on subjects whose tenor is essentially scientific. These are the
only hadiths to have been dealt with in this study.

Hadiths which have as their subject the interpretation of certain
verses of the Qur'an sometimes lead to commentaries which are hardly
acceptable today.

We have already seen the great significance of one verse (sura 36,
verse 36) dealing with the Sun which "runs its course to a settled
place". Here is the interpretation given of it in a hadith: "At sunset,
the sun . . . prostrates itself underneath the Throne, and takes
permission to rise again, and it is permitted and then (a time will come
when) it will be about to prostrate itself . . . it will ask permission
to go on its course . . . it will be ordered to return whence it has
come and so it will rise in the West . . ." (Sahih Al Bukhari). The
original text (The Book of the Beginning of the Creation, Vol. IV page
283, part 54, chapter IV, number 421) is obscure and difficult to
translate. This passage nevertheless contains an allegory which implies
the notion of a course the Sun runs in relation to the Earth: science
has shown the contrary to be the case. The authenticity of this hadith
is doubtful (Zanni).

Another passage from the same work (The Book of the Beginning of the
Creation, vol. IV page 283, part 54, chapter 6, number 430) estimates
the initial stages in the development of the embryo very strangely in
time: a forty-day period for the grouping of the elements which are to
constitute the human being, another forty days during which the embryo
is represented as 'something which clings', and a third forty-day period
when the embryo is designated by the term 'chewed flesh'. Once the
angels have intervened to define what this individual's future is to be,
a soul is breathed into him. This description of embryonic evolution
does not agree with modern data.

Whereas the Qur'an gives absolutely no practical advice on the remedial
arts, except for a single comment (sura 16, verse 69) on the possibility
of using honey as a therapeutic aid (without indicating the illness
involved), the hadiths devote a great deal of space to these subjects. A
whole section of Al Bukhari's collection (part 76) is concerned with
medicine. In the French translation by Houdas and Marcais it goes from
page 62 to 91 of volume 4, and in Doctor Muhammad Muhsin Khan's
bilingual Arabic/English edition from page 395 to 452, of volume VII.
There can be no doubt that these pages contain some hadiths which are
conjectural (Zanni), but they are interesting as a whole because they
provide an outline of the opinions on various medical subjects that it
was possible to hold at the time. One might add to them several hadiths
inserted in other parts of Al Bukhari's collection which have a medical
tenor.

This is how we come to find statements in them on the harms caused by
the Evil Eye, witchcraft and the possibility of exorcism; although a
certain restriction is imposed on the paid use of the Qur'an for this
purpose. There is a hadith which stresses that certain kinds of date may
serve as protection against the effects of magic, and magic may be used
against poisonous snakebites.

We should not be surprised however to find that at a time when there
were limited possibilities for the scientific use of drugs, people were
advised to rely on simple practices; natural treatments such as
blood-letting, cupping, and cauterization, head -shaving against lice,
the use of camel's milk and certain seeds such as black cumin, and
plants such as indian Qust. It was also recommended to burn a mat made
of palm-tree leaves and put the ash from it into a wound to stop
bleeding. In emergencies, all available means that might genuinely be of
use had to be employed. It does not seem-a priori-to be a very good
idea, however, to suggest that people drink camel's urine.

It is difficult today to subscribe to certain explanations of subjects
related to various illnesses. Among them, the following might be
mentioned: --the origins of a fever. there are four statements bearing
witness to the fact that "fever is from the heat of hell" (Al Bukhari,
The Book of Medicine, vol. VII, chapter 28, page 416).

--the existence of a remedy for every illness: "No disease God created,
but He created its treatment" (Ibid. chapter 1, page 396). This concept
is illustrated by the Hadith of the Fly. "If a fly falls into the vessel
of any of you, let him dip all of it (into the vessel) and then throw it
away, for in one of its wings there is a disease and in the other there
is healing (antidote for it). i.e. the treatment for that disease"
(Ibid. chapter 15-16, pages 462-463, also The Book of the Beginning of
Creation part 54, chapters 15 & 16.)

--abortion provoked by the sight of a snake (which can also blind).
This is mentioned in The Book of the Beginning of Creation, Vol.
IV(chapter 13 and 14, pages 330 & 334).

--haemorrhages between periods. The Book of Menses (Menstrual Periods)
Vol. VI, part 6, pages 490 & 495 contains two hadiths on the cause of
haemorrhages between periods (chapters 21 & 28). They refer to two
women: in the case of the first, there is a description (undetailed) of
the symptoms, with a statement that the haemorrhage comes from a blood
vessel; in the second, the woman had experienced haemorrhages between
periods for seven years, and the same vascular origin is stated. One
might suggest hypotheses as to the real causes of the above, but it is
not easy to see what arguments could have been produced at the time to
support this diagnosis. This could nevertheless have been quite
accurate.

--the statement that diseases are not contagious. Al Bukhari's
collection of hadiths refers in several places (chapters 19, 25, 30, 31,
53 and 54, Vol. VII, part 76, of the Book of Medicine) to certain
special cases, e.g. leprosy (page 408), plague (pages 418 & 422),
camel's scabies (page 447), and also provides general statements. The
latter are however placed side by side with glaringly contradictory
remarks: it is recommended, for example, not to go to areas where there
is plague, and to stay away from lepers.

Consequently, it is possible to conclude that certain hadiths exist
which are scientifically unacceptable. There is a doubt surrounding
their authenticity. The purpose of reference to them lies solely in the
comparison that they occasion with the verses of the Qur'an mentioned
above: these do not contain a single inaccurate statement. This
observation clearly has considerable importance.

One must indeed remember that at the Prophet's death, the teachings
that were received from this fell into two groups:

--firstly, a large number of Believers knew the Qur'an by heart
because, like the Prophet, they had recited it many, many times;
transcriptions of the text of the Qur'an already existed moreover, which
were made at the time of the Prophet and even before the Hegira[^104].

-secondly, the members of his following who were closest to him and the
Believers who had witnessed his words and deeds had remembered them and
relied on them for support, in addition to the Qur'an, when defining a
nascent doctrine and legislation.

In the years that were to follow the Prophet's death, texts were to be
compiled which recorded the two groups of teachings he had left. The
first gathering of hadiths was performed roughly forty years after the
Hegira, but a first collection of Qur'anic texts had been made
beforehand under Caliph Abu Bakr, and in particular Caliph Uthman, the
second of whom published a definitive text during his Caliphate, i.e.
between the twelfth and twenty-fourth years following Muhammad's
death.

What must be heavily stressed is the disparity between these two groups
of texts, both from a literary point of view and as regards their
contents. It would indeed be unthinkable to compare the style of the
Qur'an with that of the hadiths. What is more, when the contents of the
two texts are compared in the light of modern scientific data, one is
struck by the oppositions between them. I hope I have succeeded in
showing what follows: --on the one hand, statements in the Qur'an which
often appear to be commonplace, but which conceal data that science was
later to bring to light.

--on the other hand, certain statements in the hadiths which are shown
to be in absolute agreement with the ideas of their times but which
contain opinions that are deemed scientifically unacceptable today.
These occur in an aggregate of statements concerning Islamic doctrine
and legislation, whose authenticity is unquestioningly acknowledged.

Finally, it must be pointed out that Muhammad's own attitude was quite
different towards the Qur'an from what it was towards his personal
sayings. The Qur'an was proclaimed by him to be a divine Revelation.
Over a period of twenty years, the Prophet classified its sections with
the greatest of care, as we have seen. The Qur'an represented what had
to be written down during his own lifetime and learned by heart to
become part of the liturgy of prayers. The hadiths are said, in
principle, to provide an account of his deeds and personal reflections,
but he left it to others to find an example in them for their own
behaviour and to make them public however they liked: he did not give
any instructions.

In view of the fact that only a limited number of hadiths may be
considered to express the Prophet's thoughts with certainty, the others
must contain the thoughts of the men of his time, in particular with
regard to the subjects referred to here. When these dubious or
inauthentic hadiths are compared to the text of the Qur'an, we can
measure the extent to which they differ. This comparison highlights (as
if there were still any need to) the striking difference between the
writings of this period, which are riddled with scientific inaccurate
statements, and the Qur'an, the Book of Written Revelation, that is free
from errors of this kind.[^105]


**General Conclusions**

At the end of this study, a fact that stands forth very clearly is that
the predominant opinion held in the West on the texts of the Holy
Scriptures we possess today is hardly very realistic. We have seen the
conditions, times and ways in which the elements constituting the Old
Testament, the Gospels and the Qur'an were collected and written down:
the circumstances attendant upon the birth of the Scriptures for these
three Revelations differed widely in each case, a fact which had
extremely important consequences concerning the authenticity of the
texts and certain aspects of their contents.

The Old Testament represents a vast number of literary works written
over a period of roughly nine hundred years. It forms a highly disparate
mosaic whose pieces have, in the course of centuries, been changed by
man. Some parts were added to what already existed, so that today it is
sometimes very difficult indeed to identify where they came from
originally.

Through an account of Jesus's words and deeds, the Gospels were
intended to make known to men the teachings he wished to leave them on
completion of his earthly mission. Unfortunately, the authors of the
Gospels were not eyewitnesses of the data they recorded. They were
spokesmen who expressed data that were quite simply the information that
had been preserved by the various Judeo-Christian communities on Jesus's
public life, passed down by oral traditions or writings which no longer
exist today, and which constituted an intermediate stage between the
oral tradition and the definitive texts.

This is the light in which the Judeo-Christian Scriptures should be
viewed today, and-to be objective-one should abandon the classic
concepts held by experts in exegesis.

The inevitable result of the multiplicity of sources is the existence
of contradictions and oppositions: many examples have been given of
these. The authors of the Gospels had (when talking of Jesus) the same
tendency to magnify certain facts as the poets of French Medieval
literature in their narrative poems. The consequence of this was that
events were presented from each individual narrator's point of view and
the authenticity of the facts reported in many cases proved to be
extremely dubious. In view of this, the few statements contained in the
Judeo-Christian Scriptures which may have something to do with modern
knowledge should always be examined with the circumspection that the
questionable nature of their authenticity demands.

Contradictions, improbabilities and incompatibilities with modern
scientific data may be easily explained in terms of what has just been
said above. Christians are nevertheless very surprised when they realize
this, so great have been the continuous and far-reaching efforts made
until now by many official commentators to camouflage the very obvious
results of modern studies, under cunning dialectical acrobatics
orchestrated by apologetic lyricism. A case in point are the genealogies
of Jesus given in Matthew and Luke, which were contradictory and
scientifically unacceptable. Examples have been provided which reveal
this attitude very clearly. John's Gospel has been given special
attention because there are very important differences between it and
the other three Gospels, especially with regard to the fact that his
Gospel does not describe the institution of the Eucharist: this is not
generally known.

The Qur'anic Revelation has a history which is fundamentally different
from the other two. It spanned a period of some twenty years and, as
soon as it was transmitted to Muhammad by Archangel Gabriel, Believers
learned it by heart. It. was also written down during Muhammad's life.
The last recensions of the Qur'an were effected under Caliph Uthman
starting some twelve years after the Prophet's death and finishing
twenty-four years after it. They had the advantage of being checked by
people who already knew the text by heart, for they had learned it at
the time of the Revelation itself and had subsequently recited it
constantly. Since then, we know that the text has been scrupulously
preserved. It does not give rise to any problems of authenticity.

The Qur'an follows on from the two Revelations that preceded it and is
not only free from contradictions in its narrations, the sign of the
various human manipulations to be found in the Gospels, but provides a
quality all of its own for those who examine it objectively and in the
light of science i.e. its complete agreement with modern scientific
data. What is more, statements are to be found in it (as has been shown)
that are connected with science: and yet it is unthinkable that a man of
Muhammad's time could have been the author of them. Modern scientific
knowledge therefore allows us to understand certain verses of the Qur'an
which, until now, it has been impossible to interpret.

The comparison of several Biblical and Qur'anic narrations of the same
subject shows the existence of fundamental differences between
statements in the former, which are scientifically unacceptable, and
declarations in the latter which are in perfect agreement with modern
data: this was the case of the Creation and the Flood, for example. An
extremely important complement to the Bible was found in the text of the
Qur'an on the subject of the history of the Exodus, where the two texts
were very much in agreement with archaeological findings, in the dating
of the time of Moses. Besides, there are major differences between the
Qur'an and the Bible on the other subjects: they serve to disprove all
that has been maintained- without a scrap of evidence-concerning the
allegation that Muhammad is supposed to have copied the Bible to produce
the text of the Qur'an.

When a comparative study is made between the statements connected with
science to be found in the collection of hadiths, which are attributed
to Muhammad but are often of dubious authenticity (although they reflect
the beliefs of the period), and the data of a similar kind in the
Qur'an, the disparity becomes so obvious that any notion of a common
origin is ruled out.

In view of the level of knowledge in Muhammad's day, it is
inconceivable that many of the statements In the Qur'an which are
connected with science could have been the work of a man. It is,
moreover, perfectly legitimate, not only to regard the Qur'an as the
expression of a Revelation, but also to award it a very special place,
on account of the guarantee of authenticity it provides and the presence
in it of scientific statements which, when studied today, appear as a
challenge to explanation in human terms.


