


Contradictions and Improbabilities in the Descriptions Contradictions
and Improbabilities in the Descriptions

Each of the four Gospels contains a large number of descriptions of
events that may be unique to one single Gospel or common to several if
not all of them. When they are unique to one Gospel, they sometimes
raise serious problems. Thus, in the case of an event of considerable
importance, it is surprising to find the event mentioned by only one
evangelist; Jesus's Ascension into heaven on the day of Resurrection,
for example. Elsewhere, numerous events are differently described-
sometimes very differently indeed-by two or more evangelists. Christians
are very often astonished at the existence of such contradictions
between the Gospels-if they ever discover them. This is because they
have been repeatedly told in tones of the greatest assurance that the
New Testament authors were the eyewitnesses of the events they
describe!

Some of these disturbing improbabilities and contradictions have been
shown in previous chapters. It is however the later events of Jesus's
life in particular, along with the events following the Passion, that
form the subject of varying or contradictory descriptions.

**DESCRIPTIONS OF THE PASSION**

Father Roguet himself notes that Passover is placed at different times
in relation to Jesus's Last Supper with His disciples in the Synoptic
Gospels and John's Gospel. John places the Last Supper 'before the
Passover celebrations' and the other three evangelists place it during
the celebrations themselves. Obvious improbabilities emerge from this
divergence: a certain episode becomes impossible because of the position
of Passover in relation to it. When one knows the importance it had in
the Jewish liturgy and the importance of the meal where Jesus bids
farewell to his disciples, how is it possible to believe that the memory
of one event in relation to the other could have faded to such an extent
in the tradition recorded later by the evangelists?

On a more general level, the descriptions of the Passion differ from
one evangelist to another, and more particularly between John and the
first three Gospels. The Last Supper and the Passion in John's Gospel
are both very long, twice as long as in Mark and Luke, and roughly one
and a half times as long as Matthew's text. John records a very long
speech of Jesus to His disciples which takes up four chapters (14 to 17)
of his Gospel. During this crowning speech, Jesus announces that He will
leave His last instructions and gives them His last spiritual testament.
There is no trace of this in the other Gospels. The same process can
work the other way however; Matthew, Luke and Mark all relate Jesus's
prayer in the Garden of Gethsemane, but John does not mention it.

**JOHN'S GOSPEL DOES NOT DESCRIBE THE INSTITUTION OF THE EUCHARIST.**

The most important fact that strikes the reader of the Passion in
John's Gospel is that he makes absolutely no reference to the
institution of the Eucharist during the Last Supper of Jesus with His
Apostles.

There is not a single Christian who does not know the iconography of
the Last Supper, where Jesus is for the last time seated among His
Apostles at table. The world's greatest painters have always represented
this final gathering with John sitting near Jesus, John whom we are
accustomed to considering as the author of the Gospel bearing that
name.

However astonishing it may appear to many , the majority of specialists
do not consider John to have been the author of the fourth Gospel, nor
does the latter mention the institution of the Eucharist. The
consecration of the bread and wine, which become the body and blood of
Jesus, is the most essential act of the Christian liturgy. The other
evangelists refer to it, even if they do so in differing terms, as we
have noted above. John does not say anything about it. The four
evangelists' descriptions have only two single points in common: the
prediction of Peter's denial and of the betrayal by one of the Apostles
(Judas Iscariot is only actually named in Matthew and John). John's
description is the only one which refers to Jesus washing his disciples'
feet at the beginning of the meal.

How can this omission in John's Gospel be explained?

If one reasons objectively, the hypothesis that springs immediately to
mind (always supposing the story as told by the other three evangelists
is exact) is that a passage of John's Gospel relating the said episode
was lost. This is not the conclusion arrived at by Christian
commentators.

Let us now examine some of the positions they have adopted.

In his Little Dictionary of the New Testament (Petit Dictionnaire du
Nouveau Testament) A. Tricot makes the following entry under Last Supper
(Cène). "Last meal Jesus partook of with the Twelve Disciples during
which he instituted the Eucharist. It is described in the Synoptic
Gospels" (references to Matthew, Mark and Luke) . ". . . and the fourth
Gospel gives us further details" (references to John). In his entry on
the Eucharist (Eucharistie), the same author writes the following. "The
institution of the Eucharist is briefly related in the first three
Gospels:

it was an extremely important part of the Apostolic system of religious
instruction. Saint John has added an indispensable complement to these
brief descriptions in his account of Jesus's speech on the bread of life
(6, 32-58)." The commentator consequently fails to mention that John
does not describe Jesus's intitution of the Eucharist. The author speaks
of 'complementary details', but they are not complementary to the
institution of the Eucharist (he basically describes the ceremony of the
washing of the Apostles' feet).

The commentator speaks of the 'bread of life', but it is Jesus's
reference (quite separate from the Last Supper) to God's daily gift of
manna in the wilderness at the time of the Jews' exodus led by Moses.
John is the only one of the evangelists who records this allusion. In
the following passage of his Gospel, John does, of course, mention
Jesus's reference to the Eucharist in the form of a digression on the
bread, but no other evangelist speaks of this episode.

One is surprised therefore both by John's silence on what the other
three evangelists relate and their silence on what, according to John,
Jesus is said to have predicted.

The commentators of the Ecumenical Translation of the Bible, New
Testament, do actually acknowledge this omission in John's Gospel. This
is the explanation they come up with to account for the fact that the
description of the institution of the Eucharist is missing: "In general,
John is not very interested in the traditions and institutions of a
bygone Israel. This may have dissuaded him from showing the
establishment of the Eucharist in the Passover liturgy". Are we
seriously to believe that it was a lack of interest in the Jewish
Passover liturgy that led John not to describe the institution of the
most fundamental act. in the liturgy of the new religion?

The experts in exegesis are so embarrassed by the problem that
theologians rack their brains to find prefigurations or equivalents of
the Eucharist in episodes of Jesus's life recorded by John. O. Culmann
for example, in his book, The New Testament (Le Nouveau Testament),
states that "the changing of the water into wine and the feeding of the
five thousand prefigure the sacrament of the Last Supper (the
'Eucharist')".

It is to be remembered that the water was changed into wine because the
latter had failed at a wedding in Cana. (This was Jesus's first miracle,
described by John in chapter 2, 1-12. He is the only evangelist to do
so). In the case of the feeding of the five thousand, this was the
number of people who were fed on 5 barley loaves that were miraculously
multiplied.

When describing these events, John makes no special comment, and the
parallel exists only in the mind of this expert in exegesis. One can no
more understand the reasoning behind the parallel he draws than his view
that the curing of a paralized man and of a man born blind 'predict the
baptism' and that 'the water and blood issuing from Jesus's side after
his death unite in a single fact' a reference to both baptism and the
Eucharist.

Another parallel drawn by the same expert in exegesis conconcerning the
Eucharist is quoted by Father Roguet in his book Initiation to the
Gospel (Initiation à l'Evangile). "Some theologians, such as Oscar
Culmann, see in the description of the washing of the feet before the
Last Supper a symbolical equivalent to the institution of the Eucharist
. . ."

It is difficult to see the cogency of all the parallels that
commentators have invented to help people accept more readily the most
disconcerting omission in John's Gospel.

**APPEARANCES OF JESUS RAISED FROM THE DEAD.**

A prime example of imagination at work in a description has already
been given in the portrayal of the abnormal phenomena said to have
accompanied Jesus's death given in Matthew's Gospel. The events that
followed the Resurrection provided material for contradictory and even
absurd descriptions on the part of all the evangelists.

Father Roguet in his Initiation to the Gospel (Initiation à
l'Evangile), page 182, provides examples of the confusion, disorder and
contradiction reigning in these writings:

"The list of women who came to the tomb is not exactly the same in each
of the three Synoptic Gospels. In John only one woman came: Mary
Magdalene. She speaks in the plural however, as if she were accompanied:
'we do not know where they have laid him.' In Matthew the Angel predicts
to the women that they will see Jesus in Galilee. A few moments later
however, Jesus joins them beside the tomb. Luke probably sensed this
difficulty and altered the source a little. The Angel says: "Remember
how he told you, while he was still in Galilee . . .' In fact, Luke only
actually refers to three appearances . . ."-"John places two appearances
at an interval of one week in the upper room at Jerusalem and the third
beside the lake, in Galilee therefore. Matthew records only one
appearance in Galilee." The commentator excludes from this examination
the last section of Mark's Gospel concerning the appearances because he
believes this was 'probably written by another hand'.

All these facts contradict the mention of Jesus's appearances,
contained in Paul's First Letter to the Corinthians (15,5-7), to more
than five hundred people at once, to James, to all the Apostles and, of
course, to Paul himself.

After this, it is surprising therefore to find that Father Roguet
stigmatizes, in the same book, the 'grandiloquent and puerile phantasms
of certain Apocrypha' when talking of the Resurrection. Surely these
terms are perfectly appropriate to Matthew and Paul themselves: they are
indeed in complete contradiction with the other Apostles on the subject
of the appearances of Jesus raised from the dead.

Apart from this, there is a contradiction between Luke's description,
in the Acts of the Apostles, of Jesus's appearance to Paul and what Paul
himself succinctly tells us of it. This has led Father Kannengiesser in
his book, Faith in the Resurrection, Resurrection of Faith (Foi en la
Resurrection, Resurrection de la Foi), 1974, to stress that Paul, who
was 'the sole eyewitness of Christ's resurrection, whose voice comes
directly to us from his writings[^39], never speaks of his personal
encounter with Him Who was raised from the dead-'. . . except for three
extremely , 'he refrains moreover from describing discreet references .
. . it.'

The contradiction between Paul, who was the sole eyewitness but is
dubious, and the Gospels is quite obvious.

O. Culmann in his book, The New Testament (Le Nouveau Testament), notes
the contradictions between Luke and Matthew. The first situates Jesus's
appearances in Judea, the second in Galilee.

One should also remember the Luke-John contradiction.

John (21, 1-14) relates an episode in which Jesus raised from the dead
appears to the fishermen beside the Sea of Tiberias; they subsequently
catch so many fish that they are unable to bring them all in. This is
nothing other than a repetition of the miracle catch of fish episode
which took place at the same spot and was also described by Luke (5,
1-11), as an event of Jesus's life.

When talking of these appearances, Father Roguet assures us in his book
that 'their disjointed, blurred and disordered character inspires
confidence' because all these facts go to show that there was no
connivance between the evangelists[^40], otherwise they would definitely
have co-ordinated their stories. This is indeed a strange line of
argument. In actual fact, they could all have recorded, with complete
sincerity, traditions of the communities which (unknown to them) all
contained elements of fantasy. This hypothesis in unavoidable when one
is faced with so many contradictions and improbabilities in the
description of of events.

**ASCENSION OF JESUS**

Contradictions are present until the very end of the descriptions
because neither John nor Matthew refer to Jesus's Ascension. Mark and
Luke are the only one to speak of it.

For Mark (16, 19), Jesus was 'taken up into heaven, and sat down at the
right hand of God' without any precise date being given in relation to
His Resurrection. It must however be noted that the final passage of
Mark containing this sentence is, for Father Roguet, an 'invented' text,
although for the Church it is canonic!

There remains Luke, the only evangelist to provide an undisputed text
of the Ascension episode (24, 51): 'he parted from them[^41] and was
carried up into heaven'. The evangelist places the event at the end of
the description of the Resurrection and appearance to the eleven
Apostles: the details of the Gospel description imply that the Ascension
took place on the day of the Resurrection. In the Acts of the Apostles,
Luke (whom everybody believes to be their author) describes in chapter
1, 3 Jesus's appearance to the Apostles, between the Passion and the
Ascension, in the following terms:

"To them he presented himself alive after his passion by many proofs,
appearing to them during forty days, and speaking of the kingdom of
God." The placing of the Christian festival of the Ascension at forty
days after Easter, the Festival of the Resurrection, originates from
this passage in the Acts of the Apostles. The date is therefore set in
contradiction to Luke's Gospel: none of the other Gospel texts say
anything to justify this in a different way.

The Christian who is aware of this situation is highly disconcerted by
the obviousness of the contradiction. The Ecumenical Translation of the
Bible, New Testament, acknowledges the facts but does not expand on the
contradiction. It limits itself to noting the relevance the forty days
may have had to Jesus's mission.

Commentators wishing to explain everything and reconcile the
irreconciliable provide some strange interpretations on this subject.
The Synopsis of the Four Gospels edited in 1972 by the Bibli cal School
of Jerusalem (vol. 2, page 451) contains, for example, some very strange
commentaries.

The very word , Ascension' is criticized as follows: "In fact there was
no ascension in the actual physical sense because God is no more 'on
high' than he is 'below' " (sic). It is difficult to grasp the sense of
this comment because one wonders how Luke could otherwise have expressed
himself.

Elsewhere, the author of this commentary sees a 'literary artifice' in
the fact that "in the Acts, the Ascension is said to have taken place
forty days after the resurrection". this 'artifice' is "intended to
stress the notion that the period of Jesus's appearances on earth is at
an end". He adds however, in relation to the fact that in Luke's Gospel,
"the event is situated during the evening of Easter Sunday, because the
evangelist does not put any breaks between the various episodes recorded
following the discovery of the empty tomb on the morning of the
resurrection..."-". . . surely this is also a literary artifice,
intended to allow a certain lapse of time before the appearance of Jesus
raised from the dead." (sic) The feeling of embarrassment that surrounds
these interpretations is even more obvious in Father Roguet's book. He
discerns not one, but two Ascensions! "Whereas from Jesus's point of
view the Ascension coincides with the Resurrection, from the disciples'
point of view it does not take place until Jesus ceases definitely to
present Himself to them, so that the Spirit may be given to them and the
period of the Church may begin." To those readers who are not quite able
to grasp the theological subtlety of his argument (which has absolutely
no Scriptural basis whatsoever), the author issues the following general
warning, which is a model of apologetical verbiage:

"Here, as in many similar cases, the problem only appears insuperable
if one takes Biblical statements literally, and forgets their religious
significance. It is not a matter of breaking down the factual reality
into a symbolism which is inconsistent, but rather of looking for the
theological intentions of those revealing these mysteries to us by
providing us with facts we can apprehend with our senses and signs
appropriate to our incarnate spirit."

**JESUS'S LAST DIALOGUES THE PARACLETE OF JOHN'S GOSPEL.**

John is the only evangelist to report the episode of the last dialogue
with the Apostles. It takes place at the end of the Last Supper and
before Jesus's arrest. It ends in a very long speech: four chapters in
John's Gospel (14 to 17) are devoted to this narration which is not
mentioned anywhere in the other Gospels. These chapters of John
nevertheless deal with questions of prime importance and fundamental
significance to the future outlook. They are set out with all the
grandeur and solemnity that characterizes the farewell scene between the
Master and His disciples.

This very touching farewell scene which contains Jesus's spiritual
testament, is entirely absent from Matthew, Mark and Luke. How can the
absence of this description be explained? One might ask the following.
did the text initially exist in the first three Gospels? Was it
subsequently suppressed? Why? It must be stated immediately that no
answer can be found; the mystery surrounding this huge gap in the
narrations of the first three evangelists remains as obscure as ever.

The dominating feature of this narration-seen in the crowning speech-is
the view of man's future that Jesus describes, His care in addressing
His disciples, and through them the whole of humanity, His
recommendations and commandments and His concern to specify the guide
whom man must follow after His departure. The text of John's Gospel is
the only one to designate him as Parakletos in Greek, which in English
has become 'Paraclete'. The following are the essential passages:

"If you love me, you will keep my commandments. And I will pray the
Father, and he will give you another Paraclete." (14, 15-16)

What does 'Paraclete' mean? The present text of John's Gospel explains
its meaning as follows: "But the Paraclete, the Holy Spirit, whom the
Father will send in my name, he will teach you all things, and bring to
your remembrance all that I have said to you" (14, 26). "he will bear
witness to me" (15, 26).

"it is to your advantage that I go away, for if I do not go away, the
Paraclete will not come to you; but if I go, I will send him to you. And
when he comes, he will convince the world of sin and of righteousness
and of judgment . . ." (16, 7-8).

"When the Spirit of truth comes, he will guide you into all the truth;
for he will not speak on his own authority, but whatever he hears he
will speak, and he will declare to you the things that are to come. He
will glorify me . . ."

(16, 13-14). (It must be noted that the passages in John, chapters
14-17, which have not been cited here, in no way alter the general
meaning of these quotations).

On a cursory reading, the text which identifies the Greek word
'Paraclete' with the Holy Spirit is unlikely to attract much attention.
This is especially true when the subtitles of the text are generally
used for translations and the terminology commentators employ in works
for mass publication direct the reader towards the meaning in these
passages that an exemplary orthodoxy would like them to have. Should one
have the slightest dimculty in comprehension, there are many
explanations available, such as those given by A. Tricot in his Little
Dictionary of the New Testament (Petit Dictionnaire du Nouveau
Testament) to enlighten one on this subject. In his entry on the
Paraclete this commentator writes the following:

"This name or title translated from the Greek is only used in the New
Testament by John: he uses it four times in his account of Jesus's
speech after the Last Supper[^42] (14, 16 and 26; 15, 26; 16, 7) and once
in his First Letter (2, 1). In John's Gospel the word is applied to the
Holy Spirit; in the Letter it refers to Christ. 'Paraclete' was a term
in current usage among the Hellenist Jews, First century A.D., meaning
'intercessor', 'defender' (. . .) Jesus predicts that the Spirit will be
sent by the Father and Son. Its mission will be to take the place of the
Son in the role he played during his mortal life as a helper for the
benefit of his disciples. The Spirit will intervene and act as a
substitute for Christ, adopting the role of Paraclete or omnipotent
intercessor."

This commentary therefore makes the Holy Spirit into the ultimate guide
of man after Jesus's departure. How does it square with John's text?

It is a necessary question because a priori it seems strange to ascribe
the last paragraph quoted above to the Holy Spirit: "for he will not
speak on his own authority, but whatever he hears he will speak, and he
will declare to you the things that are to come." It seems inconceivable
that one could ascribe to the Holy Spirit the ability to speak and
declare whatever he hears . . . Logic demands that this question be
raised, but to my knowledge, it is not usually the subject of
commentaries.

To gain an exact idea of the problem, one has to go back to the basic
Greek text. This is especially important because John is universally
recognized to have written in Greek instead of another language. The
Greek text consulted was the Novum Testamentum Graece[^43].

Any serious textual criticism begins with a search for variations. Here
it would seem that in all the known manuscripts of John's Gospel, the
only variation likely to change the meaning of the sentence Is in
passage 14, 26 of the famous Palimpsest version written in Syriac[^44].
Here it is not the Holy Spirit that is mentioned, but quite simply the
Spirit. Did the scribe merely miss out a word or, knowing full well that
the text he was to copy claimed to make the Holy Spirit hear and speak,
did he perhaps lack the audacity to write something that seemed absurd
to him? Apart from this observation there is little need to labour the
other variations, they are grammatical and do not change the general
meaning. The important thing is that what has been demonstrated here
with regard to the exact meaning of the verbs 'to hear' and 'to speak'
should apply to all the other manuscripts of John's Gospel, as is indeed
the case.

The verb 'to hear, in the translation is the Greek verb 'akouô' meaning
to perceive sounds. It has, for example, given us the word 'acoustics',
the science of sounds.

The verb 'to speak' in the translation is the Greek verb 'laleô' which
has the general meaning of 'to emit sounds' and the specific meaning of
'to speak'. This verb occurs very frequently in the Greek text of the
Gospels. It designates a solemn declaration made by Jesus during His
preachings. It therefore becomes clear that the communication to man
which He here proclaims does not in any way consist of a statement
inspired by the agency of the Holy Spirit. It has a very obvious
material character moreover, which comes from the idea of the emission
of sounds conveyed by the Greek word that defines it.

The two Greek verbs 'akouô' and 'laleô' therefore define concrete
actions which can only be applied to a being with hearing and speech
organs. It is consequently impossible to apply them to the Holy
Spirit.

For this reason, the text of this passage from John's Gospel, as handed
down to us in Greek manuscripts, is quite incomprehensible if one takes
it as a whole, including the words 'Holy Spirit' in passage 14, 26. "But
the Paraclete, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name"
etc. It is the only passage in John's Gospel that identifies the
Paraclete with the Holy Spirit.

If the words 'Holy Spirit' (to pneuma to agion) are ommitted from the
passage, the complete text of John then conveys a meaning which is
perfectly clear. It is confirmed moreover, by another text by the same
evangelist, the First Letter, where John uses the same word 'Paraclete'
simply to mean Jesus, the intercessor at God's side[^45]. According to
John, when Jesus says (14, 16): "And I will pray the Father, and he will
give you another Paraclete", what He is saying is that 'another'
intercessor will be sent to man, as He Himself was at God's side on
man's behalf during His earthly life.

According to the rules of logic therefore, one is brought to see in
John's Paraclete a human being like Jesus, possessing the faculties of
hearing and speech formally implied in John's Greek text. Jesus
therefore predicts that God will later send a human being to Earth to
take up the role defined by John, i.e. to be a prophet who hears God's
word and repeats his message to man. This is the logical interpretation
of John's texts arrived at if one attributes to the words their proper
meaning.

The presence of the term 'Holy Spirit' in today's text could easily
have come from a later addition made quite deliberately. It may have
been intended to change the original meaning which predicted the advent
of a prophet subsequent to Jesus and was therefore in contradiction with
the teachings of the Christian churches at the time of their formation;
these teachings maintained that Jesus was the last of the prophets.
Conclusions The facts recorded here and the commentaries quoted from
several extremely eminent Christian experts in exegesis have refuted
affirmations of orthodoxy supported by the line adopted by the last
Council on the absolute historical authenticity of the Gospels. These
are said to have faithfully transmitted what Jesus actually did and
taught.

Several different kinds of argument have been given.

Firstly, quotations from the Gospels themselves show flat
contradictions. It is impossible to believe two facts that contradict
each other. Neither can one accept certain improbabilities and
affirmations that go against the cast-iron data provided by modern
knowledge. In this respect, the two genealogies of Jesus given in the
Gospels and the untruths implied in them are quite conclusive.

These contradictions, improbabilities and incompatibilities pass
unnoticed by many Christians. They are astonished when they discover
them because they have been influenced by their reading of commentaries
that provide subtle explanations calculated to reassure them and
orchestrated by an apologetic lyricism. Some very typical examples have
been given of the skill employed by certain experts in exegesis in
camouflaging what they modestly call 'difficulties'. There are very few
passages indeed in the Gospels that have been acknowledged as
inauthentic although the Church declares them canonic.

According to Father Kannengiesser, works of modern textual criticism
have revealed data which constitute a 'revolution in methods of Biblical
exegesis' so that the facts relating to Jesus recorded in the Gospels
are no longer 'to be taken literally', they are 'writings suited to an
occasion' or 'combat writings'. Modern knowledge has brought to light
the history of Judeo-Christianity and the rivalry between communities
which accounts for the existence of facts that today's readers find
disconcerting. The concept of eyewitness evangelists is no longer
defensible, although numerous Christians still retain it today. The work
done at the Biblical School of Jerusalem (Fathers Benoit and Boismard)
shows very clearly that the Gospels were written, revised and corrected
several times. They also warn the reader that he is "obliged in more
than one case to give up the notion of hearing Jesus's voice
directly".

The historical nature of the Gospels is beyond question. Through
descriptions referring to Jesus however, these documents provide us
above all with information about the character of their authors, the
spokesmen for the tradition of the early Christian communities to which
they belonged, and in particular about the struggle between the
Judeo-Christians and Paul: Cardinal Daniélou's work is authoritative on
these points.

Why be surprised by the fact that some evangelists distort certain
events in Jesus's life with the object of defending a personal point of
view? Why be surprised by the omission of certain events? Why be
surprised by the fictitious nature of other events described?

This leads us to compare the Gospels with the narrative poems found in
Medieval literature. A vivid comparison could be made with the Song of
Roland (Chanson de Roland), the most well-known of all poems of this
kind, which relates a real event in a fictitious light. It will be
remembered that it describes an actual episode: Roland was leading
Charlemagne's rear-guard when it was ambushed on the pass at Roncevaux.
The episode which was of minor importance,

is said to have taken place on the 15th August, 778 according to
historical records (Eginhard). It was raised to the stature of a great
feat of arms, a battle in a war of religion. It is a whimsical
description, but the imaginary element does not obliterate one of the
real battles that Charlemagne had to fight in order to protect his
frontiers against the attempts made by neighbouring peoples to penetrate
his borders. That is the element of truth and the epic style of
narrative does not remove it.

The same holds true for the Gospels: Matthew's phantasms, the fiat
contradictions between Gospels, the improbabilities, the
incompatibilities with modern scientific data, the successive
distortions of the text-all these things add up to the fact that the
Gospels contain chapters and passages that are the sole product of the
human imagination. These flaws do not however cast doubt on the
existence of Jesus's mission: the doubt is solely confined to the course
it took.


