


The Qur'an and Modern Science The Qur'an and Modern Science

**Introduction**

The relationship between the Qur'an and science is a priori a surprise,
especially when it turns out to be one of harmony and not of discord. A
confrontation between a religious book and the secular ideas proclaimed
by science is perhaps, in the eyes of many people today, something of a
paradox. The majority of today's scientists, with a small number of
exceptions of course,

are indeed bound up in materialist theories, and have only indifference
or contempt for religious questions which they often consider to be
founded on legend. In the West moreover, when science and religion are
discussed, people are quite willing to mention Judaism and Christianity
among the religions referred to, but they hardly ever think of Islam. So
many false judgements based on inaccurate ideas have indeed been made
about it, that today it is very difficult to form an exact notion of the
reality of Islam.

As a prelude to any confrontation between the Islamic Revelation and
science, it would seem essential that an outline be given of a religion
that is so little known in the West.

The totally erroneous statements made about Islam in the West are
sometimes the result of ignorance, and sometimes of systematic
denigration. The most serious of all the untruths told about it are
however those dealing with facts; for while mistaken opinions are
excusable, the presentation of facts running contrary to the reality is
not. It is disturbing to read blatant untruths in eminently respectable
works written by authors who a priori are highly qualified.

The following is an example taken from the Universalis Encyclopedia
(Encyclopedia Universalis) vol. 6. Under the heading Gospels (Evangiles)
the author alludes to the differences between the latter and the Qur'an:
"The evangelists (. . .) do not (. . .), as in the Qur'an, claim to
transmit an autobiography that God miraculously dictated to the Prophet
. . .". In fact, the Qur'an has nothing to do with an autobiography: it
is a preaching; a consultation of even the worst translation would have
made that clear to the author. The statement we have quoted is as far
from reality as if one were to define a Gospel as an account of an
evangelist's life. The person responsible for this untruth about the
Qur'an is a professor at the Jesuit Faculty of Theology, Lyon ! The fact
that people utter such untruths helps to give a false impression of. the
Qur'an and Islam.

There is hope today however because religions are no longer as
inward-looking as they were and many of them are seeking for mutual
understanding. One must indeed be impressed by a knowledge of the fact
that an attempt is being made on the highest level of the hierarchy by
Roman Catholics to establish contact with Muslims; they are trying to
fight incomprehension and are doing their utmost to change the
inaccurate views on Islam that are so widely held.

In the Introduction to this work, I mentioned the great change that has
taken place in the last few years and I quoted a document produced by
the Office for Non- Christian Affairs at the Vatican under the title
Orientations for a Dialogue between Christians and Muslims (Orientations
pour un dialogue entre chrétiens et musulmans). It is a very important
document in that it shows the new position adopted towards Islam. As we
read in the third edition of this study (1970), this new position calls
for 'a revision of our attitude towards it and a critical examination of
our prejudices' . . . 'We should first set about progressively changing
the way our Christian brothers see it.

This is the most important of all.' . . . We must clear away the
'out-dated image inherited from the past, or distorted by prejudice and
slander' . . . , and 'recognize the past injustice towards the Muslims
for which the West, with its Christian education, is to blame.'[^46] The
Vatican document is nearly 150 pages long. It therefore expands on the
refutation of classic views held by Christians on Islam and sets out the
reality.

Under the title Emancipating ourselves from our worst prejudices (Nous
libérer de nos préjugés les plus notables) the authors address the
following suggestions to Christians: "Here also, we must surrender to a
deep purification of our attitude. In particular, what is meant by this
are certain 'set judgements' that are all too often and too lightly made
about Islam. It is essential not to cultivate in the secret of our
hearts views such as these, too easily or arbitrarily arrived at, and
which the sincere Muslim finds confusing."

One extremely important view of this kind is the attitude which leads
people to repeatedly use the term Allah' to mean the God of the Muslims,
as if the Muslims believed in a God who was different from the God of
the Christians. Allâh means 'the Divinity' in Arabic: it is a single
God, implying that a correct transcription can only render the exact
meaning of the word with the help of the expression 'God'. For the
Muslim, al lâh is none other than the God of Moses and Jesus.

The document produced by the Office for Non-Christian Affairs at the
Vatican stresses this fundamental point in the following terms: "It
would seem pointless to maintain that Allâh is not really God, as do
certain people in the West! The conciliar documents have put the above
assertion in its proper place. There is no better way of illustrating
Islamic faith in God than by quoting the following extracts from Lumen
Gentium[^47]. 'The Muslims profess the faith of Abraham and worship with
us the sole merciful God, who is the future judge of men on the Day of
Reckoning . . .'"

One can therefore understand the Muslims' protest at the all too
frequent custom in European languages of saying 'Allâh' instead of 'God'
. . . Cultivated Muslims have praised D. Masson's French transition of
the Qur'an for having 'at last' written 'Dieu'[^48] instead of 'Allah'.

The Vatican document points out the following: "Allâh is the only word
that Arabic -speaking Christians have for God." Muslims and Christians
worship a single God.

The Vatican document then undertakes a critical examination of the
other false judgements made on Islam.

'Islamic fatalism' is a widely-spread prejudice; the document examines
this and quoting the Qur'an for support, it puts in opposition to this
the notion of the responsibility man has, who is to be judged by his
actions. It shows that the concept of an Islamic legalism is false; on
the contrary, it opposes the sincerity of faith to this by quoting two
phrases in the Qur'an that are highly misunderstood in the West: "There
is no compulsion in religion" (sura 2, verse 256) "(God) has not laid
upon you in religion any hardship" (sura 22, verse 78)

The document opposes the widely-spread notion of 'Islam, religion of
fear' to 'Islam, religion of love'-love of one's neighbor based on faith
in God. It refutes the falsely spread notion that Muslim morality hardly
exists and the other notion, shared by so many Jews and Christians, of
Islamic fanaticism. It makes the following comment on this: "In fact,
Islam was hardly any more fanatical during its history than the sacred
bastions of Christianity whenever the Christian faith took on,

as it were, a political value." At this point, the authors quote
expressions from the Qur'an that show how, in the West, the expression
'Holy War'[^49] has been mistranslated; "in Arabic it is Al jihâd fî
sabîl Allâh, the effort on God's road", "the effort to spread Islam and
defend it against its aggressors." The Vatican document continues as
follows: "The jihâd is not at all the Biblical kherem; it does not lead
to extermination, but to the spreading of God's and man's rights to new
lands."-"The past violence of the jihâd generally followed the rules of
war; at the time of the Crusades moreover, it was not always the Muslims
that perpetrated the worst slaughters."

Finally, the document deals with the prejudice according to which
"Islam is a hide-bound religion which keeps its followers in a kind of
superannuated Middle Ages, making them unfit to adapt to the technical
conquests of the modern age." It compares analogous situations observed
in Christian countries and states the following: "we find, (. ..) in the
traditional expansion of Muslim thought, a principle of possible
evolution in civilian society ."

I am certain that this defense of Islam by the Vatican will surprise
many believers today, be they Muslims, Jews or Christians. It is a
demonstration of sincerity and open-mindedness that is singularly in
contrast with the attitudes inherited from the past. The number of
people in the West who are aware of the new attitudes adopted by the
highest authorities in the Catholic Church is however very small.

Once one is aware of this fact, it comes as less of a surprise to learn
of the actions that sealed this reconciliation: firstly, there was the
official visit made by the President of the Office for Non-Christian
Affairs at the Vatican to King Faisal of Saudi Arabia; then the official
reception given by Pope Paul VI to the Grand Ulema of Saudi Arabia in
the course of 1974. Henceforth, one understands more clearly the
spiritual significance of the fact that His Grace Bishop Elchinger
received the Grand Ulema at his cathedral in Strasbourg and invited them
during their visit to pray in the choir. This they did before the altar,
turned towards Makka.

Thus the representatives of the Muslim and Christian worlds at their
highest level, who share a faith in the same God and a mutual respect
for their differences of opinion, have agreed to open a dialogue. This
being so, it is surely quite natural for other aspects of each
respective Revelation to be confronted. The subject of this
confrontation is the examination of the Scriptures in the light of
scientific data and knowledge concerning the authenticity of the texts.
This examination is to be undertaken for the Qur'an as it was for the
Judeo-Christian Revelation.

The relationship between religions and science has not always been the
same in any one place or time. It is a fact that there is no writing
belonging to a monotheistic religion that condemns science. In practise
however, it must be admitted that scientists have had great difficulties
with the religious authorities of certain creeds. For many centuries, in
the Christian world, scientific development was opposed by the
authorities in question, on their own initiative and without reference
to the authentic Scriptures.

We already know the measures taken against those who sought to enlarge
science, measures which often made scientists go into exile to avoid
being burnt at the stake, unless they recanted, changed their attitude
and begged for pardon. The case of Galileo is always cited in this
context: he was tried for having accepted the discoveries made by
Copernicus on the rotation of the Earth. Galileo Was condemned as the
result of a mistaken interpretation of the Bible, since not a single
Scripture could reasonably be brought against him.

In the case of Islam, the attitude towards science was, generally
speaking, quite different. Nothing could be clearer than the famous
Hadith of the Prophet: "Seek for science, even in China", or the other
hadith which says that the search for knowledge is a strict duty for
every Muslim man and woman. As we shall see further on in this section,
another crucial fact is that the Qur'an, while inviting us to cultivate
science, itself contains many observations on natural phenomena and
includes explanatory details which are seen to be in total agreement
with modem scientific data. There is no equal to this in the
Judeo-Christian Revelation.

It would nevertheless be wrong to imagine that, in the history of
Islam, certain believers had never harboured a different attitude
towards science. It is a fact that, at certain periods, the obligation
to educate oneself and others was rather neglected. It is equally true
that in the Muslim world, as elsewhere, an attempt was sometimes made to
stop scientific development. All the same it will be remembered that at
the height of Islam, between the Eighth and Twelfth centuries A.D., i.e.
at a time when restrictions on scientific development were in force in
the Christian world, a very large number of studies and discoveries were
being made at Islamic universities.

It was there that the remarkable cultural resources of the time were to
be found. The Calif's library at Cordoba contained 400,000 volumes.
Averroës was teaching there, and Greek, Indian and Persian sciences were
taught. This is why scholars from all over Europe went to study at
Cordoba, just as today people go to the United States to perfect their
studies. A very great number of ancient manuscripts have come down to us
thanks to cultivated Arabs who acted as the vehicle for the culture of
conquered countries.

We are also greatly indebted to Arabic culture for mathematics (algebra
was an Arabic invention), astronomy, physics (optics), geology, botany,
medicine (Avicenna) etc. For the very first time, science took on an
international character in the Islamic universities of the Middle Ages.
At this time, men were more steeped in the religious spirit than they
are today. but in the Islamic world, this did not prevent them from
being both believers and scientists. Science was the twin of religion
and it should never have ceased to be so.

The Medieval period was, for the Christian world, a time of stagnation
and absolute conformity. It must be stressed that scientific research
was not slowed down by the Judeo-Christian Revelation itself, but rather
by those people who claimed to be its servants. Following the
Renaissance, the scientists' natural reaction was to take vengeance on
their former enemies; this vengeance still continues today, to such an
extent indeed that in the West, anyone who talks of God in scientific
circles really does stand out. This attitude affects the thinking of all
young people who receive a university education, Muslims included.

Their thinking could hardly be different from what it is considering
the extreme positions adopted by the most eminent scientists. A Nobel
prize winner for Medicine has tried in the last few years to persuade
people, in a book intended for mass publication, that living matter was
able to create itself by chance from several basic components. Starting,
he says, with this primitive living matter, and under the influence of
various external circumstances, organized living beings were formed,
resulting in the formidable complex being that constitutes man.

Surely these marvels of contemporary scientific knowledge in the field
of life should lead a thinking person to the opposite conclusion. The
organization presiding over the birth and maintenance of life surely
appears more and more complicated as one studies it; the more details
one knows, the more admiration it commands. A knowledge of this
organization must surely lead one to consider as less and less probable
the part chance has to play in the phenomenon of life. The further one
advances along the road to knowledge, especially of the infinitely
small, the more eloquent are the arguments in favor of the existence of
a Creator. Instead of being filled with humility in the face of such
facts, man is filled with arrogance. He sneers at any idea of God, in
the same way he runs down anything that detracts from his pleasure and
enjoyment. This is the image of the materialist society that is
flourishing at present in the West.

What spiritual forces can be used to oppose this pollution of thought
practised by many contemporary scientists?

Judaism and Christianity make no secret of their inability to cope with
the tide of materialism and invasion of the West by atheism. Both of
them are completely taken off guard, and from one decade to the next one
can surely see how seriously diminished their resistance is to this tide
that threatens to sweep everything away. The materialist atheist sees in
classic Christianity nothing more than a system constructed by men over
the last two thousand years designed to ensure the authority of a
minority over their fellow men. He is unable to find in Judeo-Christian
writings any language that is even vaguely similar to his own; they
contain so many improbabilities, contradictions and incompatibilities
with modern scientific data, that he refuses to take texts into
consideration that the vast majority of theologians would like to see
accepted as an inseparable whole.

When one mentions Islam to the materialist atheist, he smiles with a
complacency that is only equal to his ignorance of the subject. In
common with the majority of western intellectuals, of whatever religious
persuasion, he has an impressive collection of false notions about
Islam.

One must, on this point, allow him one or two excuses: Firstly, apart
from the newly-adopted attitudes prevailing among the highest Catholic
authorities, Islam has always been subject in the West to a so-called
'secular slander'. Anyone in the West who has acquired a deep knowledge
of Islam knows just to what extent its history, dogma, and aims have
been distorted. One must also take into account the fact that documents
published in European languages on this subject (leaving aside highly
specialized studies) do not make the work of a person willing to learn
any easier.

A knowledge of the Islamic Revelation is indeed fundamental from this
point of view. Unfortunately, passages from the Qur'an, especially those
relating to scientific data, are badly translated and interpreted, so
that a scientist has every right to make criticisms-with apparent
justification-that the Book does not actually deserve at all.

This detail is worth noting henceforth: inaccuracies in translation or
erroneous commentaries (the one is often associated with the other),
which would not have surprised anybody one or two centuries ago, offend
today's scientists. When faced with a badly translated phrase containing
a scientifically unacceptable statement, the scientist is prevented from
taking the phrase into serious consideration. In the chapter on human
reproduction, a very typical example will be given of this kind of
error.

Why do such errors in translation exist? They may be explained by the
fact that modern translators often take up, rather uncritically, the
interpretations given by older commentators. In their day, the latter
had an excuse for having given an inappropriate definition to an Arabic
word containing several possible meanings; they could not possibly have
understood the real sense of the word or phrase which has only become
clear in the present day thanks to scientific knowledge. In other words,
the problem is raised of the necessary revision of translations and
commentaries. It was not possible to do this at a certain period in the
past, but nowadays we have knowledge that enables us to render their
true sense. These problems of translation are not present for the texts
of the Judeo-Christian Revelation. the case described here is absolutely
unique to the Qur'an.

These scientific considerations, which are very specific to the Qur'an,
greatly surprised me at first. Up until then, I had not thought it
possible for one to find so many statements in a text compiled more than
thirteen centuries ago referring to extremely diverse subjects and all
of them totally in keeping with modern scientific knowledge. In the
beginning, I had no faith whatsoever in Islam. I began this examination
of the texts with a completely open mind and a total objectivity.

If there was any influence acting upon me, it was gained from what I
had been taught in my youth; people did not speak of Muslims, but of
'Muhammadans', to make it quite clear that what was meant was a religion
founded by a man and which could not therefore have any kind of value in
terms of God. Like many in the West, I could have retained the same
false notions about Islam; they are so widely-spread today, that I am
indeed surprised when I come across anyone, other than a specialist, who
can talk in an enlightened manner on this subject. I therefore admit
that before I was given a view of Islam different from the one received
in the West, I was myself extremely ignorant.

I owe the fact that I was able to realize the false nature of the
judgements generally made in the West about Islam to exceptional
circumstances. It was in Saudi Arabia itself that an inkling was given
to me of the extent to which opinions held in the West on this subject
are liable to error.

The debt of gratitude I owe to the late King Faisal, whose memory I
salute with deepest respect, is indeed very great: the fact that I was
given the signal honour of hearing him speak on Islam and was able to
raise with him certain problems concerning the interpretation of the
Qur'an in relation to modern science is a very cherished memory. It was
an extremely great privilege for me to have gathered so much precious
information from him personally and those around him.

Since I had now seen the wide gap separating the reality of Islam from
the image we have of it in the West, I experienced a great need to learn
Arabic (which I did not speak) to be sumciently well-equipped to
progress in the study of such a misunderstood religion. My first goal
was to read the Qur'an and to make a sentence-by-sentence analysis of it
with the help of various commentaries essential to a critical study. My
approach was to pay special attention to the description of numerous
natural phenomena given in the Qur'an;

the highly accurate nature of certain details referring to them in the
Book, which was only apparent in the original, struck me by the fact
that they were in keeping with present-day ideas, although a man living
at the time of Muhammad could not have suspected this at all. I
subsequently read several works written by Muslim authors on the
scientific aspects- of the Qur'anic text: they were extremely helpful in
my appreciation of it, but I have not so far discovered a general study
of this subject made in the West.

What initially strikes the reader confronted for the first time with a
text of this kind is the sheer abundance of subjects discussed: the
Creation, astronomy, the explanation of certain matters concerning the
earth, and the animal and vegetable kingdoms, human reproduction.
Whereas monumental errors are to be found in the Bible, I could not find
a single error in the Qur'an.

I had to stop and ask myself: if a man was the author of the Qur'an,
how could he have written facts in the Seventh century A.D. that today
are shown to be in keeping with modern scientific knowledge? There was
absolutely no doubt about it: the text of the Qur'an we have today is
most definitely a text of the period, if I may be allowed to put it in
these terms (in the next chapter of the present section of the book I
shall be dealing with this problem). What human explanation can there be
for this observation? In my opinion there is no explanation; there is no
special reason why an inhabitant of the Arabian Peninsula should, at a
time when King Dagobert was reigning in France (629-639 A.D.), have had
scientific knowledge on certain subjects that was ten centuries ahead of
our own.

It is an established fact that at the time of the Qur'anic Revelation,
i.e. within a period of roughly twenty years straddling Hegira (622
A.D.), scientific knowledge had not progressed for centuries and the
period of activity in Islamic civilization, with its accompanying
scientific upsurge, came after the close of the Qur'anic Revelation.
Only ignorance of such religious and secular data can lead to the
following bizarre suggestion I have heard several times: if surprising
statements of a scientific nature exist in the Qur'an, they may be
accounted for by the fact that Arab scientists were so far ahead of
their time and Muhammad was influenced by their work. Anyone who knows
anything about Islamic history is aware that the period of the Middle
Ages which saw the cultural and scientific upsurge in the Arab world
came after Muhammad, and would not therefore indulge in such whims.
Suggestions of this kind are particularly off the mark because the
majority of scientific facts which are either suggested or very clearly
recorded in the Qur'an have only been confirmed in modern times.

It is easy to see therefore how for centuries commentators on the
Qur'an (including those writing at the height of Islamic culture) have
inevitably made errors of interpretation in the case of certain verses
whose exact meaning could not possibly have been grasped. It was not
until much later, at a period not far from our own, that it was possible
to translate and interpret them correctly. This implies that a thorough
linguistic knowledge is not in itself sufficient to understand these
verses from the Qur'an. What is needed along with this is a highly
diversified knowledge of science. A study such as the present one
embraces many disciplines and is in that sense encyclopedic. As the
questions raised are discussed, the variety of scientific knowledge
essential to the understanding of certain verses of the Qur'an will
become clear.

The Qur'an does not aim at explaining certain laws governing the
Universe, however; it has an absolutely basic religious objective. The
descriptions of Divine Omnipotence are what principally incite man to
reflect on the works of Creation. They are accompanied by references to
facts accessible to human observation or to laws defined by God who
presides over the organization of the universe both in the sciences of
nature and as regards man. One part of these assertions is easily
understood, but the meaning of the other can only be grasped if one has
the essential scientific knowledge it requires. This means that in
former times, man could only distinguish an apparent meaning which led
him to draw the wrong conclusions on account of the inadequacy of his
knowledge at the time in question.

It is possible that the choice of verses from the Qur'an which are to
be studied for their scientific content may perhaps seem too small for
certain Muslim writers who have already drawn attention to them before I
have. In general, I believe I have retained a slightly smaller number of
verses than they have. On the other hand, I have singled out several
verses which until now have not, in my opinion, been granted the
importance they deserve from a scientific point of view. Wherever I may
have mistakenly failed to take verses into consideration for this study
that were selected by these writers, I hope that they will not hold it
against me. I have also found, on occasion, that certain books contain
scientific interpretations which do not appear to me to be correct; it
is with an open mind and a clear conscience that I have provided
personal interpretations of such verses.

By the same token, I have tried to find references in the Qur'an to
phenomena accessible to human comprehension but which have not been
confirmed by modern science. In this context, I think I may have found
references in the Qur'an to the presence of planets in the Universe that
are similar to the Earth. It must be added that many scientists think
this is a perfectly feasible fact, although modern data cannot provide
any hint of certainty. I thought I owed it to myself to mention this,
whilst retaining all the attendant reservations that might be applied.

Had this study been made thirty years ago, it would have been necessary
to add another fact predicted by the Qur'an to what would have been
cited concerning astronomy , this fact is the conquest of space. At that
time, subsequent to the first trials of ballistic missiles, people
imagined a day when man would perhaps have the material possibility of
leaving his earthly habitat and exploring space. It was then known that
a verse existed in the Qur'an predicting how one day man would make this
conquest. This statement has now been verified.

The present confrontation between Holy Scripture and science brings
ideas into play, both for the Bible and the Qur'an, which concern
scientific truth. For this confrontation to be valid, the scientific
arguments to be relied upon must be quite soundly established and must
leave no room for doubt. Those who balk at the idea of accepting the
intervention of science in an appreciation of the Scriptures deny that
it is possible for science to constitute a valid term of comparison
(whether it be the Bible, which does not escape the comparison
unscathed-and we have seen why-or the Qur'an, which has nothing to fear
from science). Science, they say, is changing with the times and a fact
accepted today may be rejected later.

This last comment calls for the following observation: a distinction
must be drawn between scientific theory and duly controlled observed
fact. Theory is intended to explain a phenomenon or a series of
phenomena not readily understandable. In many instances theory changes:
it is liable to be modified or replaced by another theory when
scientific progress makes it easier to analyse facts and invisage a more
viable explanation. On the other hand, an observed fact checked by
experimentation is not liable to modification: it becomes easier to
define its characteristics, but it remains the same. It has been
established that the Earth revolves around the Sun and the Moon around
the Earth, and this fact will not be subject to revision; all that may
be done in the future is to define the orbits more clearly.

A regard for the changing nature of theory is, for example, what made
me reject a verse from the Qur'an thought by a Muslim physicist to
predict the concept of anti-matter, a theory which is at present the
subject of much debate. One can, on the other hand. quite legitimately
devote great attention to a verse from the Qur'an describing the aquatic
origins of life, a phenomenon we shall never be able to verify, but
which has many arguments that speak in its favour. As for observed facts
such as the evolution of the human embryo, it is quite possible to
confront different stages described in the Qur'an with the data of
modern embryology and find complete concordance between modern science
and the verses of the Qur'an referring to this subject.

This confrontation between the Qur'an and science has been completed by
two other comparisons: one is the confrontation of modern knowledge with
Biblical data on the same subjects; and the other is the comparison from
the same scientific point of view between the data in the Qur'an, the
Book of Revelation transmitted by God to the Prophet, and the data in
the Hadiths, books narrating the deeds and sayings of Muhammad that lie
outside the written Revelation.

At the end of this, the third section of the present work, the detailed
results of the comparison between the Biblical and Qur'anic description
of a single event are given, along with an account of how the passage
fared when subjected to the scientific criticism of each description. An
examination has, for example, been made in the case of the Creation and
of the Flood. In each instance, the incompatibilities with science in
the Biblical description have been made clear. Also to be seen is the
complete agreement between science and the descriptions in the Qur'an
referring to them. We shall note precisely those differences that make
one description scientifically acceptable in the present day and the
other unacceptable.

This observation is of prime importance, since in the West, Jews,
Christians and Atheists are unanimous in stating (without a scrap of
evidence however) that Muhammad wrote the Qur'an or had it written as an
imitation of the Bible. It is claimed that stories of religious history
in the Qur'an resume Biblical stories. This attitude is as thoughtless
as saying that Jesus Himself duped His contemporaries by drawing
inspiration from the Old Testament during His preachings:

the whole of Matthew's Gospel is based on this continuation of the Old
Testament, as we have indeed seen already. What expert in exegesis would
dream of depriving Jesus of his status as God's envoy for this reason?
This is nevertheless the way that Muhammad is judged more often than not
in the West: "all he did Was to copy the Bible". It is a summary
judgement that does not take account of the fact that the Qur'an and the
Bible provide different versions of a single event. People prefer not to
talk about the difference in the descriptions. They are pronounced to be
the same and thus scientific knowledge need not be brought in. We shall
enlarge on these problems when dealing with the description of the
Creation and the Flood.

The collection of hadiths are to Muhammad what the Gospels are to
Jesus: descriptions of the actions and sayings of the Prophet. Their
authors were not eyewitnesses.. (This applies at least to the compilers
of the collections of hadiths which are said to be the most authentic
and were collected much later than the time when Muhammad was alive).
They do not in any way constitute books containing the written
Revelation. They are not the word of God, but the sayings of the
Prophet. In these books, which are very widely read, statements are to
be found containing errors from a scientific point of view, especially
medical remedies. We naturally discount anything relating to problems of
a religious kind, since they are not discussed here in the context of
the hadiths. Many hadiths are of doubtful authenticity. they are
discussed by Muslim scientists themselves. When the scientific nature of
one of the hadiths is touched upon in the present work, it is
essentially to put into relief all that distinguishes them from the
Qur'an itself when seen from this point of view, since the latter does
not contain a single scientific statement that is unacceptable. The
difference, as we shall see, is quite startling.

The above observation makes the hypothesis advanced by those who see
Muhammad as the author of the Qur'an quite untenable. How could a man,
from being illiterate, become the most important author, in terms of
literary merit, in the whole of Arabic literature? How could he then
pronounce truths of a scientific nature that no other human being could
possibly have developed at the time, and all this without once making
the slightest error in his pronouncements on the subject?

The ideas in this study are developed from a purely scientific point of
view. They lead to the conclusion that it is inconceivable for a human
being living in the Seventh century A.D. to have made statements in the
Qur'an on a great variety of subjects that do not belong to his period
and for them to be in keeping with what was to be known only centuries
later. For me, there can be no human explanation to the Qur'an.


