


PARABLE OF THE PENCIL
The Pencil Maker took the pencil aside, just before putting him into the
box.

“There are 5 things you need to know,” he told the pencil, “Before I
send you out into the world.

Always remember them and never forget, and you will become the best
pencil you can be.”

One: “You will be able to do many great things, but only if you allow
yourself to be held in

someone’s hand.”

Two: “You will experience a painful

sharpening from time to time, but

you’ll need it to become a better

pencil.”

Three: “You will be able to correct

any mistakes you might make.”

Four: “The most important part of

you will always be what's inside.”

And Five: “On every surface you are used on, you must leave your mark.
No matter what the

condition, you must continue to write.”

The pencil understood and promised to remember, and went into the box
with purpose in its heart.

Now replacing the place of the pencil with you. Always remember them and
never forget, and you

will become the best person you can be.

One: “You will be able to do many great things, but only if you allow
yourself to be held in God’s

hand. And allow other human beings to access you for the many gifts you
possess.”

Two: “You will experience a painful sharpening from time to time, by
going through various

problems in life, but you’ll need it to become a stronger person.”

Three: “You will be able to correct any mistakes you might make.”

Four: “The most important part of you will always be what’s on the
inside.”

And Five: “On every surface you walk through, you must leave your mark.
No matter what the

situation, you must continue to do your duties.”

Allow this parable on the pencil to encourage you to know that you are a
special person and only

you can fulfill the purpose to which you were born to accomplish.

Never allow yourself to get discouraged and think that

your life is insignificant  and cannot make a change.


