


BEAUTIFULGIFT!
A young man was getting ready to graduate college. For many months he
had admired a beautiful

sports car in a dealer’s showroom, and knowing his father could well
afford it, he told him that was

all he wanted. As Graduation Day approached, the young man awaited signs
that his father had

purchased the car. On the morning of his graduation his father called
him into his private study.

His father told him how proud he was to have such a fine son, and told

him how much he loved him. He handed his son a beautiful wrapped

gift box. Curious, but somewhat disappointed the young man opened

the box and found a lovely, leather-bound Holy Qur’an. Angrily, he

raised his voice at his father and said, “With all your money you give

me a Holy book?” and stormed out of the house, leaving the holy book.

He never contacted his father again for long long time. Many years

passed and the young man was very successful in business. He had a

beautiful home and wonderful family, but realized his father was very
old, and thought perhaps he

should go to him. He had not seen him since that graduation day.

Before he could make arrangements, he received a telegram telling him
his father had passed away,

and willed all of his possessions to his son. He needed to come home
immediately and take care

things. When he arrived at his father’s house, sudden sadness and regret
filled his heart. He began

to search his father’s important papers and saw the still new Holy
Qur’an, just as he had left it years

ago. With tears, he opened the Holy Qur’an and began to turn the pages.
As he Read those words, a

car key dropped from an envelope taped behind the Holy Qur’an. It had a
tag with the dealer’s

name, the same dealer who had the sports car he had desired. On the tag
was the date of his

graduation, and the words


