


PAID IN FULL.
How many times do we miss GOD blessings because

they are not packaged as we expected?

WHAT IS AFAMILY?

A man came home from work late, tired and irritated,

to find his 5-year old son waiting for him at the door.

SON: “Daddy, may I ask you a question?”

DAD: “Yeah sure, what is it?” replied the man.

SON: “Daddy, how much do you make an hour?”

DAD: “That’s none of your business. Why do you ask such a thing?” the
man said angrily.

SON: “I just want to know. Please tell me, how much do you make an
hour?”

DAD: “If you must know, I make $20 an hour.”

“Oh,” the little boy replied, with his head down. Looking up, he said,

“Daddy, may I please borrow $10?”

The father was furious, “If the only reason you asked that is so you can
borrow some money to buy

a silly toy or some other nonsense, then you march yourself straight to
your room and go to bed.

Think about why you are being so selfish. I work hard everyday for such
this childish behavior.”

The little boy quietly went to his room and shut the door. The man sat
down and started to get even

angrier about the little boy’s questions. How dare he ask such questions
only to get some money?

After about an hour or so, the man had calmed down, and started to
think: Maybe there was

something he really needed to buy with that $10 and he really didn’t ask
for money very often.

The man went to the door of the little boy’s room and opened the door.

“Are you asleep, son?” He asked. “No daddy, I’m awake,” replied the boy.

“I’ve been thinking, maybe I was too hard on you earlier,” said the man.
“It’s been a long day and

I took out my aggravation on you. Here’s the $10 you asked for.”

The little boy sat straight up, smiling. “Oh, thank you daddy!” He
yelled.

Then, reaching under his pillow he pulled out some crumpled up bills.

The man, seeing that the boy already had money, started to get angry
again.

The little boy slowly counted out his money, and then looked up at his
father.

“Why do you want more money if you already have some?” the father
grumbled.

“Because I didn’t have enough, but now I do,” the little boy replied.

“Daddy, I have $20 now. Can I buy an hour of your time? Please come home
early tomorrow.

I would like to have dinner with you.”

Share this story with someone you like.... But even better, share $20
worth of time with someone

you love. It’s just a short reminder to all of you working so hard in
life.

We should not let time slip through our fingers without having spent
some time with those who

really matter to us, those close to our hearts.

If we die tomorrow, the company that we are working for could easily
replace us in a matter of

days.

But the family & friends we leave behind will feel the loss for the rest
of their lives. And come to

think of it, we pour ourselves more into work than to our family. An
unwise investment indeed!

So what is the moral of the story???

Don’t work too hard...and you know what’s the full word of FAMILY?

***FAMILY = (F)ATHER (A)ND (M)OTHER,(I)(L)OVE (Y)OU!***
