


AHOLE IN THE FENCE
There once was a little boy who had a bad temper. His Father gave him a
bag of nails and told him

that every time he lost his temper, he must hammer a nail into the back
of the fence.

The first day the boy had driven 37 nails into the fence. Over the next
few weeks, as he learned to

control his anger, the number of nails hammered daily gradually dwindled
down. He discovered it

was easier to hold his temper than to drive those nails into the
fence....

Finally the day came when the boy didn’t lose his temper at all. He told
his father about it and the

father suggested that the boy now pull out one nail for each day that he
was able to hold his

temper. The day passed and the young boy was finally able to tell his
father that all the nails were

gone. The father took his son by the hand and led him to the fence. He
said, “You have done well,

my son, but look at the holes in the fence.”

The fence will never be the same. When you say things in anger, they
leave a scar just like this one.

You can put a knife in a man and draw it out. It won’t matter how many
times you say I’m sorry,

the wound is still there. A verbal wound is as bad as a physical one.

Friends and loved ones are a very rare jewel, indeed.

They make you smile and encourage you to succeed.

They lend an ear, they share a word of praise, and they

always want to open their hearts to us. Water your

relationships with kindness… and they will grow. So be

careful little lips what you say…! And you won't chase

friendships away.


