


GRANDPA’S TABLE
A frail old man went to live with his son, daughter-in-law, and
four-year old grandson. The old

man’s hands trembled, his eyesight was blurred, and his step faltered.
The family ate together at

the table. But the elderly grandfather’s shaky hands and failing sight
made eating difficult. Peas

rolled off his spoon onto the floor. When he grasped, the glass, milk
spilled on the tablecloth.

The son and daughter-in-law became irritated with the mess. “We must do
something about

Grandfather,” said the son. “I’ve had enough of his spilled milk, noisy
eating, and food on the

floor.” So the husband and wife set a small table in the corner. There,
Grandfather ate alone while

the rest of the family enjoyed dinner. Since Grandfather had broken a
dish or two, his food was

served in a wooden bowl. When the family glanced in Grandfather’s
direction, sometimes he had a

tear in his eye as he sat alone. Still, the only words the couple had
for him were sharp admonitions

when he dropped a fork or spilled food. The four-year-old watched it all
in silence.

One evening before supper, the father noticed his son playing with wood
scraps on the floor. He

asked the child sweetly, “What are you making?” Just as sweetly, the boy
responded, “Oh, I am

making a little bowl for you and Mama to eat your food in when I grow
up.” The four-year-old

smiled and went back to work. The words so struck the parents that they
were speechless. Then

tears started to stream down their cheeks. Though no word was spoken,
both knew what must be

done.

That evening the husband took Grandfather’s hand and gently led him back
to the family table.

For the remainder of his days he ate every meal with the family.

And for some reason, neither husband nor wife seemed to care

“L**ittle Things Affect Little Minds”**

any longer when a fork was dropped, milk spilled, or the

tablecloth soiled.


