


DON’T JUDGE ABOOK BYITS COVER!
A lady in a faded gingham dress and her husband, dressed in a homespun
threadbare suit, stepped

off the train in Boston and walk timidly without an appointment into the
Harvard University

President’s outer office.

The secretary could tell in a moment that such backwoods, country hicks
had no business at

Harvard and probably didn’t even deserve to be in Cambridge.

“We want to see the president,” the man said softly.

“He’ll be busy all day,” the secretary snapped.

“We’ll wait,” the lady replied.

For hours the secretary ignored them, hoping that the couple would
finally become discouraged

and go away. They didn’t and the secretary grew frustrated and finally
decided to disturb the

president, even though it was a chore she always regretted.

“Maybe if you see them for a few minutes, they’ll leave,” she said to
him.

He sighed in exasperation and nodded. Someone of his importance
obviously didn’t have the time

to spend with them, but he detested gingham dresses and homespun suits
cluttering up his outer

office.

The president, stern faced and with dignity, strutted toward the couple.

The lady told him, “We had a son who attended Harvard for one year. He
loved Harvard. He was

happy here. But about a year ago, he was accidentally killed. My husband
and I would like to erect a

memorial to him, somewhere on campus.”

The president wasn’t touched.... He was shocked.

“Madam,” he said, gruffly, “we can’t put up a statue for every person
who attended Harvard and

died. If we did, this place would look like a cemetery.”

“Oh, no,” the lady explained quickly. “We don’t want to erect a statue.
We thought we would like to

give a building to Harvard.”

The president rolled his eyes. He glanced at the gingham dress and
homespun suit, and then

exclaimed, “A building! Do you have any earthly idea how much a building
costs? We have over

seven and a half million dollars in the physical buildings here at
Harvard.”

For a moment the lady was silent.

The president was pleased. Maybe he could get rid of them now.

The lady turned to her husband and said quietly, “Is that all it

costs to start a university? Why don’t we just start our own?”

Her husband nodded.

The president’s face wilted in confusion and bewilderment. Mr.

and Mrs. Leland Stanford got up and walked away, traveling to

Palo Alto, California where they established the University that

bears their name, Stanford University, a memorial to a son that

Harvard no longer cared about.

You can easily judge the character of others by how

they treat those who they think can do nothing.
