


JUST P.U.S.H!
A man was sleeping at night in his cabin when suddenly his room filled
with light, and the Lord

told the man he had work for him to do, and showed him a large rock in
front of his cabin.

The Lord explained that the man was to push against the rock with all
his might. So, this the man

did, day after day. For many years he toiled from sun up to

sun down; his shoulders set squarely against the cold,

massive surface of the unmoving rock, pushing with all of

his might. Each night the man returned to his cabin sore and

worn out, feeling that his whole day had been spent in vain.

Since the man was showing discouragement, the Adversary

(Satan) decided to enter the picture by placing thoughts into

the weary mind: “you have been pushing against that rock for

a long time, and it hasn’t moved.” Thus, giving the man the

impression that the task was impossible and that he was a

failure. These thoughts discouraged and disheartened the

man. Satan said, “Why kill yourself over this?”

“Just put in your time, giving just the minimum effort; and that will be
good enough.”

That’s what he planned to do, but decided to make it a matter of prayer
and take his troubled

thoughts to the Lord. “Lord,” he said, “I have labored long and hard in
your service, putting all my

strength to do that which you have asked. Yet, after all this time, I
have not even budged that rock

by half a millimeter. What is wrong? Why am I failing?”

The Lord responded compassionately, “My Servant, when I asked you to
serve Me and you

accepted, I told you that your task was to push against the rock with
all of your strength, which you

have done. Never once did I mention to you that I expected you to move
it. Your task was to push.

And now you come to Me with your strength spent, thinking that you have
failed. But, is that really

so? Look at yourself. Your arms are strong and muscled, your back sinewy
and brown, your hands

are callused from constant pressure, your legs have become massive and
hard.

Through opposition you have grown much, and your abilities now surpass
that which you used to

have. Yet you haven’t moved the rock. But your calling was to be
obedient and to push and to

exercise your faith and trust in My wisdom. This you have done. Now I,
my servant, will move the

rock.” At times, when we hear a word from God, we tend to use our own
intellect to decipher what

He wants, when actually what God wants is just a simple obedience and
faith in Him. By all means,

exercise the faith that moves mountains, but know that it is still God
who moves mountains.

When everything seems to go wrong just P.U.S.H!

When the job gets you down just P.U.S.H!

When people don’t react the way you think they should just P.U.S.H!

When your money is “gone” and the bills are due just P.U.S.H!

When people just don’t understand you just P.U.S.H!

P + U + S + H = Pray + Until + Something + Happens
