


DETERMINATON
In 1883, a creative engineer named John Roebling was inspired by an idea
to build a spectacular

bridge connecting New York with the Long Island. However bridge building
experts throughout the

world thought that this was an impossible feat and told Roebling to
forget the idea. It just could not

be done. It was not practical. It had never been done before.

Roebling could not ignore the vision he had in his mind of this bridge.
He thought about it all the

time and he knew deep in his heart that it could be done. He just had to
share the dream with

someone else. After much discussion and persuasion he managed to
convince his son Washington,

an up and coming engineer, that the bridge in fact could be built.

Working together for the first time, the father and son developed
concepts of how it could be

accomplished and how the obstacles could be overcome. With great
excitement and inspiration,

and the headiness of a wild challenge before them, they hired their crew
and began to build their

dream bridge.

The project started well, but when it was only a few months underway a
tragic accident on the site

took the life of John Roebling. Washington was injured and left with a
certain amount of brain

damage, which resulted in him not being able to walk or talk or even
move.

“We told them so.”

“Crazy men and their crazy dreams.”

“It’s foolish to chase wild visions.”

Everyone had a negative comment to make and felt that the project should
be scrapped since the

Roeblings were the only ones who knew how the bridge could be built. In
spite of his handicap

Washington was never discouraged and still had a burning desire to
complete the bridge and his

mind was still as sharp as ever.

He tried to inspire and pass on his enthusiasm to some of his friends,
but they were too daunted

by the task. As he lay on his bed in his hospital room, with the
sunlight streaming through the

windows, a gentle breeze blew the flimsy white curtains apart and he was
able to see the sky and

the tops of the trees outside for just a moment.

It seemed that there was a message for him not to give up. Suddenly an
idea hit him. All he could

do was move one finger and he decided to make the best use of it. By
moving this, he slowly

developed a code of communication with his wife.

He touched his wife’s arm with that finger, indicating to her that he
wanted her to call the

engineers again. Then he used the same method of tapping her arm to tell
the engineers what to do.

It seemed foolish but the project was under way again.

For 13 years Washington tapped out his instructions with his finger on
his wife’s arm, until the

bridge was finally completed. Today the spectacular Brooklyn Bridge
stands in all its glory as a

tribute to the triumph of one man’s indomitable spirit and his
determination not to be defeated by

circumstances. It is also a tribute to the engineers and their team
work, and to their faith in a man

who was considered mad by half the world. It stands too as a tangible
monument to the love and

devotion of his wife who for 13 long years patiently decoded the
messages of her husband and told

the engineers what to do.

Perhaps this is one of the best examples of a never-say-die attitude
that overcomes a terrible

physical handicap and achieves an impossible goal.

Often when we face obstacles in our day-to-day life, our hurdles seem
very small in comparison to

what many others have to face.

The Brooklyn Bridge shows us that

dreams that seem impossible can be

realized with determination and

persistence, no matter what the

odds are.

Even the most distant dream

can be realized with

determination and persistence.
