


GOD EXISTS
A man went to a barbershop to have his hair and his beard cut

as always. He started to have a good conversation with the

barber who attended him. They talked about so many things on

various subjects.

Suddenly, they touched the subject of God. The barber said:

“Look man, I don’t believe that God exists as you say so.”

“Why do you say that?”

Asked the client. Well, it’s so easy; you just have to go out in

the street to realize that God does not exist. Oh, tell me, if God

existed, would there be so many sick people? Would there be

abandoned children? If God existed, there would be neither

suffering nor pain. “I can’t think of a God who permits all of

these things.” The client stopped for a moment thinking but he

didn’t want to respond so as to prevent an argument.

The barber finished his job and the client went out of the shop.

Just after he left the barbershop, he saw a man in the street with a
long hair and beard (it seems

that it had been a long time since he had his cut and he looked so
untidy). Then the client again

entered the barbershop and he said to the barber: “know what? Barbers do
not exist.”

“How come they don’t exist?” asked the barber. “Well I am here and I am
a barber.” “No!” - the

client exclaimed. “They don’t exist because if they did there would be
no people with long hair and

beard like that man who walks in the street.”

“Ah, barbers do exist, what happens is that people do not come to us.”
“Exactly!” - Affirmed the

client. “That’s the point. God does exist, what happens is people don’t
go to Him and do not look

for Him that’s why there’s so much pain and suffering in the world.”


