


THE SELFISH MAN
Once upon a time, there was a selfish man. He liked everything to be

his own. He could not share his belongings with anyone, not even his

friends or the poor.

One day, the man lost thirty gold coins. He went to his friend’s house

and told him how he lost his gold coins. His friend was a kind man.

As his friend’s daughter was coming from an errand she found thirty gold
coins, when she arrived

home, she told her father what she had found. The girl’s father told her
that the gold coins belong

to his friend and he sent for him. When the selfish man arrived, he told
him how his daughter had

found his thirty gold coins and handed then to him. After counting the
gold coins the man said that

ten of them was missing and had been taken by the girl as he had forty
gold coins. He further

commented that he will recover the remaining amount from him. But the
girl’s father refused.

The man left the gold coins and went to the court and informed the judge
there about what had

taken place between him and the girl’s father.

The judge sent for the girl and her father, and when they arrived asked
the girl how many gold

coins did she find. She replied thirty gold coins. The Judge that asked
the selfish man how many

gold coins did he lose and he answered forty gold coins.

The judge then told the man that the gold coins did not belong to him
because the girl found thirty

and not forty as he claimed to have lost and then told the girl to take
the gold coins and that if any-

body is looking for them he will send for the girl.

The judge told the man that if anybody reports that they have found
forty gold coins he will send

for him. It was then that the man confessed that he lied and that he
lost thirty gold coins but the

judge did not listen to him.

This story teaches us to be always honest as dishonest never pays.


