


BE CAREFULWHAT YOU PLANT
An emperor in the Far East was growing old and knew it was time to
choose his successor.

Instead of choosing one of his assistants or his children, he decided
something different.

He called young people in the kingdom together one day. He said, “It is
time for me to step down

and choose the next emperor. I have decided to choose one of you.”

The kids were shocked! But the emperor continued. “I am going to

give each one of you a seed today. One very special seed. I want you

to plant the seed, water it and come back here after one year from

today with what you have grown from this one seed. I will then judge

the plants that you bring, and the one I choose will be the next

emperor!”

One boy named Ling was there that day and he, like the others, received
a seed. He went home and

excitedly told his mother the story. She helped him get a pot and
planting soil, and he planted the

seed and watered it carefully. Every day he would water it and watch to
see if it had grown. After

about three weeks, some of the other youths began to talk about their
seeds and the plants that

were beginning to grow.

Ling kept checking his seed, but nothing ever grew. 3 weeks, 4 weeks, 5
weeks went by. Still

nothing. By now, others were talking about their plants but Ling didn't
have a plant, and he felt

like a failure. Six months went by, still nothing in Ling’s pot. He just
knew he had killed his seed.

Everyone else had trees and tall plants, but he had nothing. Ling didn’t
say anything to his friends,

however. He just kept waiting for his seed to grow.

A year finally went by and all the youths of the kingdom brought their
plants to the emperor for

inspection. Ling told his mother that he wasn’t going to take an empty
pot. But honest about what

happened, Ling felt sick to his stomach, but he knew his mother was
right. He took his empty pot

to the palace. When Ling arrived, he was amazed at the variety of plants
grown by the other youths.

They were beautiful in all shapes and sizes. Ling put his empty pot on
the floor and many of the

other kinds laughed at him. A few felt sorry for him and just said, “Hey
nice try.”

When the emperor arrived, he surveyed the room and greeted the young
people. Ling just tried to

hide in the back. “What great plants, trees and flowers you have grown,”
said the emperor. “Today,

one of you will be appointed the next emperor!” All of a sudden, the
emperor spotted Ling at the

back of the room with his empty pot. He ordered his guards to bring him
to the front. Ling was

terrified. “The emperor knows I’m a failure! Maybe he will have me
killed!”

When Ling got to the front, the Emperor asked his name. “My name is
Ling,” he replied. All the

kids were laughing and making fun of him. The emperor asked everyone to
quiet down. He looked

at Ling, and then announced to the crowd, “Behold your new emperor! His
name is Ling!” Ling

couldn’t believe it. Ling couldn’t even grow his seed. How could he be
the new emperor? Then the

emperor said, “One year ago today, I gave everyone here a seed. I told
you to take the seed, plant it,

water it, and bring it back to me today. But I gave you all boiled
seeds, which would not grow.

All of you, except Ling, have brought me trees and plants and flowers.
When you found that the

seed would not grow, you substituted another seed for the one I gave
you. Ling was the only one

with the courage and honesty to bring me a pot with my seed in it.
Therefore, he is the one who will

be the new emperor!”

If you plant honesty, you will reap trust.

“R**emember your graves because your**

If you plant goodness, you will reap friends.

way passes over it. You will be dealt with

If you plant humility, you will reap greatness.

as you deal with others, you will reap what

If you plant perseverance, you will reap victory.

you sow, and what you send today will

If you plant consideration, you will reap harmony.

meet you tomorrow.” Imam Ali (AS)

If you plant hard work, you will reap success.

If you plant forgiveness, you will reap reconciliation.

If you plant openness, you will reap intimacy.

If you plant patience, you will reap improvements.

If you plant faith, you will reap miracles.

But

If you plant dishonesty, you will reap distrust.

If you plant selfishness, you will reap loneliness.

If you plant pride, you will reap destruction.

If you plant envy, you will reap trouble.

If you plant laziness, you will reap stagnation.

If you plant bitterness, you will reap isolation.

If you plant greed, you will reap loss.

If you plant gossip, you will reap enemies.

If you plant worries, you will reap wrinkles.

If you plant sin, you will reap guilt.

So be careful what you plant now, It will determine what you will reap
tomorrow, The seeds you

now scatter, Will make life worse or better, your life or the ones who
will come after. Yes, someday,

you will enjoy the fruits, or you will pay for the choices you plant
today.
