


THE CRYSTALBALL
In the south of Spain, there was a small village whose people were very
joyful and lucky. The

children played under the shade of trees in the gardens of their home. A
shepherd boy whose name

was Nasir, stayed near the village with his father, mother and
grandmother. Early morning each

day, he takes his herd of goats up the hills to find a suitable place
for them to graze. In the

afternoon he would return with them to the village. At night his
grandmother would tell him a

story. The story of stars. This story really interested Nasir. As usual,
on one of these days, as Nasir

was watching his herd and playing his flute he suddenly saw a wonderful
light behind the flower

bush. When he came towards the branches he saw a transparent and most
beautiful crystal ball.

The crystal ball was glittering like a colorful rainbow. Nasir carefully
took it in

his hand and turned it around. With surprise suddenly he heard a weak
voice

coming from the crystal ball. It said; “You can make a wish that your
heart

desires and I will fulfill it.” Nasir could not believe that he had
actually heard

a voice. But he became so engrossed in his thoughts for he had so many

wishes but he must wish for something which was impossible like the wish
to

be able to fly. He said to himself, if I wait till tomorrow I will
remember many

things. He put the crystal ball in a bag and gathered the herd, happily
returned back

to the village. He decided that he would not tell anyone about the
crystal ball. On the following day

also, Nasir could not decide what to wish for, because he really had
everything he needed.

The days passed as usual, and Nasir appeared to be very cheerful that
the people around him were

amazed to see his cheerful disposition. One day a boy followed Nasir and
his herd and hid behind

a tree. Nasir as usual sat in one corner, took out the crystal ball and
for a few moments looked at it.

The boy waited for the moment when Nasir would go to sleep. Then he took
the crystal ball and ran

away. When he arrived in the village, he called all the people and
showed them the crystal ball.

The citizens of that village took the crystal ball in their hand and
turned it around with surprise.

Suddenly they heard a voice from inside the crystal ball, which says, “I
can fulfill your wish.”

One person took the ball and screamed, “I want one bag full of gold.”
Another took the ball and

said loudly, “I want two chest full of jewelry.”

Some of them wished that they would have their own palace with grand
door made from pure gold

instead of their old houses. Some also wished for bags full of jewelry,
but nobody asked for gardens

in their palaces. All their wishes were fulfilled but still the citizens
of the village were not happy.

They were jealous because the person that had a palace had no gold and
the person that had the

gold had no palace. For this reason, the citizens of the village were
angry and were not speaking to

each other. There was not even one garden which existed in the village
where the children could

play. The patience of the children was running out and they were
uncomfortable. Nasir and his

family were happy and pleased. Every morning and afternoon he would play
the flute.

The children could not wait anymore and decided to return the crystal
ball to Nasir. The parents

and neighbors went to him. The children said to Nasir; “When we had a
small village we all were

happy and joyful.” The parent also spoke. In one way or another nobody
is happy. The expensive

palaces and jewelry only bring us pain. When Nasir saw that the people
were really regretful, he

said I have not wished till now, if you really want everything to return
to its own place, then I will

wish for it. Everyone happily agreed. Nasir took the crystal ball in his
hand turned around and

wished that the village become the same as it was before. Everyone
quickly turned towards the

village and saw it became the same old village with gardens full of
trees and fruits.

Once again the people started to live happily and the children played
under the shade of trees.

From the next day and everyday at sunset the sound of Nasir’s flute
could be heard in the village.

This story teaches us that we should be happy with whatever we have and
not to be greedy.
