


FOUR WIVES
Once upon a time. There was a rich merchant who had 4 wives. He loved
the 4thwife the most and

adorned her with rich robes and treated her to delicacies. He took great
care of her & gave her

nothing but the best.

He also loved the 3rdwife very much. He’s very proud of her and always
wanted to show off her to

his friends. However, the merchant is always in fear that she might run
away with some other men.

He too, loved his 2ndwife. She is a very considerate person, always
patient & in fact is the

merchant’s confidante. Whenever the merchant faced some problems, he
always turned to his

2ndwife and she would always help him out and tide him through difficult
times.

Now, the merchant’s 1stwife is a very loyal partner and has made great
contributions in

maintaining his wealth and business as well as taking care of the
household. However, the

merchant did not love the 1stwife and although she loved him deeply, he
hardly took notice of her.

One day, the merchant fell ill. Before long, he knew that he was going
to die soon. He thought of

his luxurious life and told himself, “Now I have 4 wives with me. But
when I die, I’ll be alone. How

lonely I’ll be!” Thus, he asked the 4thwife, “I loved you most, endowed
you with the finest clothing

and showered great care over you. Now that I’m dying, will you follow me
and keep me company?”

“No way!” replied the 4thwife and she walked away without another

word. Answer cut like a sharp knife right into the merchant’s heart.

The sad merchant then asked the 3rdwife, “I have loved you so much

for all my life. Now that I’m dying, will you follow me and keep me

company?”

“No!” replied the 3rdwife. “Life is so good over here! I’m going to

remarry when you die!” The merchant’s heart sank and turned cold.

He then asked the 2ndwife, “I always turned to you for help and

you’ve always helped me out. Now I need your help again. When I die,
will you follow me and keep

me company?” “I’m sorry, I can’t help you out this time!” replied the
2ndwife.” “At the very most,

I can only send you to your grave.” Answer came like a bolt of thunder &
merchant was devastated.

Then a voice called out: “I’ll leave with you. I’ll follow you no matter
where you go.” The merchant

looked up and there was his 1stwife. She was so skinny, almost like she
suffered from malnutrition.

Greatly grieved, the merchant said, “I should have taken much better
care of you while I could

have!”

Actually, we all have 4 wives in our lives. The 4thwife is our body. No
matter how much time and

effort we lavish in making it look good, it’ll leave us when we die.

Our 3rdwife is our possessions, status and wealth. When we die, they all
go to others.

The 2ndwife is our family and friends. No matter how close they had been
there for us when

we’re alive, the furthest they can stay by us is up to the grave.

The 1stwife is in fact our soul, often neglected in our pursuit of
material wealth & sensual pleasure.

Guess what? It is actually the only thing that follows us wherever we
go. Perhaps it’s a good idea to cul-

tivate and strengthen it now rather than to wait until we’re on our
deathbed to lament.


