


LION, RATS, SNAKE & THE HONEYCOMB
Once a man saw in his dream, that a lion was chasing him. The man ran to
a tree, climbed on to it

and sat on a branch. He looked down and saw that the lion was still
there waiting for him.

The man then looked to his side where the branch he was sitting on was

attached to the tree and saw that two rats were circling around and
eating the

branch. One rat was black and the other one was white. The branch would
fall

on the ground very soon.

The man then looked below again with fear and discovered that a big
black

snake had come & settled directly under him. Snake opened its mouth
right

under the man so that he will fall into it.

The man then looked up to see if there was anything that he could hold
on to.

He saw another branch with a honeycomb. Drops of honey falling from it.

The man wanted to taste one of the drops. So, he put his tongue out and
tasted

one of the fallen drops of honey. The honey was amazing in taste. So, he

wanted to taste another drop. As he did, he got lost into the honey
sweetness.

Meanwhile, he forgot about the two rats eating his branch away, the lion
on

the ground and the snake that is sitting right under him. After a while,
he

woke up from his sleep.

To get the meaning behind this dream, the man went to a pious scholar of

Islam. The scholar said, the lion you saw is your death. It always
chases you

and goes wherever you go.

The two rats, one black and one white, are the night and the day. Black
one is the night and the

white one is the day. They circle around, coming one after another, to
eat your time as they take

you closer to death. The big black snake with a dark mouth is your
grave. It’s there, just waiting for

you to fall into it. The honeycomb is this world and the sweet honey is
the luxuries of this world.

We like to taste a drop of the luxuries of this world but it’s very
sweet. Then we taste another drop

and yet another.

Meanwhile, we get lost into it and we forget about our time,

we forget about our death and we forget about our graves.

“This world is like a serpent, so soft to touch, but so full of lethal
poison. Unwise people are allured

by it and drawn towards it, and wise men avoid it and keep away from its
poisonous effects.”

Imam Ali (AS)


