


THE CLUB 99
Some time ago, there lived a King. This King should have been contented
with his life, given all

the riches and luxuries he had. However, this was not the case! The King
always found himself

wondering why he just never seemed content with his life.

Sure, he had the attention of everyone wherever he went, attended fancy
dinners and parties,

but somehow, he still felt something was lacking and he couldn’t put his
finger on it.

One day, the King had woken up earlier than usual to stroll around his
palace. He entered his huge

living room and came to a stop when he heard someone happily singing
away... following this

singing... he saw that one of the servants was singing and had a very
contented look on his face.

This fascinated the King and he summoned this man to his chambers. The
man

entered the King’s chambers as ordered. The King asked why he was so
happy?

To this the man replied: “Your Majesty, I am nothing but a servant, but
I make

enough of a living to keep my wife and children happy. We don’t need too

much, a roof over our heads and warm food to fill our tummy. My wife and

children are my inspiration; they are content with whatever little I
bring home.

I am happy because my family is happy.”

Hearing this, the King dismissed the servant and summoned his Personal
Assistant to his

chambers.

The King related his personal anguish about his feelings and then
related the story of the servant to

his Personal Assistant, hoping that somehow, he will be able to come up
with some reasoning that

here was a King who could have anything he wished for at a snap of his
fingers and yet was not

contented, whereas, his servant, having so little was extremely
contented.

The Personal Assistant listened attentively and came to a conclusion. He
said, “Your Majesty,

I believe that the servant has not been made part of The 99 Club.”

“The 99 Club? And what exactly is that?” the King inquired.

To which the Assistant replied, “Your Majesty, to truly know what The 99
Club is, you will have to

do the following... place 99 Gold coins in a bag and leave it at this
servant’s doorstep, you will then

understand what The 99 Club is.”

That very same evening, the King arranged for 99 Gold coins to be placed
in a bag at the servant’s

doorstep. Although he was slightly hesitant and he thought he should
have put 100 Gold coins into

the bag, but since his assistant had advised him to put 99 that is what
he did.

The servant was just stepping out of his house when he saw a bag at his
doorstep. Wondering about

its contents, he took it into his house and opened the bag. When he
opened the bag, he let out a

great big shout of joy...Gold Coins... so many of them. He could hardly
believe it. He called his wife

to show her the coins.

He then took the bag to a table and emptied it out and began to count
the coins. Doing so,

he realized that there were 99 coins and he thought it was an odd number
so he counted again, and

again and again only to come to the same conclusion... 99 Gold Coins.

He began to wonder, what could have happened to that last one coin? For
no one would leave 99

coins. He began to search his entire house, looked around his backyard
for hours, not wanting to

lose out on that one coin. Finally, exhausted, he decided that he was
going to have to work harder

than ever to make up for that one Gold coin to make his entire
collection an even 100 Gold Coins.

He got up the next morning, in an extremely horrible mood, shouting at
the children and his wife

for his delay, not realizing that he had spent most of the night
conjuring ways of working hard so

that he had enough money to buy himself that gold coin. He went to work
as usual - but not in his

usual best mood, singing happily - as he grumpily did his daily errands.

Seeing the man’s attitude change so drastically, the King was puzzled.
He promptly summoned his

assistant to his chambers. The King related his thoughts about the
servant and once again, his

assistant listened. The King could not believe that the servant who
until yesterday had been singing

away and was happy and content with his life had taken a sudden change
of attitude, even though

he should have been happier after receiving the gold coins.

To this the assistant replied “Ah! But your Majesty, the servant has now
officially joined The 99

Club.” He explained: “The 99 Club is just a name given to those people
who have everything but

yet are never contented, therefore they are always working hard and
striving for that extra one to

round it out to 100!

We have so much to be thankful for and we can live with very little in
our lives, but the minute we

are given something bigger and better, we want even more!

We are not the same happy contented person we used to be, we want more
and more and by

wanting more and more we don’t realize the price we pay for it. We lose
our sleep, our happiness;

we hurt the people around us just as a price to pay for our growing
needs and desires. That is what

joining The 99 Club is all about.”

Hearing this King decided that from that day onwards, he was going to
start appreciating all the

little things in life.

Striving for more is always good, but let’s not strive so hard and for
so much that we loses all those

near and dear to our hearts, we shouldn’t compromise our happiness for
moments of luxuries!


