


THE NEIGHBOR
Sayyed Jawad Ameli, a great Mujtahid, was having his dinner when someone
knocked at his door.

A servant from his master, Ayatullah Sayyed Mehdi Bahrul Uloom, appeared
and said: “Your

master has sent for you to come immediately. He has just sat down for
his dinner but refuses to

eat until he sees you.”

There was no time to lose. Sayyed Jawad Ameli left his dinner and rushed
to

Ayatullah Bahrul Uloom’s residence. Just as he entered, the master
looked

disapprovingly at him and said: “Sayyed Jawad! You have no fear of
Allah!

Don’t you feel ashamed in front of Allah?” This came as a shock to him,
as he

could not remember doing anything to incur the wrath of his master.

He said: “My master may guide me where I have failed.”

Ayatullah Bahrul Uloom replied: “It is now a week that your neighbor and
his family are without

wheat and rice. He was trying to buy some dates from a shop on credit
but the shopkeeper refused

to grant him any more credit. He returned home empty-handed and the
family is without a morsel

of food.” Sayed Jawad was taken by surprise. “By Allah,” he said, “I
have no knowledge about this.”

That is why I am displeased all the more. How can you be unaware of your
own neighbor? Seven

days of difficulties have passed and you tell me you do not know about
it. Well, If you had known

and ignored him despite your knowledge, then you would not even he a
Muslim, Ayatullah Uloom

adjoined. Then he instructed him to take all the dishes of food before
him to his neighbor. “Sit with

him to eat, so that he does not feel ashamed. And take this sum for his
future ration. Place it under

his pillow or carpet so that he is not humiliated, and inform me when
this work is completed, for

not until then shall I eat.” “That man is not from me who sleeps
contentedly while his

neighbor sleeps hungry.” Holy Prophet Muhammad (Peace be upon him)


