


THE THREE COWS
There was a green and fresh pasture, in which three cows lived, a white
cow, a black cow and a

reddish-brown one. The cows were kind to each other. They were nice to
each other. They used to

graze in the meadow together. and they used to sleep near each other.

Till it happened one day, the reddish-brown colored lion of the forest
happened to pass that way.

The lion was unhappy. It was hungry, and was looking for a prey. On
catching sight of the cows it

became glad, but couldn't attack them, because they were together. So,
the lion sat in a corner and

waited till the cows would separate from each other.

The cows were together and wouldn’t part away from each other, because
they knew that if they

were together, no predator could attack them. The lion lay in ambush
nearby for two or three days.

But the cows continued to remain together, and wouldn’t separate from
each other. The lion

became unhappy.

A plan occurred to it. It went towards the cows, greeted them

and said: “How are you my friends?” Are you fine? I have

been remembering you for a long time, but because I am too

busy, I can’t come to you and ask about your health.

Today I said to myself: “Anyhow I should come and see you

from near and visit you.” The reddish-brown cow said: “Sir,

your coming has really pleased us and brightened our pasture.”

The lion said: “I have always remembered you, and have even ordered a
better pasture made ready

for you.” Reddish-brown cow said: “Sir, you have really obliged us and
we are very thankful to you.”

Both the white and the black cows were troubled by what their friend,
the reddish-brown cow said,

and were grieved at its thoughtlessness. They feared lest it should be
deceived.

They said to each other: Which forest has not got a better pasture? Why
does the reddish-brown

cow believe what the lion says? Doesn’t it know that lions seek other
animals only to prey on them?

The reddish-brown cow became more and more a close friend of the lion
each day.

The black cow and the white cow advised it as much as they could, but
with no avail.

One day the lion said to the reddish-brown cow: “You know that the color
of our bodies is dark

and that the color of the body of the white cow is light, and you also
know that the light color is the

opposite of the dark color. It would be very good if I eat the white
cow, so that there will be no

difference among us any longer and that we will be able to live together
well.”

The reddish-brown cow accepted the saying of the selfish lion and
started talking to the black cow

to keep it busy, so that the lion could eat the white cow with more
ease. The white cow was left

alone and was killed, while the black and the reddish-brown cows were
busy with idle talks.

Two or three days passed since the lion had devoured the white cow. The
lion, angry and uneasy,

was lying in a corner, and the reddish-brown cow was moving around the
lion and grazing. The lion

called the reddish-brown cow. The cow answered: “Yes sir!”

The lion said: “The color of my body and the color of your body are
reddish-brown, and black does

not go with our color. It will be very good if I eat the black cow, so
that in this forest we all will be

of the same color.” The reddish-brown cow accepted and moved away from
the black cow.

The lion attacked and devoured the black cow, too. And as for the
reddish-brown cow, it was so

filled with joy that it didn’t know what to do. It roamed and grazed and
said to itself: “It is only

me who has the color of the lion...” A few days passed since the black
cow had been devoured by

the lion. The lion roared and said. “O the reddish-brown cow! Where are
you?”

The reddish-brown cow, shaking with fear, went forward and said: “Yes
sir!” The lion said: “Today

it is your turn, get yourself ready, I am going to eat you.” The
reddish-brown cow, with great fear &

horror said: “Why sir, I am your friend. I did whatever you said. So why
do you want to eat me?”

The lion roared and said: “Friend of a friendless!” How is it possible
that a lion makes friendship

with a cow? No matter how much the reddish-brown cow begged and
entreated, the lion didn’t

accept its words. The lion attacked the cow.

The cow said: “Mr. Lion, please allow me to cry out three times before
you eat me.” The lion said:

“Quickly, quickly!” The reddish-brown cow cried out: “I was eaten the
very day the white cow was

eaten. I was eaten the very day the black cow was eaten. I was eaten the
very day I made.... with

you.” The lion devoured the reddish-brown cow very quickly. Then it said
to itself: “I have finished

my job in this forest. Now I had better go to other forests.” Divide and
rule policy.


