


AWHITE HAS NO SUPERIORITYOVER ABLACK
The following scene took place on a BA flight between Johannesburg and

London. A white woman, about 50 years old, was seated next to a black

man. Obviously disturbed by this, she called the air Hostess. Madam,

what is the matter, the hostess asked you obviously do not see it then?

She responded. You placed me next to a black man. I do not agree to sit
next to someone from such

a repugnant group. Give me an alternative seat. Be calm please, the
hostess replied.

Almost all the places on this flight are taken. I will go to see if
another place is available. The

Hostess went away and then came back a few minutes later. Madam, just as
I thought, there are no

other available seats in the economy class. I spoke to the captain and
he informed me that there is

also no seat in the business class. All the same, we still have one
place in the first class.

Before the woman could say anything, the hostess continued. It is not
usual for our company to

permit someone from the economy class to sit in the first class However,
given the circumstances;

the captain feels that it would be scandalous to make someone sit next
to someone so disgusting.

She turned to the black guy, and said. Therefore, Sir, if you would like
to, please take your hand

luggage because a seat awaits you in the first class. At the moment, the
other passengers who were

shocked by what they had just witnessed stood up and applauded.

This is a true story against racism, which is not usually told. All
mankind is from Adam and Eve; an

Arab has no superiority over a non-Arab, nor a non-Arab has any
superiority over an Arab; also a

white has no superiority over a black, nor does a black have any
superiority over white except by

piety and good action. Learn that every Muslim is the brother of another
Muslim, and that Muslims

constitute one brotherhood.


