


GHULAMHUSSEIN AND THE GAME OF CHANCE
Ghulamhusein was a popular social figure and a keen host of guests
coming to him from distant

lands. He lived in Moshi, a beautiful small town at the foot of Mt.
Kilimanjaro in Tanzania. He was

generous and hospitable to one and all. One of his hobbies during
leisure hours particularly on

Saturdays and Sundays was to play the game of cards with his friends.
For hours they used to get

together where they enjoyed the game. It was not with the aim of
gambling but rather just for

pleasure and pass time.

Once in the midst of a lively game of cards, his servant came to inform
him that a guest of his was

seriously ill at the guest house and needed his immediate attention. He
sent the servant back saying

he would come soon. But he was so much engrossed to withdraw from it. So
he continued to play

with keen interest.

After a while, his servant came again to report that the condition of
the guest was

deteriorating and needed his urgent attention as there was no one else
to attend.

But Ghulamhusein was so deeply engrossed in the game that he did not
want to be

disturbed. As such, again he sent the servant back promising to come
soon.

By the time he could be free from the very mind captivating game of
cards, the

servant came for the third time. But this time he reported that the
guest of his a

poor traveler from distant lands had already died. This news gave a
shock of his life to

Ghulamhusein. It convinced him of the evil and harmful effect of such an
indoor game. There and

then he vowed never to indulge himself in such a game.

Is this not an eye-opening example of an intoxicating and mentally
distracting game of cards,

commonly played today either as a pass-time or for gambling purposes?
Perhaps it also explains

the philosophy behind absolute Islamic forbiddance to play or watch such
a game, even without

the chance of gaining or losing money. It is meant to be prevention than
a cure, lest man is one day

tempted to use the game for gambling purpose.

"Abstention from sins is better than

seeking help afterward." Imam Ali (AS)


