


AN AGED STUDENT
Sikaki was a skilled artist an artisan. With great expertise and
interest, he made such a nice and

beautiful inkpot that it could be presented to the king. He expected
that, appreciating his artistic

skill, the king would encourage him as far as possible. So, with
countless hopes and thousand of

desires, he presented that inkpot to the king. In the beginning the king
was very impressed by his

artistic skill but afterwards an unpleasant event occurred that caused
an extraordinary change in

Sikaki’ s life and way of thinking.

When the king was observing the skilled artistry of the beautiful inkpot
and Sikaki was lost in the

world of thoughts, the people informed that a scholar-literary person or
jury is about to enter the

court. As soon as the scholar entered, the king got so much absorbed in
welcoming and talking to

him that he forgot Sikaki and his skilled artistry. This incident caused
an adverse and deep effect

on the heart of Sikaki.

He realized that now he would not receive the encouragement he had
expected and all his desires

and hopes are useless now. But Sikaki’s high spirited mind did not allow
him to be in peace, so he

started thinking as to what should he do. He decided to do what the
others have done and go on the

same way that the others have gone (uptill now). Therefore, he decided
to search for his lost hopes

in the world of knowledge, literature and books. Although for a wise man
who has passed the days

of his young age, it was not easy to study with young children and to
start right from the

preliminary stage. But he did not have a choice After all whenever the
fish is taken out of water,

it is fresh.

Worse than that, in the beginning he did not find any sort of interest
in himself regarding reading

and writing. Perhaps spending a long time in artistic works and
handicraft was the reason for

stagnancy in his scientific and literary talent. But neither his
advanced age nor lack of capability,

none of these could change his decision. With great enthusiasm and zeal
for attaining knowledge,

he strictly got busy with his studies, until another incident occurred:

The teacher who was teaching him Shafi’e jurisprudence (fiqh Shafi’e),
taught him this lesson:

“The teacher believes that the skin of a dog becomes clean (tahir) after
tanning.” Sikaki repeated

this sentence a lot of times so that at the time of examination he
should be able to succeed. But

when he was asked to answer this question, he said: “The dog believes
that the skin of a teacher

becomes clean after tanning.”

The audience upon hearing this answer started laughing. It was clear for
everybody that this old

man is absolutely incapable of reading and writing. After this incident
Sikaki not only left the

school , but he left the town and went towards the Jungle. By chance, he
reached the

foot of a mountain, where he saw that the water is falling drop by drop
from the top

and due to the continuous falling of water, a hole had been formed in
that hard stone.

He reflected for sometime, a good idea crossed his mind like lightning.
And he said:

“Maybe my heart is not ready to accept (knowledge) but it is not harder
than this

stone. It is impossible that continuous studying and hard work would be
ineffective.”

Therefore, he came back and with hard work, he got busy in the
attainment of

knowledge. As a result he was reckoned as one of the popular scholars of
his time.

You never be too old to learn something new.


