


WEALTH - LOVE - SUCCESS
A woman came out of her house and saw 3 old men with long white beards
sitting in her front yard.

She did not recognize them. She said “I don’t think I know you, but you
must be hungry.

Please come in and have something to eat.”

“Is the man of the house home?”, they asked.

“No,” she replied. “He’s out.”

“Then we cannot come in,” they replied.

In the evening when her husband came home,

she told him what had happened.

“Go tell them I am home and invite them in!”

The woman went out and invited the men in.

“We do not go into a House together,” they replied.

“Why is that?” she asked.

One of the old men explained: “His name is Wealth,” he said pointing to
one of his friends, and said

pointing to another one, “He is Success, and I am Love.” Then he added,
“Now go in and discuss

with your husband which one of us you want in your home.”

The woman went in and told her husband what was said. Her husband was
overjoyed. “How nice!,”

he said. “Since that is the case, let us invite Wealth. Let him come and
fill our home with wealth!”

His wife disagreed. “My dear, why don’t we invite Success?”

Their daughter-in-law was listening from the other corner of the house.
She jumped in with her

own suggestion: “Would it not be better to invite Love? Our home will
then be filled with love!”

“Let us heed our daughter-in-law’s advice,” said the husband to his
wife.

“Go out and invite Love to be our guest.”

The woman went out and asked the 3 old men,

“Which one of you is Love? Please come in and be our guest.”

Love got up and started walking toward the house. The other 2 also got
up and followed him.

Surprised, the lady asked Wealth and Success: “I only invited Love, Why
are you coming in?”

The old men replied together: “If you had invited Wealth or Success, the
other two of us would’ve

stayed out, but since you invited Love, wherever He goes, we go with
him. Wherever there is Love,

there is also Wealth and Success!!!”


