


LOVE AND TIME
Once upon a time, there was an island where all the feelings lived:
Happiness, Sadness, Knowledge,

and all of the others, including Love. One day it was announced to the
feelings that the island

would sink, so all constructed boats and left. Except for Love.

Love was the only one who stayed. Love wanted to hold out until the last
possible moment. When

the island had almost sunk, Love decided to ask for help.

Richness was passing by Love in a grand boat. Love said, “Richness, can
you take me with you?”

Richness answered, “No, I can’t. There is a lot of gold and silver in my
boat. There is no place here

for you.”

Love decided to ask Vanity who was also passing by in a beautiful
vessel. “Vanity, please help me!”

“I can’t help you, Love. You are all wet and might damage my boat,”
Vanity answered.

Sadness was close by so Love asked, “Sadness, let me go with you.” “Oh .
Love, I am so sad that

I need to be by myself!” Happiness passed by Love, too, but she was so
happy that she did not even

hear when Love called her.

Suddenly, there was a voice, “Come, Love, I will take you.” It was an
elder.

So blessed and overjoyed, Love even forgot to ask the elder where they
were

going. When they arrived at dry land, the elder went his own way.
Realizing

how much was owed the elder, Love asked Knowledge, another elder, “Who

Helped me?”

“It was Time,” Knowledge answered.

“Time?” asked Love. “But why did Time help me?” Knowledge smiled with
deep wisdom and

answered, “Because only Time is capable of understanding how valuable
Love is.”


