


THE MAYONNAISE AND THE COFFEE
When things in your life seem almost too much to handle, when 24 hours
in a day are

not enough, remember the mayonnaise Jar...and the Coffee...

A professor stood before his philosophy class and had some items

in front of him. When the class began, wordlessly, he picked up a

very large and empty mayonnaise Jar and proceeded to fill it with

golf balls.

He then asked the students if the Jar was full. They agreed that it was.
So the professor then picked

up a box of pebbles and poured them into the Jar. He shook the Jar
lightly. The pebbles rolled into

the open areas between the golf balls. He then asked the students again
if the Jar was full. They

agreed it was.

The professor next picked up a box of sand and poured it into the Jar.
Of course, the sand filled up

everything else. He asked once more if the Jar was full. The students
responded unanimous “yes.”

The professor then produced two cups of Coffee from under the table and
poured the entire

contents into the Jar, effectively filling the empty space between the
sand. The students laughed.

“Now,” said the professor, as the laughter subsided, “I want you to
recognize that this Jar

represents your life. The golf balls are the important things, your God,
family, your children, your

health, your friends, and your favorite passions things that if
everything else was lost and only they

remained, your life would still be full.” The pebbles are the other
things that matter like your job,

your house, and your car. The sand is everything else the small stuff.

“If you put the sand into the Jar first,” he continued, “there is no
room for the pebbles or the golf

balls.” The same goes for life. If you spend all your time and energy on
the small stuff, you will

never have room for the things that are important. Pay attention to the
things that are critical to

your happiness. Play with your children. Take care of the golf balls
first, the things that really

matter. Set your priorities. The rest is just sand.

One of the students raised her hand and inquired what the Coffee
represented. The professor

smiled. “I’m glad you asked. It just goes to show you that no matter how
full your life may seem,

there’s always room for a couple of cups of Coffee with a friends.”

THE BAR

A tale is told about a small town that had historically been “dry,”

(no alcohol sold) but then a local businessman decided to build a

tavern. A group of Christians from a local church were concerned

and planned an all-night prayer meeting to ask God to intervene.

It just so happened that shortly thereafter lightning struck the bar and
it burned to the ground.

The owner of the bar sued the church, claiming that the prayers of the
congregation were

responsible, but the church hired a lawyer to argue in court that they
were not responsible.

The presiding judge, after his initial review of the case, stated that
“No matter how this case comes

out, one thing is clear. The tavern owner believes in prayer and the
Christians do not.”


