


PUT THE GLASS DOWN!
A professor began his class by holding up a glass with some water in it.
He held it up for all to see

and asked the students, “How much do you think this glass weighs?”

‘50 gms!’.... ‘100 gms!’...... ‘125 gms’ the students answered.

“I really don’t know unless I weigh it,” said the professor, “but, my
question

is: What would happen if I held it up like this for a few minutes?”

“Nothing” the students said.

“Ok! What would happen if I held it up like this for an hour?” the
professor

asked. “Your arm would begin to ache,” said one of the students.

“You’re right, now what would happen if I held it for a day?”

“Your arm could go numb, you might have severe muscle stress and
paralysis and have to go to

hospital for sure!” ventured another student; and all the students
laughed.

“Very good. But during all this, did the weight of the glass change?”
asked the professor.

“No” the students said.

“Then what caused the arm ache and the muscle stress?” The students were
puzzled.

“Put the glass down!” said one of the students.

“Exactly!” said the professor. “Life’s problems are something like this.
Hold it for a few minutes in

your head and they seem okay. Think of them for a long time and they
begin to ache. Hold it even

longer and they begin to paralyze you. You will not be able to do
anything.”

“It’s important to think of the challenges (problems) in your life, but
EVEN MORE IMPORTANT is

to have trust in Allah (swt) and to ‘put them down’ at the end of every
day before you go to sleep.

That way, you are not stressed, you wake up every day fresh and strong
and can handle any issue,

any challenge that comes your way!”

So, as it becomes time for you to leave office today, Remember friend to
“PUT THE GLASS DOWN

TODAY” and have tranquility by putting trust in Almighty Allah (swt).

Holy Quran (48:4) says: “He it is who sent down tranquility into the
hearts of the believers that

they might have more faith added to their faith.”  Tranquility is sign
of strong faith while worries

and stress is sign of weak faith. Tell to your mind every day before you
go to sleep: “YAA

AYYATUHAN NAFSUL MUTMAINNAH, IRJI’II ILAA RABBIKI RADHIYATAN MARDHIYYAH,

FADKHULII FII IBAADII WADKHULII JANNATII”. (Al-Fajr 89:27-30)

“O soul that is at rest satisfied. Return to your Lord well-pleased
(with Him), well-pleasing (Him).

So, enter among My servants, and enter into my Paradise.”

By worrying so much, do not turn your life to hell. Good luck.


