


MAYI NEVER GET TOO BUSYIN MYOWN AFFAIRS!
It was a bitter, cold evening. The old man’s beard was glazed by
winter’s frost while he waited for

a ride across the river. The wait seemed endless. His body became numb
and stiff from the frigid

north wind. He heard the faint, steady rhythm of approaching hooves
galloping along the frozen

path.

Anxiously, he watched as several horsemen rounded the bend. He let the
first one pass by without

an effort to get his attention. Then another passed by... and another.

Finally, the last rider neared the spot where the old man sat like a

snow statue.

As this one drew near, the old man caught the rider’s eye and said,

“Sir, would you mind giving an old man a ride to the other side?

There doesn’t appear to be a passageway by foot.”

Reining his horse, the rider replied, “Sure thing. Hop aboard.”

Seeing the old man was unable to lift his half-frozen body from the
ground, the horseman

dismounted and helped the old man onto the horse. The horseman took the
old man not just across

the river, but to his destination, which was just a few miles away.

As they neared the tiny but cozy cottage, the horseman’s curiosity
caused him to inquire, “Sir, I

notice that you let several other riders pass by without making an
effort to secure a ride. Then I

came up and you immediately asked me for a ride. I’m curious why, on
such a bitter winter night;

you would wait and ask the last rider. What if I had refused and left
you there?”

The old man lowered himself slowly down from the horse, looked the rider
straight in the eyes, and

replied, “I’ve been around here for some time. I reckon I know people
pretty good.”

The old-timer continued, “I looked into the eyes of the other riders and
immediately saw there was

no concern for my situation. It would have been useless even to ask them
for a ride. But when I

looked into your eyes, kindness and compassion were evident. I knew,
then and there, that your

gentle spirit would welcome the opportunity to give me assistance in my
time of need.”

Those heartwarming comments touched the horseman deeply.

“I’m most grateful for what you have said,” he told the old man. “May I
never get too busy in my

own affairs that I fail to respond to the needs of others with kindness
and compassion.”

Ya Allah, Make me among those about whom the Holy Quran (Hashr 59:9) has
said: “And they give

them preference over their own selves even though they are in need.”


