


DON’T WE ALL
I was parked in front of the mall wiping off my car. I had just come
from the car wash and was

waiting for my wife to get out of work. Coming my way from across the
parking lot was what society

would consider a bum. From the looks of him, he had no car, no home, no
clean clothes, and no

money.

There are times when you feel generous but there are other times that
you

just don’t want to be bothered. This was one of those “don’t want to be

bothered times.”

“I hope he doesn’t ask me for any money,” I thought. He didn’t.

He came and sat on the curb in front of the bus

stop but he didn’t look like he could have enough

money to even ride the bus. After a few minutes he

spoke. “That’s a very pretty car,” he said.

He was ragged but he had an air of dignity around

him. His scraggly blond beard keeps more than his face warm.

I said, “Thanks,” and continued wiping off my car.

He sat there quietly as I worked. The expected plea for money never
came.

As the silence between us widened something inside said, “Ask him if he
needs any help.”

I was sure that he would say “yes” but I held true to the inner voice.

“Do you need any help?” I asked.

He answered in three simple but profound words that I shall never
forget. We often look for

wisdom in great men and women. We expect it from those of higher
learning and accomplishments.

I expected nothing but an outstretched grimy hand. He spoke the three
words that shook me.

“Don’t we all?” he said.

I was feeling high and mighty, successful and important, above a bum in
the street, until those

three words hit me like a twelve gauge shotgun. Don’t we all?

I needed help. Maybe not for bus fare or a place to sleep, but I needed
help. I reached in my wallet

and gave him not only enough for bus fare, but enough to get a warm meal
and shelter for the day.

Those three little words still ring true. No matter how much you have,
no matter how much you

have accomplished, you need help too. No matter how little you have, no
matter how loaded you

are with problems, even without money or a place to sleep, you can give
help.

Even if it’s just a compliment, you can give that. You never know when
you may see someone that

appears to have it all. They are waiting on you to give them what they
don’t have. A different

perspective on life, a glimpse at something beautiful, a respite from
daily chaos, that only you

through a torn world can see.

Maybe the man was just a homeless stranger wandering the streets. Maybe
he was more than that.

maybe he was sent by a power that is great and wise, to messenger to a
soul too comfortable in

themselves. Maybe God looked down, called an Angel, dressed him like a
bum, and then said,

“Go messenger to that man cleaning the car, that man needs help.” Don’t
we all?

“.....Even a smile can be charity.....” Holy Prophet Muhammad (Peace be
upon him)


