


THE SHIP
A voyaging ship was wrecked during a storm at sea and only two of the
men on it were able to swim

to a small, desert like island.

The two survivors, not knowing what else to do, agreed that they had no
other recourse but to pray

to God. However, to find out whose prayer was more powerful, they agreed
to divide the territory

between them and stay on opposite sides of the island.

The first thing they prayed for was food. The next morning, the first
man saw a fruit-bearing tree

on his side of the land, and he was able to eat its fruit. The other
man’s parcel of land remained

barren.

After a week, the first man was lonely and he decided to pray for a
wife. The next day, another ship

was wrecked, and the only survivor was a woman who swam to his side of
the land. On the other

side of the island, there was nothing.

Soon the first man prayed for a house, clothes, more food. The next day,
like magic, all of these

were given to him. However, the second man still had nothing.

Finally, the first man prayed for a ship, so that he and his wife

could leave the island. In the morning, he found a ship docked at

his side of the island. The first man boarded the ship with his wife

and decided to leave the second man on the island.

He considered the other man unworthy to receive God’s blessings,

since none of his prayers had been answered.

As the ship was about to leave, the first man heard a voice from heaven
booming, “Why are you

leaving your companion on the island?”

“My blessings are mine alone, since I was the one who prayed for them,”
the first man answered.

“His prayers were all unanswered and so he does not deserve anything.”

“You are mistaken!” the voice rebuked him. “He had only one prayer,
which I answered. If not for

that, you would not have received any of my blessings.”

“Tell me,” the first man asked the voice, “What did he pray for that I
should owe him anything?”

“He prayed that all your prayers be answered.”

For all we know, our blessings are not the fruits of our prayers alone,
but those of another praying for us.


