


THE CLEVER KING!
There was a country long time ago where the people would change a king
every year. The person

who would become the king had to agree to a contract that he would be
sent to an island after his

one year of being a king.

One king finished his term and it was time for him to go to the island
and live there. The people

dressed him up in expensive clothes and put him on an elephant and took
him around the cities to

say goodbye to all the people. This was the moment of sadness for all
the kings who ruled for one

year. After saying farewell, the people took the king with a boat to
remote island and left him there.

On their way back, they discovered a ship that had sunk just recently.
They saw a young man who

survived by holding on to a floating piece of wood. As they needed a new
king, they picked up the

young man and took him to their country. They requested him to be a king
for a year. First he

refused but later he agreed to be a king. People told him about all the
rules and regulations and

that how he will be sent to an island after one year.

After three days of being a king, he asked the ministers if they could
show him the island where all

the other kings were sent. They agreed and took him to the island. The
island was covered with

thick Jungles and sounds of vicious animals were heard coming out of
them. The king went little bit

inside to check. Soon he discovered the dead bodies of all the past
kings. He understood that as

soon as they were left in the island, the animals came and killed them.

The king went back to the country and collected 100 strong workers. He
took them to the island

and instructed them to clean the Jungle, remove all the deadly animals &
cut down all excess trees.

He would visit the island every month to see how the work was
progressing. In the first month, all

the animals were removed and many trees were cut down. In the second
month, the whole island

was cleaned out. The king then told the workers to plant gardens in
various parts of the island.

He also took with himself useful animals like chickens, ducks, birds,
goats, cows etc. In the third

month, he ordered the workers to build big houses and docking stations
for ships. Over the months,

the island turned into a beautiful place.

The young king would wear simple clothes and spend very little

from his earnings as a king. He sent all the earnings to the island

for storage. When nine months passed like this, the king called the

ministers and told them: “I know that I have to go the island after

one year, but I would like to go there right now.” But the ministers

didn’t agree to this and said that he has to wait for another 3

months to complete the year.

3 months passed and now it was a full year. The people dressed up

the young king and put him on an elephant to take him around the

country to say goodbye to others. However, this king is

unusually happy to leave the kingdom.

People asked him, “All the other kings would cry at this moment and why
are you laughing?”

He replied, “Don’t you know what the wise people say? They say that when
you came to this world

as a baby, you were crying and everyone was smiling. Live such a life
that when you are die, you

will be smiling and everyone around you will be crying. I have lived
that life. While all the other

kings were lost into the luxuries of the kingdom, I always thought about
the future and planned for

it. I turned the deadly island into a beautiful abode for me where I can
stay peacefully.”

The moral lesson from this story is about how we should live our life.
The life of this world is to

prepare for the life hereafter. In this life, we shouldn’t get lost into
the deceiving and attractive

things of this world and forget about what is to come in the afterlife.
Rather, even if we are kings,

we should live a simple life like our beloved Prophet Muhammad (SAW) and
save all our

enjoyments for the hereafter. May Allah make it easy for us all. Amin.

Holy Quran (31:34) says: Verily the knowledge of the Hour is with Allah
(alone). It is He Who

sends down rain, and He Who knows what is in the wombs. Nor does any one
know what it is that

he will earn on the morrow: Nor does any one know in what land he is to
die. Verily with Allah is

full knowledge and He is acquainted (with all things).

Holy Quran (59:18) urges us to prepare for tomorrow: O ye who believe!
Fear Allah, and let every

soul look to what (provision) He has sent forth for the morrow. Yea,
fear Allah: for Allah is

well-acquainted with (all) that ye do.

Some body asked Imam Hassan (AS),

Why are we reluctant to die, why don’t we like death?

“Because,” replied the Imam Hassan (AS),

“You ruined your next world and developed this one; naturally,

you do not like to be transferred from flourishing to decline.”


