


BUILDING YOUR HOUSE
An elderly carpenter was ready to retire. He told his
employer-contractor of his plans to leave the

house-building business to live a more leisurely life with his wife and
enjoy his extended family. He

would miss the paycheck each week, but he wanted to retire. They could
get by.

The contractor was sorry to see his good worker go & asked if he could
build just one more house as

a personal favor. The carpenter said yes, but over time it was easy to
see that his heart was not in

his work. He resorted to shoddy workmanship and used inferior materials.
It was an unfortunate

way to end a dedicated career.

When the carpenter finished his work, his employer came to inspect

the house. Then he handed the front-door key to the carpenter and

said, "This is your house... my gift to you."

The carpenter was shocked!

What a shame! If he had only known he was building his own house,

he would have done it all so differently.

So it is with us. We build our lives, a day at a time, often putting
less than our best into the

building. Then, with a shock, we realize we have to live in the house we
have built.

If we could do it over, we would do it much differently.

But, you cannot go back. You are the carpenter, and every day you hammer
a nail, place a board, or

erect a wall. Someone once said, “Life is a do-it-yourself project.”
Your attitude, and the choices you

make today, helps build the “house” you will live in tomorrow.
Therefore, build wisely!

SAND AND STONE

A story tells that two friends were walking through the desert. During
some point of the journey

they had an argument, and one friend slapped the other one in the face.
The one who got slapped

was hurt, but without saying anything, wrote in the sand: “TODAY MY BEST
FRIEND SLAPPED

ME IN THE FACE.”

They kept on walking until they found an oasis, where they decided to

take a bath. The one, who had been slapped, got stuck in the mire and

started drowning, but the friend saved him. After the friend recovered

from the near drowning, he wrote on a stone: “TODAY MY BEST

FRIEND SAVED MY LIFE.”

The friend who had slapped and saved his best friend asked him, “After

I hurt you, you wrote in the sand and now, you write on a stone, why?”

The other friend replied: “When someone hurts us, we should write it
down in sand where winds of

forgiveness can erase it away. But, when someone does something good for
us, we must engrave it

in stone where no wind can ever erase it.”

Learn to write your hurts in the sand, and to carve your benefits in
stone.


