


ATEACHER’S PROTEST!
There was no timetable nor a room designated for PRAYERS in the

School. The School was ‘secular,’ hence prayers were not supposed to

be allowed.

After being interviewed and accepted by the school administration,

the eager teaching prospect said in protest: “Let me see if I’ve got
this

right.” You want me to go into that room with all those kids and fill

their every waking moment with a love for learning. And I’m

supposed to instill a sense of pride in their ethnicity, modify their

disruptive behavior, observe them for signs of abuse and even censor

their T-shirt messages and dress habits.

You want me to wage a war on drugs and sexually transmitted diseases,
check their backpacks for

weapons of mass destruction, and raise their self-esteem.

You want me to teach them firm belief in God, patriotism, good
citizenship, sportsmanship, and

fair play, how and where to register to vote, how to balance a
checkbook, & how to apply for a job.

I am to check their heads for lice, maintain a safe environment,
recognize signs of antisocial

behavior, offer advice, write letters of recommendation for student
employment and scholarships,

and encourage respect for their elders and future employers.

And I am to communicate regularly with the parents by letter, telephone,
newsletter, & report card.

All of this I am to do with just a piece of chalk, a blackboard, a few
books, a bulletin board, and a

big smile AND on a starting salary that qualifies my family for food
stamps!

You want me to do all of this, and you expect me NOT TO PRAY.

You expect me not to pray when Holy Quran (Baqarah 2:45) says: “Nay,
seek (Allah’s) help with

patient perseverance and PRAYER: It is indeed hard, except to those who
bring a lowly spirit.”

“O my Lord! Make me and my children among those who establish prayers.”
(Ibrahim: 40)

“Indeed it is the Prayers, which helps to refrain from indecent acts and
evils.” (Ankabut: 45)

You want me to do all of this and you expect me not to pray when SUCCESS
of every one depends

on Prayers. Holy Quran (Al-Mu’minuun: 9) says that successful believers
are: “...... those who are

punctual in their prayers.”

Dear sir, since I am sure that I will not be able to fulfill your
expectations, nor I will be successful in

my career WITHOUT prayers, “I resign willingly from the post.”

The Administrator looked down for a while then suddenly declared: “Young
man, go ahead with

your job. You have taught me a very important lesson today: Without
prayers and help from God,

no work is a success. We shall make special arrangements for prayers
from today.”


