


DO NOT DO EVILTO ANYONE
There was a man in Isfahan who used to beat his wife but unfortunately
she

succumbed to his beating though he had not intended to kill her. But
when she

was dead he became fearful of her relatives. In a state of anxiety he
came out of

his house and met an acquaintance to whom he posed his problem.

The friend told him to invite a young man to his house and behead him
and put

the severed head next to the wife’s corpse. Then he would tell the
wife’s relatives

that he had found them together in bed and was unable to control his
ire. And

slew them both. The man liked the idea and sat at the doorway in
anticipation of

a young man. After sometime a handsome youth passed by his house. He
invited him inside and

beheaded him.

Then he summoned the wife’s relatives and told them the fictitious
story. They were satisfied but

the person who had devised this plan had a teenage son who did not reach
home that day. The man

was worried and when the son failed to turn up he came to the house of
the one whom he had

offered evil advice and asked him if he carried out the plan suggested
by him. Yes, said he and took

him near the dead bodies. He was shocked when he saw that the youth he
had killed was his own

son. His evil advice caused the death of his own son.

The moral of this story is that one who digs a pit for others falls into
it himself.

History is replete with such incidents.

According to Tafserul Mizan the following saying was common among the
Arabs: One who digs a

hole for his brother; Allah throws him headlong into it. A similar
proverb is present in Persian also:

Do not do evil to anyone the sane evil will turn towards you.

Reference: Greater Sins Vol. 3 (English) by Ayatullah Dastagaub Shirazi


