


PUPPIES FOR SALE
A farmer had some puppies he needed to sell. He painted a sign
advertising the pups and set about

nailing it to a post on the edge of his yard. As he was driving the last
nail into the post, he felt a tug

on his overalls. He looked down into the Eyes of a little boy.

“Mister,” he said, “I want to buy one of your puppies.”

“Well,” said the farmer, as he rubbed the sweat off the back of his
neck, “these puppies come from

fine parents and cost a good deal of money.”

The boy dropped his head for a moment. Then reaching deep into his
pocket, he pulled out a

handful of change and held it up to the farmer. “I’ve got thirty-nine
cents. Is that enough to take a

look?” “Sure,” said the farmer.

And with that he let out a whistle, “Here Dolly!” he called.

Out from the doghouse and down the ramp ran Dolly followed by four
little balls of fur.

The little boy pressed his face against the chain link fence. His eyes
danced with delight.

As the dogs made their way to the fence, the little boy noticed
something else stirring inside the

doghouse. Slowly another little ball appeared; this One noticeably
smaller. Down the ramp it slid.

Then in a somewhat awkward manner the little pup began hobbling toward
the others, doing its

best to catch up....

“I want that one,” the little boy said, pointing to the runt.

The farmer knelt down at the boy's side and said, “Son, you don’t want
that

puppy. He will never be able to run and play with you like these other
dogs

would.”

With that the little boy stepped back from the fence, reached down, and

began rolling up one leg of his trousers. In doing so he revealed a
steel

brace running down both sides of his leg attaching itself to a specially
made

shoe. Looking back up at the farmer, he said, “You see sir, I don’t run
too well myself, and he will

need someone who understands.”

The world is full of people who need someone who understands.


