


OFFFICE BOY
A jobless man applied for the position of “office boy” at a very big
firm.

The HR manager interviewed him, then a test: clean the floor. “You are
hired” he said, give me

your email address, and I’ll send you the application to fill, as well
as when you will start.

The man replied “I don’t have a computer, neither an email.”

I’m sorry, said the HR manager, if you don’t have an email that means
you do not exist. And who

doesn’t exist, cannot have the job. The man left with no hope at all. He
didn’t know what to do,

with only $10 US in his pocket.

He then decided to go to the supermarket and buy a 10 KG tomato crate.
He then sold the tomatoes

in a door to door round. In less than two hours, he succeeded to double
his capital. He repeated the

operation 3 times, and returned home with $60 US. The man realized that
he can survive by this

way, and started to go everyday earlier, and return late. Thus, his
money doubles or triples every

day. Shortly later, he bought a cart, then a truck, and then he had his
own fleet of delivery vehicles.

5 years later, the man is one of the biggest food retailers in the US.
He started to plan his family’s

future, and decided to have a life insurance.

He called an insurance broker, and chooses a protection plan. When the
conversation was

concluded, the broker asked him his email. The man replied: “I don’t
have an email.” The broker

replied curiously, you don’t have an email, and yet have succeeded to
build an

empire. Do you imagine what you could have been if you had an email?

The man thought for a while, and replied: an office boy!

The moral of this story:

1: Internet is not the solution to your life.

2: If you don’t have internet and you work hard you can be a
millionaire.

3: If you received this message by email, you are closer to be an office
boy, rather than a

MILLIONAIRE.


