


ONE BEDROOM FLAT
As the dream of most parents I had acquired a MBBS degree and passed
PLAB to enter UK, the

land of braves and opportunity. When I arrived in the UK, it was as if a
dream had come true. Here

at last I was in the place where I wanted to be. I decided I would be
staying in this country for

about Five years (maximum Permit Free Period) in which time I would have
earned enough money

to settle down in India.

My father was a government employee and after his retirement, the only
asset he could acquire was

a decent one bedroom flat. I wanted to do some thing more than him. I
started feeling homesick

and lonely as the time passed. I used to call home and speak to my
parents every week using cheap

international phone cards.

Two years passed, two years of Burgers at McDonald’s and chicken legs in
KFC and discos and 2

years watching the foreign exchange rate getting happy whenever the
Rupee value went down.

Finally I decided to get married. Told my parents that I have only 10
days of holidays and

everything must be done within these 10 days. I got my ticket booked in
the cheapest flight. Was

jubilant as I was actually enjoying shopping for gifts for all my
relatives and friends back home.

If I miss anyone then there will be talks. After reaching home I spent
home one week going through

all the photographs of girls and as the time was getting shorter I was
forced to select one candidate.

In-laws told me, to my surprise, that I would have to get married in 2-3
days, as I will not get

anymore holidays soon and they cannot wait for long.

After the marriage, it was time to return to UK, after giving some money
to my parents and telling

the neighbors to look after them, we (I was lucky and managed to get the
visa of my wife early)

returned to UK.

My wife enjoyed this country for about two months and then she started
feeling lonely. The

frequency of calling India increased to twice in a week sometimes 3
times a week as she also has to

call her parents. Our savings started diminishing. After two more years
we started to have kids.

Two lovely kids, a boy and a girl, were gifted to us by the almighty.
Every time I spoke to my

parents, they asked me to come to India so that they can see their
grand-children. Every year I

decide to go to India.

But part work, part monetary conditions prevented it. Years went by and
visiting India was a

distant dream. Then suddenly one day I got a message that my parents
were seriously sick. I tried

but I couldn’t get any holidays and was stuck up in the procedures and
thus could not go to India.

The next message I got was my parents were passed away and as there was
no one to do the last

rites the society members had done whatever they could. I was depressed.
My parents passed away

without seeing their grand children.

After couple more years passed away, much to my children’s dislike (by
now nearly cocos) and my

wife’s joy we returned to India to settle down. I started to look for a
suitable property, but to my

dismay my savings were short and the property prices had gone up during
all these years. I had to

return to the UK. My wife refused to come back with me and my children
refused to stay in India.

My 2 children and I returned to UK after promising my wife I would be
back for good after two

years.

Time passed by, my daughter decided to get married to a Scottish and my
son was happy living in

Ireland. I decided that enough is enough and wound-up every thing and
returned to India. I had

just enough money to buy a decent Two-bed room flat in a well-developed
locality. Now I am 60

years old and the only time I go out of the flat is for the routine
visit to the nearby place of worship.

My faithful wife has also left me and gone to the holy abode.

Sometimes I wondered was it worth all this? My father, even after
staying in India, had a house to

his name and I too have the same, nothing more.

I lost my parents and children for just ONE EXTRA BEDROOM. Looking out
from the window I

see a lot of children dancing. This damned cable TV has spoiled our new
generation and these

children are losing their values and culture because of it. I get
occasional cards from my children

asking I am alright.

Well at least they remember me. Now perhaps after I die it will be

the neighbors again who will be performing my last rites,

God Bless them.

But the question still remains ‘was all this worth it?’

I am still searching for an answer....There are no unanswered

prayers.... At times the answer is NO.

THEYARE NOT IN NEED OF YOUR PRESENTS...!

A’bdullah Ibn Masud had been one of the close companions of the Holy
Prophet (SAW) and had

developed into being a distinguished and zealous personality of Islam.
During the caliphate of

Hazrat U’thman, he suffered a bout of illness, which eventually resulted
in his death.

Hazrat U’thman once came to pay him a visit and finding him distressed,
asked, what distresses

you so greatly? My sins, he answered.

“The honor of a Mu’min lies in night worship

Tell me your wish so that I can fulfill it for you.

and his esteem lies in his being

independent of the people.”

I desire God mercy, replied Ibn Masud.

Imam Sadiq (AS)

The caliph asked, if you permit, I could call for the doctor.

It is the Doctor who has made me sick, replied Ibn Masud.

If you want, I could present you with gifts from the Public Treasury.

Ibn Masud retorted, at the time when I was in need, you did not give me
a thing and now that I am

not in need, you wish to shower me with presents!

Hazrat U’thman insisted, Let these gifts be for your daughters then.

They are not in need of your presents, Ibn Masud replied tersely. I have
instructed them to recite

the chapter Al-Waaqiah every night, for surely, I have heard the Holy
Prophet (SAW) say: One, who

recites the chapter Al-Waaqiah every night, shall never be afflicted by
poverty.

“Prayer reverts both what has been destined and what has not been
destined.” Imam Musa (AS)


