


YOU ARE BEAUTIFUL!
It’s a phrase that my mother uses a lot. I used to wonder, “How in the
world

can Mother call them beautiful?” I am a logical, statistical man. I call
things

as I see them. I didn’t see beauty.

My mother would tell people this with an enthusiasm they could feel. She

was genuine. She wasn’t telling them they were beautiful to get
something

from them. Most of the time, they were trying to get something from her.

I wondered for years what was wrong with Mother’s perception and vision.

Couldn’t she see that all of the people she called beautiful weren’t
beautiful?

You were beautiful only if you had a certain figure and face that was
classed as beautiful by the laws

of the world and glamour. Yet when my mother spoke, people smiled as
though Glamour magazine

had listed them as one of the beautiful people of the year.

It took me years to finally understand my mother’s vision and the
phrase, “Beauty is in the eye of

the beholder.” My mother had a spirit that could see the beauty in a
person. Most only look on the

outside and then compare what they see with the standards the world has
given them. That was

what I was doing. Today when you leave your house, carefully look at the
first person whom you

see and notice how beautiful they are.

They may be balding, fat, wrinkled, pimply, or any of the other things
the world frowns upon as

beauty. Look at them closely and look for the beauty. If you really
look, you’ll see it.

I didn’t believe that at first until I tried it. Sure enough, as I
stared and opened another set of eyes,

I was able to see the beauty in every person. No matter how rough or
worn a person looked, each

pain etched line held a glimpse of beauty.

You just had to look for the beauty. It’s there. When you leave your
home this morning, look hard

at each person. You will start to see the beauty of every human who you
didn’t know existed. Trust

me and try this. If you sincerely look, you will see it. When you get
home after seeing the beauty in

faces you see, look in the mirror. You are beautiful. Thank you mama for
all of the beauty that you

have not only seen, but added. She used to tell me: “Be like a honey bee
which always sits on

beautiful flowers.”

Prophet Muhammad (SAW) said: “Indeed Allah is Beautiful and He loves
beauty.” In other place

he (SAW) says: “A believer is beautiful because Allah has given him
beautiful characters.”

Holy Quran emphasizes on remembering the beautiful things Allah (SWT)
has created and praise

them profusely. “And as for the blessing of your Lord, do announce it.”
(93:11)

Allah (SWT) Himself remembers and praises the good creations He has
created; among them is His

beloved Prophet Muhammad (SAW): “And He exalted your praise (O
Muhammad).” (94:4)

“Indeed Allah and His Angels are sending blessings upon the Prophet. O
you who believe, send

blessings upon him (you as well) and salute him with a (becoming)
salutation.” (33:56)

Dear readers, you are beautiful. May Allah’s beautiful blessings be upon
you always.


