


Contextualization: A New Missionary Approach to Muslims
The author has worked as Research Associate at the Islamic Foundation,
Leicester, and is presently Research Scholar at the Centre of West Asian
Studies, Aligarh Muslim University, India.

Christian evangelism, despite consistent organized effort in the Muslim
world since the beginnings of the colonial era, has made little
progress. The turnout of the resources put in is so low that according
to statistics reported by Church sources, on the average one Christian
priest in his entire life achieves one convert from Islam.

Unable to reverse the tide of paganism and materialism in its quarters,
due to its own inherent theological weakness, Christianity has been
struggling to expand in Africa and Asia. While believing Christians have
become a diminishing minority in the West itself, Church authorities
have looked hopefully to Africa and Asia, encouraged by the high
illiteracy rates and rampant poverty there, both of which are a legacy
of the colonial era during which the Christian countries devastated
these lands.

Reportedly, Muslims have increased in the last fifty years by 235%,
whereas the corresponding increase in the Christian world has been 47% a
figure which includes the statistical Christians of the capitalist world
as well as the populations of the Eastern European countries of the
communist bloc. The high population growth rates in Muslim countries as
well as the world-wide resurgence of Islam in recent years have deeply
disturbed Christian organizations, leading them to devise new missionary
approaches to Muslims. One of such approaches, which is more an antic
than evangelism, is \`contextualization'.

Modern Christian missions started their activities in the 16th century
and entered alien lands, including the Crescent, under the umbrella of
colonial powers. In African animistic societies missions achieved
encouraging results. However, in countries like India and China, the
homelands of great ancient civilizations, Hinduism and Buddhism,
Christian missions failed badly. The Crescent proved more barren.

If Christianity was able to win a few converts from the Crescent, at the
same time, it yielded many of its adherents to Islam. However, the
failure of the missions did not benight their ardency and sanguinity.
Missionaries have been in search of new methods for Muslim outreach.
Their newest discovery is contextual approach which has been much
debated in some theological books and journals which throw ample light
on its theological and practical implications.

Arguments For Contextualization
The term \`contextualization' as a specific missionary term came to the
fore in 1972 when the Theological Educational Fund (TEF), spon­sored by
the World Council of Churches (WCC), published its report “Ministry in
Context”, in which churches were strongly urged to introduce some
radical reforms in theological education'. Since then there has been
heated controversy representing a very wide divergence of opinion on the
issue. However, it has been used in some parts of the world as a
successful method

for missionary outreach and this has imparted to it further significance
and validity.

In 1972, contextuality was a somewhat complicated nuclear concept.
However, in 1988, after a period of sixteen years in which it has been
much debated, it looks somewhat comprehensible, though some serious
practical questions still remain. Is it a new terminology to express the
old concept of indigenization or does it mean something: more or is it a
totally new concept? And if it is fairly a new terminology how can it be
defined and what are the parameters to distinguish it from being a
syncretism? These are some of the questions which, figure in all
discussions.

Indigenization and contextualization, in fact, are not contradictory to
each other. However, the later has a wider meaning than the former. The
concept of an indigenous church came to the fore in the nineteenth
century when Christianity was severely criticized as the white man's
religion in Africa and charged with foreignness in Asia.

As the Africans and Asians were required to embrace the paganized
Christianity of Europe and denounce their own culture and with the local
churches under the direct control of the white foreigners, who were
obsessed with a sense of racial superiority and administrative wisdom,
the afore­said Afro-Asian criticism contained a great deal of truth.
Moved by such \`allegations' some church leaders, determined to bring
some dignity to the national and regional churches, and conceived the
idea of an indigenous church. Indignity was then defined as to establish
a self-supporting, self-governing and self-propagating native church.
Much the same idea was expressed in 1938 when the Madras Conference
defined indigenization as follows:

An indigenous church, young or old, in the East or in the West, is a
church, rooted in obedience to Christ, spontaneously uses forms of
thought and modes of action natural and familiar in its own
environment.1

However, it should be quite clear that such a native church will remain
very much an inseparable part of the universal church. Indigenization,
in fact, includes three things: “(1) relatedness to the soil-ability to
make elements of local churches captive to Christ; (2) possession of an
ade­quately trained ministry, a ministry adapted to local requirements;
(3) an inner spiritual life, nurturing the Christian community,
witness­ing to the unevangelized.”2

Contextualization includes, in sum, all that is implied in
indigeni­zation and a bit more. It is, in fact, an activity to engage in
constructing or developing a national theology or making Christianity
relevant to a provided group of people. Kato remarks:

We understand the term to mean making concepts or ideals relevant in a
given situation.... Since the Gospel message is inspired but the mode of
its expression is not, contextualization of the modes of expression is
not only right but necessary.3

In “Contextualization: Theory, Tradition and Method”, Buswell proposes
to break down the term into three categories: “contextualization of the
Witness, contextualization of the church and its leadership and
contextualization of the Word”.4 Contextualization of the Witness,
Buswell

explains, is a kind of inculturation, that is “to make the Gospel
message intelligible in the idiom of the language and culture of the
receivers”.5 Buswell finds no significant difference between
contextuali­zation and indigenization. To contextualize the church and
its leadership means to indigenize both.

Contextualization of the Word, according to Buswell, implies translation
of the Logos and doing an ethno theology in the context of this or that
ethnic group. Buswell further adduces his point of view by quoting
Flonde Efefe.

To Africanize Christianity cannot be an occasion for prefabricating a
new theology. The purpose of the Pan-African movement or African
theology is to promote an African expression of the interpretation of
the Gospel.6

Bruce Fleming, another missiologist, explains contextualization with
reference to the following three terms: supra cultural, Trans cultural
and cultural.7 Supra cultural, Fleming explains, is the framework
revealed in the Scripture. In other words, it is the Biblical
Christianity and truth that can never be compromised during the course
of cross-cultural communication. While Christian experiences learnt
through history, Christian tradition are termed \`trans cultural' ,
\`cultural' simply implies the construction or development of a native
Christian theology.

However, Charles R. Taber offers a more lucid definition.
“Con­textualization”, he says, “is the effort to understand and take
seriously the specific context of each human group and person on its own
terms and in all its dimensions-cultural, religious, social, political,
economic ­and to discern what the Gospel says to people in that
context”. Thus contextualization for Taber is “to discover in the
Scripture what God is saying to these people”. “In other words”, Taber
adds, “Contextuali­zation takes very seriously the example of Jesus in
the sensitive and careful way he offered each person a Gospel tailored
to his or her own context”.8

Contextualization is, no doubt, a fairly new missionary term. How­ever,
its germs are found in the past, especially in the life and activity of
the early Church. St. Paul, in particular, was a perfect contextualized
preacher. He expresses, in fact, a contextual theology and approach when
he says:

I am a free man, nobody's slave; but I make myself everybody's slave in
order to win as many people as possible.9

As the Jews were reluctant to give up their Law, Paul did not demand
that they abandon it. Instead, he acknowledged their world-view and
invited them to believe in Jesus without abandoning the Torah. He dealt
with the Gentiles in a similar way when he took the Gospel to them. The
Law and other Jewish traditions were absolutely repugnant to the pagans;
so Paul abolished the Law for the sake of their conversion. He held that
Biblical Christianity was not related to any particular culture. The
basic Christian truth is one: faith in Christ. Whoever accepts this
truth enters the Christian fold, whatever his culture.

The Church seems to have been conscious of the significance of a
contextual approach throughout its history. In the days long past, in
1659, the Roman Papacy had prepared some instructions and guide­lines
for Christian missionaries working in China which anticipate
contextuality:

Do not regard it as your task and do not bring any pressure to bear on
the peoples to change their manners, customs and uses, unless they are
evidently contrary to religion and sound morals. What could be more
absurd than to transport France, Spain, Italy or some other European
country to China? Do not draw invidious contrasts between the customs of
the peoples and those of Europe; do your utmost to adapt yourself to
them.10

The last of the Papal instructions: “do your utmost to adapt yourself to
them” is, in fact, the core of the contextualized witness. It involves
respect and love extended to the local culture and customs.
Further­more, a missionary is required not only to respect the national
culture but to identify with and adapt himself to it as much as
possible.

A far better example of contextuality is, however, found in the
personality and work of Robert de Nobili (1577-1665), an Italian Jesuit
of noble birth who arrived in India in 1605. Within a few months of his
arrival he learnt Tamil, one of the four ancient Dravidian lan­guages,
on the Fisher Coast.

He then went to Madurai, then a great centre of Tamil thought,
literature and culture. There were already some missionaries in Madurai
and a church functioning under the leadership of Father Fernandez, a
Portuguese Jesuit. These missionaries were working along the traditional
lines they had inherited from Goa, the centre of the Catholic mission in
India. Their manners and customs were purely European, hence alien and
quite abhorrent to the Indians. These missionaries mistook the European
culture as an inseparable part of the Christian faith which made it
impossible for affluent and higher Indian castes to embrace it.

Nobili observed the weaknesses of the Catholic mission and the need for
a new method for missionary outreach. He realized that the Brahmins
could be evangelized only by way of an identification with their culture
and life style. As a result he cut himself off from the rest of the
missionaries, studied the Brahmin culture, their prejudices and Tamil
classics. Brahmins should not be asked, Nobili said, to abnegate the
special privileges they had in the society or to give up their cultural
habits unless they were obviously idolatrous. To identify with them
Nobili became a Sanyasi guru, a priest and teacher who renounces the
luxuries of the material world and adopts an ascetic way of life. As
soon as he did so many Brahmins flocked to him to listen to his message.
The resulting conversion was encouraging. He baptized several hundred
Brahmins in Madurai, Trichinopoly and Salem.

However, Nobili's fellow missionaries were not happy with his method of
evangelism and his toleration of certain Hindu taboos. They reported to
the Holy Roman See “that he was tolerating Hindu super­stition, that he
was deceiving the people and that by segregating his converts, he was
creating a schism in the Church.11 “Whether a deceiver, a hypocrite or
the reverse of both let it be judged by theologians from the viewpoint
of contextual theology he was a perfect contextualized preacher. As can
be ascertained from the above discussion contextualization of the Gospel
in any provided group is a risky and difficult task. It “requires a
profound empirical analysis of the context in place of a flip or a
priory judgment.”12 This is the reason some theologians and
missiologists, especially of the Third World, argue

that nationals are best suited to do contextual theology. Foreign
missiologists, even trained missionaries, often fail to understand the
given situation and as a result commit serious mistakes.

Western missiologists are also divided on this issue. The findings of a
survey conducted by the Association of Evangelical Professors of Mission
runs:

Though the larger block of votes affirmed this (i.e. encouraging
nationals to develop their own theologies) as desirable (27), a
significant number were not sure (10), and a slightly large group (17)
denied it. The combined total of the \`no' and \`not sure' equated that
of the affirmative vote.13

However, both nationals and foreigners have been engaged in the task of
developing contextual theology and approaches to reach the unreached.

Contextualization, as stated above, is a risky enterprise. For, if not
carefully done, it might lead to syncretism. Apprehensive of it, many
theologians have rejected the whole concept of contextualization and
branded it as un-Christian. They believe that Christianity and Western
culture are inseparable and Christianization necessarily warrants
Westernization. However, the contextualists hold all such notions as
baseless and un-Christian.

They point out that Western Christianity itself is paganized and its
many postulates have no grounding in the Bible. However, with a view to
overcoming the fear of syncretism, advocates of the contextual approach
offer a theory of critical contextualization. It implies that every
culture will be critically examined and all that is un-Biblical or
contradictory to the basic Biblical teachings will be rejected. It
naturally implies that whatever corresponds to the Christian truth will
be accommodated and adjusted. Norman R. Ericson prescribes three
criteria to contextualize the Gospel in given situations in a way that
might reduce the possibility of syncretism:

1. “Truth. There is a body of truth which is assumed. This truth,
whether implicit or explicit, forms the absolute standard by which
everything must be evaluated.

2. Meaning. The Christians in society must so contextualize that the
right meanings are delivered through the cultural forms and ideology. We
must be continually aware that the meanings of actions or objects in
Western society will not regularly have the same meanings in the Third
World. The Christian must then be careful not to deliver the wrong
meaning by his mode of behaviour or cultural participation. The question
must always be asked: What does this mean to the people?

3. Communication. At the verbal-ideological level, consistent attention
must be given to effectiveness. How is our Gospel communi­cated?...How
are the people to know that God is love if there is no activity which in
culturally meaningful ways demonstrates the love of God in the lives of
the evangelizers.14

But the main and most important question, the contextualization of the
Gospel message in a given Muslim society, remains unresolved. There are
certain basic differences in the fundamental beliefs and world views of
both Christianity and Islam. Islam believes in an uncompromis­ing
monotheism

par excellence, whereas Christianity, though originally a monotheistic
religion, has drifted into a trio: God the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Spirit.

Unlike the animistic and other religious communities and their cultures,
Islamic culture is shaped, in large measure, by its faith in one God,
the Hereafter and the institution of prophet hood, of which the final
member was our beloved Prophet Muhammad (S). The contextualization of
the Gospel message in such a society will lead either to sheer
syncretism or to the further distortion of Christianity.

However, the contextual theologians argue that such a pure Muslim
society no longer exists in the world today. The existing Muslim
societies are greatly influenced by animistic taboos and super­stitions.
They also differ from each other in life-style , language, dress, food,
manners, attitudes, and even in certain beliefs. Along with these facts,
the poverty, religious ignorance and widespread illiteracy of the Muslim
world, missionaries believe, provide unprecedented opportuni­ties to win
the Muslims for Christ through contextualized witness.

Requirements for a Contextual Missionary
With such ideas in mind, as mentioned above, contextual missiologists
propose certain requirements for missionaries to be deputed to Muslims.
They are, first of all, required to acquire some good attitudinal
qualities. For the relationship between the two major world
communi­ties, Christians and Muslims, has been extremely strained in the
past and at present it is not wholly good owing to several factors,
especially the Palestinian and Jerusalem question.

There has been a spate of literature despising Islam, denigrating the
Prophet (S) and defaming the Muslim world. It is therefore considered
indispensable for all missionaries to be extremely different from common
Westerners and to “abandon triumphalism and develop sincere respect,
appreciation and sensitivity for all Muslim persons, for their faith and
for their way of life”,15 not because the Islamic faith merits such
esteem and veneration but because it is an unavoidable necessity for
genuine communication of the Gospel message to Muslim peoples. Hence no
wonder that today some mission­aries are found disregarding the medieval
crusades, criticizing the excesses of the colonial period and the
pioneer colonial missionaries and expressing their disapproval of
Zionism and the official terrorism of the Israeli government.

Language: Acquiring the language of the target people is indispensable
for a contextual missionary, because effective communication of the
Gospel in a given situation is impossible without linguistic
proficiency. There are certain other advantages. In most ethnic groups
proficiency in the local language is regarded as veneration for and a
complement to the culture, while improper language use, in certain
cases, smacks of contempt and revilement of the culture. Expertise in
the language of the target group also enables a missionary to avoid
committing offence-instances of which are numerous-against the
addressees and to evangelize them in the best way possible.

Food: Contextuality is involvement in an alien culture and adoption of
its customs without compromising the basic Christian faith. It
necessarily

includes, among other things, food and dress, etc. Should the Americans
and Europeans give up popular Western dishes like ham, bacon and
pork-meat-all despicably unclean and prohibited for Muslims-and eat ipso
facto dishes like curry, which is full of spices and chilies? It is not
of course binding on any contextual missionary to do so, but if he does
it is greatly appreciated.

Missionaries are instructed to deal tactfully and politely with their
target people in the matter of foods they find unbearable to eat and
never to reject any foods or demand that the nationals give them up as
being un-Christian. Rejection of one's food when offered in some Muslim
societies is considered a most damaging insult. Missionaries must always
be conscious of the fact that a society cannot be evangelized by way of
denigration.

Dress: Contextual missionaries are generally encouraged to wear the
local dress and to show veneration for it. Missionaries, especially
women, usually strongly react when asked to put on Muslim-style clothes,
especially a veil. However, women missionaries are strongly encouraged
to overcome their objection to the veil anti other \`conserva­tive'
dresses of the Muslim women in the interest of Gospel evangelism. For,
missionaries believe, the women workers practicing purdah would receive
an encouraging response from their Muslim sisters.

Masjid-e \`Isa (Jesus Mosque): According to the contextual missionaries,
Muslims are hostile to every thing Christian and unless this hostility
is reduced to a normal human relationship, no proper evangelism can take
place. What irks Muslims most is a Christian church. Would it not be
better, the contextualists propose, to call christian churches \`Jesus
mosques' or even erect a church on the pattern of a mosque. After
enumerating many differences between a church and a mosque, Robert S.
McClenahan remarks:

The whole construction, furnishing and conduct of the churches
traditional and man-made, the ecclesiastical system, environment and
organization, pre­sent many an occasion to dissuade, not to attract the
Moslem, and to make him declare that if this is Christianity, then the
farther he remains from it, the better.16

To solve this problem missionaries present the idea of Jesus mosque
which, they hope, would reduce the Muslims' abhorrence to the church. A
Jesus mosque, the contextualists assert, is not un-Christian as the New
Testament speaks of no particular directive to be observed regard­ing
the outer form and structure of a church. The contextualists also say
that there is no harm from the Biblical point of view in using a mosque
or any such building for Christian service.

A Jesus mosque, if it ever comes into existence, would adopt everything
from structure pattern to administration, which is consid­ered,
scripturally or traditionally, to be necessary for a mosque. A masjid by
virtue of its meaning is a place of prostration. In its visible physical
form, however, a masjid is the name attributed to some build­ing
constructed or adopted for offering prayers (salat) five times a day.
Generally it contains a minbar, the pulpit from where the Friday sermon
is delivered, a place of ablution-the washing of prescribed parts of
body which symbolically means the purification of the soul domes and
minarets, but none of them are an

essential part of the mosque. The only condition required for the
erection of a mosque is that it should face Makkah (Qiblah). It is and
should be simple as enjoined by the Prophet (S) and free from
unnecessary decoration. It should be neat and clean where believers come
for no other purpose than the worship of God, their Maker and Lord.

A church, on the other hand, is a highly decorated building, with a
cross up-front, elaborate setting of chancels, choirs, pulpit, pews,
altar, baptistery, confessional, icons and images, but none of them are,
of course, enjoined by Jesus or commanded in the Scripture. The
Scripture's silence regarding the structure of-a cathedral or a church
has been taken by the contextualists as unconditional permission to
con­struct any kind of church, including one on a mosque-like pattern.

Likewise the Scripture has set no particular forms for Christian
service. Most of the forms practised by the Western churches are
traditional and culture-oriented. The contextualists, especially the
Third World theologians, argue that if Europe is free to develop its own
forms of worship, why should a Muslim convert not be given the same
freedom and right in order to pray to his Lord in his own familiar
cultural form: salat. Bashir \`Abd al-Masih, a convert, remarks:

Muslim converts who state that their deepest experience of worship to
Jesus is in kneeling with their heads to the ground are free to worship
just that way, structuring their place of worship accordingly.17

Moreover, the contextualists say, the churches in Africa and India
frequently use the local forms of worship. If they are accepted as
Christian, why are Muslim forms of worship, like salat, rejected as
false syncretism? However, if the salat is adopted as a Christian form
of worship there would arise many a serious question. For instance a
Muslim offers his prayer five times a day and recites aloud three times
some verses from the Holy Quran. What should the contextualized
missionaries and Muslim converts do? Will they recite verses from the
Bible? If so, in what language? The following answer was once suggested
by a Muslim convert:

A catechism can be developed where Bible verses are recited at
appropriate times during prayer. Verses which commence on standing,
kneeling, bowing and prayer with uplifted hands can be spoken by the
worshipper as he makes each change in position. This would give prayer a
Biblical flavour rather than being a carbon copy of Western cultural
forms.18

The whole emphasis in missionary literature is placed on efforts to find
similarities between Friday prayer and Sunday worship. Sunday has come
to be accepted-though not clearly commanded in the Bible-as the day of
worship throughout the Christian world. However, accord­ing to the
contextualists, it would not be a sin if a church, located in a Muslim
community, chooses Friday as the day of worship. Again the differences
between Friday prayer and Sunday worship have not been properly
discussed. In other words, means for the Christianization of Muslim
Friday prayer have not been clearly worked out and many serious
questions remain unresolved.

Christian Fasting: Fasting, one of the five pillars of Islam, is another
obligatory Islamic worship. Ramadan, the ninth month of the Hijrah

calendar, has been specified by God for keeping fast every day from dawn
to sunset. The whole month is filled with spirituality through­out the
Muslim world and stamps a profound influence on the believers. What
should a contextualized missionary and Muslim converts still living in a
Muslim country do? Should they abstain from fasting as it has not been
commanded in the Scripture? As in the past, traditional missionaries
still ask converts not to fast in the month of Ramadan.

The convert is also to denounce the other forms of Islamic worship.
However, the contextual missionaries, though they offer no dogmatic
answer, exhort converts to fast to give an impression to the Muslims
that Christians are not spiritually weak. With this purpose in mind, the
contextualized missionaries have been observing the prescribed fast of
Ramadan.

As a result, they have won appreciation from their neighboring Muslims.
It is worth noting that in uneducated Muslim societies where Islam is
mostly understood through the cultural norms of family or the society
rather than the Quran and the Sunnah or where the populace depends
greatly on their \`Ulama' (religious scholars) for guidance in religious
affairs, such contextualized missionaries, often in the garb of a Muslim
religious leader, have been highly successful, if not in winning
converts, at least in minimizing the \`hostile and stern resistance'
which, according to them, overwhelmingly characterizes the Muslim world.

Bible Recitation: The Muslims' love and reverence for the Quran and
Quranic recitation is evident from the fact that in all parts of the
Muslim world there are dedicated persons called huffaz, persons who have
memorized the whole Quran. Good Muslims are supposed to read the Quran
in Arabic, whatever their mother tongue. For this reason Muslim parents
are anxious that their children should be taught to read the Quran
properly. In recent years Quranic cassettes have become widely popular
and this has further increased the Muslims' attachment to the Quran.
Even persons unable to understand the Arabic language delight in
listening to Quranic cassettes. Because the “efficacy of canonical
prayers, litanies, invocations, etc. is contained not only in the
content but also in the very sounds and reverberation of the sacred
language.19

Observing Muslims' veneration for and interest in Quranic recitation
missionaries working in the United Arab Emirates once proposed to
prepare Biblical cassettes:

The oral communication of the Gospel in tape, radio or memorized form
will probably best facilitate evangelization of the nomads. Expressive,
poetic translations of the Scripture that can be chanted are needed to
fully commu­nicate to Koran-steeped Arab hearts.20

Whether Bible-cassettes have been prepared or not, it is quite evident
that to what extent a contextual missionary can go to evangelize and
convert Muslims to the Christian faith.

Christian Ids: Every group in the world has some religious or social and
cultural festivals which are celebrated in a unique manner. Muslims
celebrate two festivals, \`Id al-Fitr and \`Id al-'Adha. However, these
festivals are purely of a religious nature, full of meaning and not just
occasions

provided for merry-making and exultation. It is suggested in missionary
literature that the contextualized missionaries should celebrate the two
Muslim festivals as Christian \`Ids. “On the Christian Id days,” remarks
a convert, “new clothes would be purchased for the family, a great feast
would be served and special portions of food would be allotted for the
poor. The focus of the day would be a special open­ air church service
where the Good News of the Gospel would be openly proclaimed.

In the light of what has been discussed in the preceding pages it can be
said that contextualization of the Gospel in any provided group involves
an in-depth study of its world-view, system of values and behavior.

This is the reason that both evangelicals and missiologists who advocate
a contextual approach to Muslims urge the missionaries to. Make a
comprehensive study of Islam and the world Muslim Ummah, especially of
the group they choose to evangelize. Such an all-embracing study of
Muslim culture and societies is held as a prerequisite for the
missionaries who are to be deputed to some Islamic country.

Such a study, inter alia, enables a missionary to understand the
differences between Islam and Christianity, of his culture and that of
the target group and discern what the Gospel says to Muslim peoples in
their own context. And this, in sum, is the contextual approach. A
remarkable difference between the old traditional method of preaching
and the contextual approach is that while in olden times missionaries
went to the Muslim world with a sense of racial superiority, a different
hostile culture and an easily distinguishable Christian message,
attacking openly the \`falsity' of Islam, the backwardness of Muslims
and demand­ing that they enter the Christian fold as a semi-European or
American, in contextualized witness, on the contrary, Muslims are not
required to give up their culture; the missionary himself changes and
adapts to the Muslim culture, if not contradictory to the basic tenets
of the Bible.21

Bibliography
------------

BEVANS, Stephen,*“Models of Contextual Theology”* . Missiology: An
International Review, vol. XIII, No.2 (April 1985), pp. 185-202.

BLAIR, C.F.,*“Tentmaking: A Contextualized Approach to Islam”* .
Missiology: An International Review, vol. XI, No.2 (April 1983),
pp.219-27.

BRADSHAW, M. and SAVAGE, D.,*“The Gospel, Contextualization and
Syncretism Report”* , In Let the Earth Hear His Voice, J.D. Douglas
(ed.). World wide Publications: Minneapolis, Minnesota, 1975.

BUSWELL, James O. III,*“Contextualization: Theory, Tradition and
Method”* in Theology and Mission, D.J. Hesselgrave (ed.). Baker Book
House: Grand Rapids, 1978, pp. 87-111.

COE, Shoki,*“Contextualizing Theology”:* in Mission Trends, No.3, G.
Anderson and T. Stransky (eds.). Paulist: Grand Rapids; Eardmans: New
York, 1976.

CONN, Harvie M.,*“Contextualization: A New Dimension for Cross-Cultural
Hermeneutic”* . EMQ, 14; 1978, pp. 39-46.

----*“Contextualization”* Partnership 12. Abington, PA; Partnership in
Mission: 23 October, 1978.

----*“Contextualization: Where Do We Begin?”* in Evangelicals and
Liberation, Carl E. Armerding, (ed.). Presbyterian and Retormed
Publishing Co.: Phillipshurg, New Jersey, 1979, pp. 90-119.

---- -*“The Muslim Convert and His Culture”* in The Gospel and Islam: A
1978 Compendium, Don M. McCurry (ed.). MARC: Monrovia, California, 1979,
pp. 97-113.

----*“Theological Trends and Issues in Christian World Missions As Seen
from a North American Perspective'* . OBMR, 3, 1979, pp. 53-7.

COSTAS, Orlando,*“Contextualization and Incarnation”* , J. Th. So.,
Africa 29, 1979, pp. 23-30.

ERICSON, Norman R.,*“Implications from the New Testament for
Contextuali­zation”* in Theology and Mission, David J. Hesselgrave,
(ed.). Baker Book House: Grand Rapids, 1978, pp. 71-85.

FLEMING, Bruce C.E.,*“Contextualixation of Theology”* William Carey
Library: Pasadena, California, 1980.

GEHMAN, Richard J.,*“Guidelines in Contextualization”* , East Africa
Journal of Theology, 2:1, 1983, pp. 24-36.

GLASSER, Arthur F.,*“Help from an Unexpected Quarter of the Old
Testament and Contextualization”* ,*Missiology* : An International
Review, Vol. VII, No. 4, (October 1979), pp. 403-10.

GRATION, John,*“Willowbank to Zaire: The Doing of Theology”*
,*Missiology* : An International Review, vol. XII, No. 3 (July 1984),
pp. 297-309.

HALEBLIAN, Krikor,*“The Problem of Contextualization”* ,*Missiology* :
An International Review, vol. XI, No. 1 (January 1983), pp. 95-111.

HIEBERT, Paul G.,*“Critical Contextualization”* .*Missiology* : An
International Review, vol. XII, No. 3 (July 1984), pp. 298-309.

----*“The Gospel and Culture* ” in*The Gospel and Islam* : A 1978
Compendium. Don M. McCurry (ed.). MARC: Monrovia, California, 1979, pp.
58-70.

HOFFMAN, Valerie,*“The Christian Approach to the Muslim Women and
Family”* in*The Gospel and Islam* : A 1978 Compendium, Don M. McCurry,
(ed.). MARC: Monrovia, California, 1979, pp. 581-93.

HUGHES, Philip,*“The Use of Actual Beliefs in Contextualizing Theology”*
,*East Asia Journal of Theology* , 2:2 (October 1984), pp. 251-58.

IMASOGIE, D.,*“Contextualization: Constructive Interaction Between
Culture, People, Church and the Theological Programme”* ,*East Africa
Journal of Evangelical Theology* , 2:1 (1983), pp. 19-23.

ISMAIL, Zafar,*“The Muslim Convert and the Church”* , International
Review of Mission, vol. LXXII, No.285 (January 1983), pp. 385-92.

KANE, J. Herbert,*“Understanding Christian Missions”* , Baker Book
House: Grand Rapids, Michigan, 1978.

KATO, Byang. H.,*“The Gospel, Cultural Context and Religious
Syncretism”* , in Let the Earth Hear His Voice. J.D. Douglas (ed.).
Worldwide Publica­tions: Minneapolis, Minnesota, 1975.

KRAFT, Charles H.,*Christianity in Culture: Study in Biblical
Theologizing in Cross-Cultural Perspective* . Orbis Books: Mary Knoll,
New York, 1979.

---*“The Contextualization of Theology”* . EMQ, 14, (1978), pp. 31-6.

---*“Dynamic Equivalence Churches: An Ethnotheological Approach to
Indi­geneity”* , Missiology: An International Review, vol. I, No.l
(January 1973).

---*“Dynamic Equivalence Churches in Muslim Society”* in The Gospel and
Islam: A 1978 Compendium, Don M. McCurry (ed.). MARC: Monrovia,
California, 1979, pp. 114-22.

KRAFT, C.H. and T.N. Wisely (eds.), Readings in Dynamic Indigeneity,
William Carey Library: Pasadena, California, 1979.

LARSON, Donald N.,*“The Cross-Cultural Communication of the Gospel to
Muslims”* in The Gospel and Islam: A 1978 Compendium, Don M. McCurry
(ed.), MARC: Monrovia, California, 1979, pp. 71-84.

LIND, Millard C.,*“Refocusing Theological Education to Mission: The Old
Testa­ment and Contextualization”* ,*Missiology: An International
Review* , vo1.X, No. 2 (April 1982), pp. 141-60.

MASSIH, Bashir Abdol,*“The Incarnational Witness to the Muslim Heart”*
in*The Gospel and Islam* : A 1978 Compendium, Don M. McCurry (ed.).

MARC: Monrovia, California, 1979, pp. 85-96.

MCCLENAHAN, Robert S.,*“The Moslem's Mosque' and the Christian's
Church”,* The Moslem World, vol. XXXII (1942), pp. 159-66.

McCURRY, Don M., “*Cross-Cultural Models for Muslim Evangelism”*
,*Missiology: An International Review* , vo1.IV, No-3 (july 1976), pp.
267-83.

McKinney, Lois,*“Contextualizing Instruction: Contribution to Missiology
from the Field of Education”* , Missiology: An International Review,
vol. XII, No. 3, (July 1984), pp. 311-26.

NEILL, Stephen,*“A History of Christian Missions”* , Penguin Books Ltd.:
New York, 1977.

NICHOLLS, Bruce J., Contextualization: A Theology of Gospel and Culture.
Inter-versity Press: Leicester, 1979.

PARSHALL, Phil, Bridges to Islam. Baker Book House: Gramd Rapids,
Michigan, 1983.

---*“Contextualized Baptism for Muslim Converts”* , Missiology: An
International Review, vo. VII, No.4 (October 1979), pp. 501-15.

---- New Paths in Muslim Evangelism. Baker Book House: Grand Rapids,
Michigan, 1980.

POTTER, Philip,*“Doing Theology in a Divided World”* ,*The Ecumenical
Review* , 35:3 (July 1983), pp. 289-96.

RO, Bong Rin,*“Contextualization: Asian Theology”* in What Asian
Christians are Thinking, D.J. Elwood (ed.). 1976.

SCHLORFF, Samuel P.,*“The Catholic Programme for Dialogue with Islam: An
Evangelical Evaluation with Special Reference to Contextualization”* ,
Mis­siology: An International Review, vol. XI, No. 2 (April 1983), pp.
131-48.

SCHREITER, Robert J.,*“Culture, Society and Contextual Theologies”* ,
Missiology: An International Review, vol. XII , No. 3 (July 1984), pp.
261-73.

TABER, C.R.,*“Contextualization: Indigenization and/or Transformation”*
in*The Gospel and Islam* : A 1978 Compendium, Don M. McCurry (ed.),
MARC: Monrovia, California, 1979, pp. 143-54.

----*“The Limits of Indigenization in Theology”* , Missiology: An
International Review, vol. VI, No. 1 (January 1978), pp. 53-79.

THEOLOGICAL EDUCATION FUND, Ministry in Context:*The Third Mandate
Programme of the Theological Education Fund (1970-1977)* . New Life
Press: Bromley, Kent, United Kingdom, 1972.

VAN DER WERFF, Lyle L.*Christian Mission to Muslims* . William Carey
Library: Pasadena, California, 1977.

WAGNER, Peter C. and Dayton, Edward R.,*Unreached Peoples 79* . David C.
Cook Publishing Co: Elgin, 1978.

---- Unreached Peoples 80. David C. Cook Publishing Co: Elgin, 1980.

WHITEMAN, Darrell L*., “Effective Communication of the Gospel amid
Cultural Diversity”* *Missiology: An International Review, vol. XII* ,
No.3 (July 1984), pp. 275-85.
