


References
[^1]: International Missionary Council, The World Mission of the Church,
London and New York: Madras Conference Report, 1939, p.26.

[^2]: Conn, Harvie, M. “Contextualization: Where Do We Begin?'.” in
Evangelicals and Liberation, (ed.) Carl E. Armerding. New Jersey,
Presbyterian and Reformed Publishing Co., 1979, p.92.

[^3]: Byang H. Kato, “The Gospel, Cultural Context and Religious
Syncretism” in Let the Earth Hear His Voice, (ed.) J. D. Douglas,
Minneapolis, Worldwide Publications, 1975, p.217.

[^4]: James O. Buswell, “Contextualization Theory, Tradition and
Method,” Missiology, vol. VI, p.90.

[^5]: Ibid.

[^6]: Flonde Efefe, “Revolution in Theology”, All Africa Conference of
Churches Bulletin,5, September-October, 1972, p.7.

[^7]: Bruce Fleming C.E. , Contextualization of Theology, Pasadena,
California, William Carey Library, 1980.

[^8]: Charles R. Taber “Contextualization: Indigenization and/or
Transforma­tion,” in The Gospel and Islam: A 1978 Compendium, (ed.) Don
M. McCurry, Monrovia, CA: MARC, 1979, p.146.

[^9]: I. Cor. 9:19, Good News Bible: Today's English Version, London.
The Bible Societies, 1976, p.213.

[^10]: Stephen Neill, A History of Christian Mission. New York: Penguin
Books Ltd., 1977, p.170.

[^11]: Stephen Neill, op. cit. p.186.

[^12]: Charles, R. Taber, op. cit. p.146.

[^13]: Conn, Harvie. M., “Theological Trends and Issues in Christian
World Missions As Seen from a North African Perspective”, OBMR 3: pp.
53-7.

[^14]: Norman R. Ericson, “Implications from the New Testament for
Contextualization” in Theology and Mission, (ed.) David J. Hesselgrave.
Grand Rapids: Baker Book House, 1978, p.79.

[^15]: Charles R. Taber. op. cit. p.150.

[^16]: Robert S. MeClenahan, “The Moslem's Mosque and the Christian
Church”, The Moslem World, vol. XXXII (April 1942), p.165.

[^17]: Bashir Abdal Massih, “The Incarnational Witness to the Muslims'
Heart”, in The Gospel and Islam, (ed.) Don M. McCurry, MARC, 1979, p.88.

[^18]: Quoted in Phil Parshall's New Paths in Muslim Evangelism.
Michigan: Baker Book House, 1980, p.204

[^19]: Sayyed Hussein Nasr, Ideals and Realities of Islam. London:
George Allen & Unwin, 1966, p.47.

[^20]: C. Peter Wagner and Edward R. Dayton (Eds.), Unreached Peoples
79. Elgin: David C. Cook Publishing Co., 1979, p.221.

[^21]: Cf. Phil Parshall, op. cit. p.147.


