ا،أ، آ، ع, A
============

A’imma أئمة: Plural of امام imam, religious leader. There are many types
of such leaders in Islam: The most common is the امام الجماعة mam
al-jama’a, leader of congregational prayers. Imamite Shi’ites follow 12
Imams who start from Ali ibn Abu Talib and end with the Awaited One,
Imam al-Mahdi. The word امام imam is given a much broader meaning in
verse 124 of Ch. 2, The Cow, of the Holy Qur’an where it refers to an
imam of an entire nation. Such imams of entire nations, we are told in
17:71, will be gathered on the Judgment Day with their followers for
questioning.

Abrashiyya أبرشية: parish, diocese A.D.: stands for "Anno Domini" ("year
of the Lord"). It is used to refer to pre-Hijra dates. Hijra is the
migration of the Prophet from Mecca to Medina. According to some
reports, the Prophet entered Medina on the 12th of Rabi\` I which then
coincided with the 24th of September according to the Julian calendar or
the 27th of September according to the Gregorian calendar of the year
622 A.D.

Adab or Aadaab آداب: ethics, rules of conduct, morals, arts

\`Adil عادل: fair, just, equitable, impartial, unbiased

\`Adl عدل: Usually, it refers to the concept of the justice of Allah
(God). This is one of the principles of the Islamic creed: The Almighty
is fair and just to everyone and does not discriminate among His
servants.

Ahadith or Ahadeeth أحاديث: Pl.; singular: hadith, a statement (usually
stated/attributed either to the Prophet (ص) or to one of the members of
his Progeny or companions); these are one of the two sources of the
Sunna, the other being the Holy Qur'an. But this Sunna has been
distorted so much since the beginning of the Islamic history by
politicians and interest seekers, so much so that it is very difficult
now to sift through them and identify what is authentic, genuine, and
what is fabricated. Mu\`awiyah played a major role in distorting the
Islamic creed by paying writers to tailor design "traditions" to serve
his interests and support his deviated views.

Ahilla أهله: plural of hilal, crescent

Ahl ar-Ra'i أهل الرأي: people of opinion. It refers to qualified people
who are consulted on Islamic matters.

Ahzab أحزاب: parties. "Ahzab" occurs in Ch. 33 of the Holy Qur'an to
describe the different tribes that fought the Muslims in the Battle of
Khandaq (ditch, moat) which took place in 5 A.H./627 A.D. Refer to the
meaning of khandaq below for full details.

Ala علا: rose, ascended; علا على: prevailed, overrode, predominated,
triuphed over. It also means soared or indulged in pride, acted
arrogantly, thought too much of himself. Other meanins: mounted, towered
over.

\`Alim عالم: scholar, theologian, a highly knowledgeable person

Allahu Akbar or Allaho Akbar, Allahu Akber, Allahoo Akber, Or Allah
Akbar الله أكبر: This statement is said by Muslims quite often and on
various occasions. During the call for prayers, during prayers, when
they are happy, when they wish to express their approval of what they
hear, when they slaughter an animal, and when they want to praise a
speaker…, Muslims utter this expression. Its means: "Allah is the
Greatest."

Almani علماني” secular, multi-confessional

A\`mal أعمال: highly recommended acts of adoration

Amin or Ameen أمين: custodian or guardian, someone who is loyal,
faithful, trustworthy, secretary

Amir or Ameer أمير: leader or commander, prince, one in charge

Amir al-Mumineen or Ameerul-Mu'mineen أمير المؤمنين: Commander of the
Faithful: title of the caliphs, Islamic rulers. Followers of Ahl al-Bayt
(ع), the Prophet's Prgeny, apply it particularly to Imam Ali ibn Abu
Talib (ع) on account of the "Ghadeer Khumm Declaration". This
Declaration took place on the 18th of Thul-Hijja of the year 11 A.H.
which then coincided, according to the Gregorian Christian calendar,
with the 9th of March (or the 6th of March according to the Julian
Christian calendar) of the year 633 A.D. The Ghadeer, swamp or small
lake of shallow water formed mostly by rainfall, is located in the Juhfa
desert between Mecca and Medina on the pilgrims' route to Mecca. It is
there and then that the Prophet (ص) articulated his famous statement:
"To whom I have been a mawla, master, this Ali is his master! Lord
befriend whoever befriends him and be the enemy of whoever antagonizes
him!" It is there and then that Ali was called "Amir al-Mu'mineen",
commander of the faithful. Numerous classic books (mostly in Arabic)
detail this incident. One of them is al-Bukhari's book titled At-Tarikh
Al-Kabir where the author details the incident in Vol. 1, Part 1, p. 375
(Hayderabad, India, edition). Alhamdu-Lillah, I have written an entire
book about this incident which I titled Ghadeer Khumm: Where Islam was
Perfected.

Ansar or Ansar أنصار: helpers, supporters. These were the people of
Medina who responded to the Prophet's call to Islam and helped establish
Islam's first city-state power. One of the most famous of the Ansar is
the great sahabi "Abu Ayyub" Khalid ibn Zaid (some say ibn Kulayb)
al-Ansari who hosted the Prophet (ص) upon his arrival at Medina
following his Hijra, migration, from Mecca.

Aqaba or Aqabah عقبه: Literally, this word means: obstacle, obstruction,
stumbling block, hindrance. It also refers to a place in Mina just
outside Mecca where the first Muslims of Yathrib (Medina) pledged
allegiance to the Prophet in the year 621 A.D. shortly before the
migration (hijra). A similar meeting took place the next year when more
Muslims from Yathrib pledged their allegiance to the Prophet (ص).

Aqiqa عقيقة: a dinner reception held after a child is born; relatives,
friends, and neighbors are invited for such an occasion; sacrifice of a
sheep or goat at the time of the ritual shaving of the baby's first
grown hair

Arafat or Arafah or Arafa عرفه: a hill and plain north of Mecca. Muslims
believe that it is on this hill and its surrounding plain that mankind
will start their resurrection on the Judgment Day for questioning,
judgment and settling accounts. During the hajj on the ninth day of the
month of Thul-Hijja, Muslim pilgrims gather in this area for one day.

Arsh عرش: Literally, it means throne, symbol of the Al­mighty's
Authority.

Asabiyya عصبيه: fanaticism, extremism, excessive tribal loyalty

Asala or Asaalah أصالة: Purism, purity, genuineness, authenticity,
excellence

Ashar أسحار: plural of sahar, the time immediately preceding daybreak

Assalamu Alaikum or Assalamo Alaikum, As-Salamo Alaikom السلام عليكم”
This is an expression which Muslims utter whenever they meet one
another. It is a statement of greeting with peace. Its meaning is:
"Peace be upon/with you" or "May the peace and the Mercy of Allah be
upon/with you," The complete statement is "Assalamu Alalikum Wa
Rahmatullahi Wa Barakatuh," السلام عليكم و رحمة الله و بركاته which
means: "May the peace, mercy, and blessings of Allah be upon/with you."

Asr عصر” late afternoon, time for one of the five obligatory salat,
prayer, rites

Astaghfirullah or Astaghfir-Allah أستغفرالله: This is an expression used
by a Muslim when he pleads for Allah's forgiveness. The meaning is: "I
ask Allah for His forgiveness." A Muslim utters this statement many
times, even when he is talking to another person. When a Muslim abstains
from doing wrong, or even when he wants to prove that he is innocent of
an incident of which he is charged, he uses this expression, too. After
every salat (payer), a Muslim utters this statement at least three
times. One hadith (Prophet's tradition) says that Istighfar, the
uttering of this statement, is the essence of adoration.

Ateeq عتيق: Literally, it means old, obsolete, antinquated, ancient. But
the Venerable Ka'ba has always been referred to as البيت العتيق which
has more than one meaning: the House which was spared the destruction of
the flood of Prophet Noah (ع), that is, it was "freed" or spared the
destruction caused by the flood. According to the famous lexicon Lisan
al-Arab, what is عتيق is the best, the choicest, the most precious of
everything. This fits the Ka'ba more than any other place or spot or
monument on earth. Lisan al-Arab also says that the Ka'ba is described
as البيت العتيق because the Almighty freed it from the hegemony of any
tyrant in all human history: None could demolish it or obliterate its
precincts or put an end to the pilgrimage to it which was first started
by our father Adam, and it will continue till the Last Day. Adam was
taught by arch-angel Gabriel how to perform the pilgrimage so he would
be forgiven for having eaten of the forbidden fruit in Paradise. The
time when Adam was kicked out of Paradise was in the late afternoon, so
Gabriel taught him to pray 3 rek'ats (prostrations): one on behalf of
himself, another on behalf of his wife, our mother Eve, and one on
behalf of his offspring, our human species. This is why sunset prayers
are performed in 3 rek'ats.

Athan or Adhan أذان: the call for prayers; mu'aththin is one who
performs the 'athan

Athbat أثبات: plural of thabat ثبت, one who is widely recognized as an
authority in his field

Atiyya عطية: gift, present, grant, boon

A'uzu billahi minashaitanir-rajim or A'oodhu billahi minash-Shaitan
ar-Rajeem أعوذ بالله من الشيطان الرجيم: This is a statement which
Muslims have to recite before reciting the Holy Qur'an, before speaking,
before doing almost anything, even before making a supplication,
performing the ablution or entering the wash room. Its meaning is: "I
seek refuge with Allah from the outcast Satan." "Allah" is the Arabic
name of God which the Muslims prefer over "God" simply because it is
unique: You cannot derive a dual, plural, or feminine derivation from
it. One of its meanings is: "The One about Whom the minds wonder"
because nobody can grasp the essence or greatness of the Almighty. Satan
is the source of evil and he always tries to misguide and mislead
people, so one needs to seek refuge against the mischief of Satan with
the omni-Potent and all-Powerful Lord of lords, Allah.

Awl عول: one sought during the time of need, a reliable helper  
 Awqiyya أوقيه: weight, undefined measure for weighing items

Awra عورة: Private parts, body parts that are not supposed to be exposed
to others, nudity, nakedness, intimate bodily parts, shame. For men,
they are from the navel to the knee. For women, all the body except the
hands, feet, and face.

Aya or Ayat آيه: Verse (from a sacred scripture); plural: ayat. The
literal meaning of "aya" is miracle or sign. The Qur'an is considered to
be a miracle by itself. Each verse is called an ayat, a miracle.

Aza' عزاء: consolation, comfort, solace, condolence; a ceremony held at
one's death or martyrdom; الحسين (ع) :عزاء Commemorations of the somber
occasion of the martyrdom of Imam al-Husayn (ﻉ) which include the
recounting of the heroic epic of his martyrdom, lamentations, religious
lectures, admonishments and other rites. They also include the
distribution of traditional foods served on the occasion and other gifts
to the attendants of the majalis where such commemmorations are held.


