ب, B
====

Bada' بداء: starting point, the beginning/start of something, the onset

Badiya باديه: desert or semi-arid environment

Badr بدر: Geographically, Badr is a highway station located 200 miles
from Mecca and 80 miles from Medina, and it is the site of the early
Muslims' first battle in defense of the creed. The Muslims numbered only
313 men who had to fight mostly on foot because they had only 2 horses
and 70 camels. Their enemies, the polytheists of Quraish, numbered
between 900 and one thousand men. But the Muslims were fired with holy
zeal and enthusiasm, so much so that they defeated their enemies,
killing seventy of them and wounding many others. Their losses were: 14
from among the Muhajir fighters and 8 from the Ansar. The battle started
on the 17th of the month of Ramadan in 2 A.H., which coincided with
March 16, 624 A.D.

Bagha بغى: transgressed, behaved in an aggressive or unfairly hostile
way, oppressed

Baghidh بغيض: hated, contemptible, abhorred

Ba'is بائس: destitute, needy, indigent, distressed, wretch, miserable

Bakka'in or Bakka'un or Bakka'oon بكائون: weepers. These were the people
who could not accompany the Prophet on his Tabuk campaign because they
lacked the resources. They started to weep when they realized that they
could not go.

Balagha or Balaaghah بلاغة: wise rhetoric, elocution, mastery of oratory
and language

Baqi\` or Baqee بقيع: the cemetery where some members of the Prophet’s
family and many sahaba are buried. It is located in the south-east side
of Medina. The tomb of the Mother of the Faithful Khadija daughter of
Khuwaylid, the Prophet's first wife and main supporter in spreading
Islam, was also located there before it was demolished by Saudi
authorities, and so was the grave of Hamzah, uncle and strong supporter
of the Prophet. Only traces of both graves can now be seen at the
Baqee’. A number of graves of other sahaba were gradually razed as well.

Bara'a or Baraa'ah براءه: dissociation, rejecting responsibility for; it
also is one of the Chapters of the Holy Qur'an and it has another name:
Surat at-Tahreem, Chapter of Prohibition (Ch. 9). It was revealed to ban
non-Muslims from entering the Haram of the Ka\`ba in Mecca up to a
certain perimeter. It is the only Qur’anic chapter which does not start
with the basmala.

Barak-Allah or Barakalla, Barakalah بارك الله: This is an expression
which means "May the blessings of Allah (be upon/with you)." When a
Muslim wants to thank another person, he uses different statements to
express his thanks, appreciation and gratitude. One of them is to say
"Baraka Allah."

Barakah or Baraka بركه: blessing, Divine Grace

Barzakh برزخ: barrier, separator, the place and time wherein the souls
undergo a life of their own in the spiritual world till the Day of
Judgment when each soul is re-outfitted with an eternal, indestructible,
body, physical form or shape; see the Holy Qur'an, 23:100, 55:20 and
25:53.

Basira or Baseerah بصيره: (intellectual) vision, insight,
circumspection, discernment

Basmala بسمله: the uttering of "Bismillahir-Ramanir-Raam" (In the Name
of Allah, the most Gracious, the most Merciful); see also Bismillah…
below. Basmala (or Bismillah, Arabic بسملة) is an Arabic language noun
which is used as the collective name of the whole of the recurring
Islamic phrase bismi-llahi ar-rahmani ar-rahim. This phrase constitutes
the first verse of every "sura" (or chapter) of the Qur’an (except for
the ninth sura), and is used in a number of contexts by Muslims. It is
recited several times as part of Muslim daily prayers, and it is usually
the first phrase in the preamble of the constitutions of Islamic
countries.

بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم bismi-llahi ar-rahmani ar-rahimi  
 "In the name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful”

The word "basmala" itself was derived by a slightly unusual procedure in
which the first four pronounced consonants of the phrase bismi-llahi...
were taken as a quadri-literal consonantal root b-s-m-l (ب س م ل). This
abstract consonantal root was used to derive the noun basmala, as well
as related verb forms which mean "to recite the basmala". The practice
of giving often-repeated phrases special names is paralleled by the
phrase Allahu Akbar, which is referred to as the "Takbir تكبير" (also
Ta’awwudh تعوذ etc.); and the method of coining a quadri-literal name
from the consonants of such a phrase is paralleled by the name "Hamdala"
for Alhamdulillah.

In the Qur'an, the phrase is usually numbered as the first verse of the
first sura, but according to the view adopted by at-Tabari, it precedes
the first verse. It occurs at the beginning of each subsequent sura of
the Qur'an, except for the ninth sura (see, however, the discussion of
the 8th and 9th chapters of the Qur’an at eighth sura), but is not
numbered as a verse except, in the currently most common system, in the
first sura (chapter).

The Basmala occurs twice in the 27th sura, at the beginning and in verse
30 (where it prefaces a letter from Sulayman (Prophet Solomon) to the
Queen of Sheba, Balqees (or Balqis).

The Basmala has a special significance for Muslims, who are to begin
each task after reciting the verse. It is often preceded by Ta’awwudh.
In Arabic calligraphy, it is the most prevalent motif, more so even than
the Shahada. The three definite nouns of the Basmala, Allah, ar-Rahman
and ar-Rahim correspond to the first three of the traditional 99 Names
of Allah in Islam. Both ar-Rahman and ar-Rahim are from the same
triliteral root, rahm "to feel sympathy or pity". According to Lane,
ar-rahman is more intensive, including in its objects the believer and
the unbeliever, and may be rendered as "The Compassionate", while
ar-rahim has for its peculiar object the believer, considered as
expressive of a constant attribute, and may be rendered as "The
Merciful".

In a commentary on the Basmala in his Tafsir at-Tabari writes: “The
Messenger of Allah (ﺹ) said that Jesus was handed by his mother Mary
over to a school in order that he might be taught. [The teacher] said to
him: ‘Write “Bism (In the name of)”.’ And Jesus said to him: ‘What is
“Bism”?’ The teacher said: ‘I do not know.’ Jesus said: ‘The “Ba” is
Baha’u'llah (the glory of Allah), the “Sin” is His Sana’ (radiance), and
the “Mim” is His Mamlakah (sovereignty).”

The total value of the letters of "Bismillah ar-Rahman ar-Rahim"
according to one Arabic system of numerology is 786. There are two
methods of arranging the letters of the Arabic alphabet. One method is
the most common alphabetical order (used for most ordinary purposes),
beginning with the letters Alif ا, ba ب, ta ت, tha ث etc. The other
method is known as the “Abjad nimerals’ method” or ordinal method. In
this method the letters are arranged in the following order:: Abjad,
Hawwaz, Hutti, Kalaman, Sa'fas, Qarshat, Sakhaz, Zazagh; and each letter
has an arithmetic value assigned to it from one to one thousand. (This
arrangement was done, most probably in the 3rd century of Hijrah during
the 'Abbasid period, following the practices of speakers of other
Semitic languages such as Aramaic, Hebrew, Syriac, Chaldean etc.)

Taking into account the numeric values of all the letters of the
Basmala, according to the Abjad order, the total is 786. In the Indian
subcontinent the Abjad numerals have become quite popular. Some people,
mostly in India and Pakistan, use 786 as a substitute for Bismillah ("In
the name of Allah" or "In the name of God"). They write this number to
avoid writing the name of God, or Qur'anic verses on ordinary papers,
which can be subject to dirt or come in contact with unclean materials.
This practice does not date from the time of Muhammad and is not
universally accepted by Muslims.

The basmala, or the phrase bismillah ar-Rahman ar-Rahim, is one of the
most oft-recited phrases in the life of every single observant Muslim.
It occupies a key place in the Qur'an itself, for it is the only
non-Qur'anic phrase that all copies of the Qur'an included, apparently
as a ‘marker’ between the Suras. Numerous works have been written
specifically about the basmala. In this response, a brief linguistic and
grammatical explanation will be offered, followed by a discussion of the
name ar-Rahman.

The Basmala as Portrayed in Early and Medieval Islamic Sources
--------------------------------------------------------------

The first verse of the Qur'an has almost unanimously been portrayed as
being Qur'an, 96:1, ‘Recite in the name of your Lord who created.’ From
this, some derived that the status of a rudimentary basmala was
established, as the ‘name of your Lord’ is invoked. In another early
Meccan Sura, Noah is told to ride the Arc ‘…in the name of God’ (Qur'an,
11:41). In yet another Meccan Sura, reputed to have been revealed after
this one, Solomon writes a letter to the Queen of Sheba in which her
advisors tell her, “**This (letter) is from Solomon, and it (says): In
the name of God, the Rahman, the Rahim” (Qur'an, 27:30).**

The fact that the basmala in its present form was introduced to the
Meccan Arabs by the Prophet is quite explicitly mentioned in many
sources. One incident, recorded in some canonical works of hadith and
the Sirah of Ibn Ishaq (d. 150/767), mentions that during the writing of
the Treaty of Hudaybiyyah in 6 A.H., one of the emissaries of Mecca,
Suhayl ibn Amr, refused to allow the Prophet to begin the treaty with
the basmala. His reputed reason was, “As for this ‘ar-Rahman’, I do not
know who He is, but rather, write as we are accustomed to write, ‘In
your name, O God! (bismik Allahumma).’”

There are quite a few prophetic traditions that expound upon the
blessings of this phrase and when it should be said. It might also have
served a more mundane role: Ibn Abbas is alleged to have said that the
Prophet was not able to recognize the end of one Sura from the beginning
of the next until the basmala was recited by Gabriel.

The basmala is the only phrase of the Qur'an that Sunni scholars have
disagreed about: is it a verse of the Qur'an or not? There is agreement
that it is a part of Qur'an, 27:30, where it is mentioned in Solomon’s
letter to Sheba, and there is also agreement that it does not form a
part of Sura 9. But there was a disagreement about its status at the
beginning of all other Suras, especially the first, al-Fatiha. This
disagreement is found amongst the four canonical schools of law as well
as the ten recitations (qira'at) of the Qur'an. Some of them opined that
the basmala was a separate verse at the beginning of every Sura, others
said it was part of the first verse. A third group claimed it was only a
verse at the beginning of the al-Fatiha, while a fourth denied that it
was a verse in any of these instances. And a fifth group posited that it
was a verse by itself, not connected to any Sura, which had been placed
there as a ‘divider’ to separate two consecutive Suras. This difference
of opinion had a direct impact on certain rituals, such as whether one
was obliged to recite the basmala out loud in every prayer or not.6

A Grammatical Breakdown and Exegetical Explanation of the Basmala
-----------------------------------------------------------------

The basmala consists of four words, the first of which has a
prepositional letter attached to it. All of these words are nouns; no
verbs or verbal nouns are present. The first letter of the basmala, the
‘b-’ is a prepositional letter (harf jar), thus causing the first word
(‘bism’) to be in a genitive state The preposition b- has many uses, but
over here appears to be for seeking help (istianah).7 The word ism is
the Arabic for ‘noun’. Linguists differed whether it originated from
sumuw (s-m-w), meaning ‘to elevate’, or from wasam (w-s-m), meaning ‘to
brandish’; the Basran school opted for the former, whilst the Kufan
preferred the latter.

Due to the fact that the phrase bism is in a genitive state, it needs
some actor (amil) to which it can be attached (taalluq). The Kufan
school of grammar typically assumes that all missing actors must be
verbs, as that is the basis of words for them. In contrast, the Basran
school considers all missing actors to be nouns due to their position
that nouns are the basis of words. The Kufans then split up amongst
themselves in three specific issues regarding the basmala. Firstly: what
was this missing verb? Was it, ‘I recite,’ or ‘I begin,’ or perhaps a
verb that varied depending upon the action being done at that time?
Secondly, what was the tense of the verb: was it a command or was it in
present tense? In other words, is the recitor saying, ‘I recite with the
name of God’, or is God saying ‘I command you to recite with the name of
God?’ Thirdly, what was the position of this missing verb: before the
‘bism’ or after?

Most Kufans, as well as az-Zamakhshari in his al-Kashshaf, came to the
conclusion that the verb is specific to the context of invoking the
basmala (hence it can be used for any permissible act), that it was in
the present tense (since the purpose of the basmala is to obtain God’s
blessings upon the recitor), and that the missing verb’s place was after
the ‘bismi’ (since it is more blessed to begin with the name of God, and
since it reminded one that the purpose of doing any act was for God, and
because it is a clear refutation of the pagans who would begin by saying
‘In the name of al-Lat’).

The Basrans, on the other hand, generally held that the missing noun was
‘My recitation’ (qira'ati), or ‘My beginning’ (ibtida'i), and that it
was placed before the genitive. The question also arose: what does it
mean seeking help from the ‘name’ (ism) of God? Specifically, the issue
concerned the theological controversy over the implication of the Divine
Names: are these Names God Himself, or do they belong to God, or
originate from Him, or is the noun ‘ism’ superfluous (za'id) and only
needed for emphasis? The Asharites, Mutazilites and Ahl al-Hadith (to
name the more prominent groups) each had their own positions.

The next noun in the basmala is the divine name ‘Allah’. This name
raises a whole slew of questions, of which only a few will be dealt with
here. There is no doubt that the name ‘Allah’ was the primary name of
the Islamic divinity. The name appears more than 2,700 times in the
Qur'anic text, and there is an overwhelming amount of evidence to show
that this name was used for many centuries by the pagan Arabs to refer
to a Supreme God – a god that even they, with their permissive idolatry,
refused to draw or carve images of.

The linguistic meaning and origin of this name has always been a topic
of much discussed in Muslim scholarship. Although a minority of Sunni
theologians and linguists considered this name to be a proper name,
devoid of any meaning, the majority of them considered it to be derived
from some three letter root. Some suggested that it was a rare
transmutation from walaha, which means ‘to confound and confuse’, as if
the nature of God (‘Allah’) confuses and befuddles the minds of all
those who try to grasp or understand Him. Others suggested that it is
from laha, which means ‘to conceal and cover’, since the true nature of
God is concealed from all. However, the most prevalent opinion, amongst
linguistics, theologians, and exegetes, is that the name is derived from
alaha, which means ‘to show servitude and worship’; hence God (“Allah”)
is the only Being that is worthy of servitude and worship.

Some Western Islamists have posited Aramaic, Syriac or Hebrew origins
for this name; strong evidence to substantiate this claim, however,
remains lacking.

To summarize before moving on, the first two words of the basmala
translate as, ‘My recitation is with the name of Allah’ for the Basris,
and as, ‘With the name of Allah I recite…’ for the Kufans.

This name (viz., ‘Allah’), is then followed by two other nouns,
ar-Rahman, and ar-Rahim. Both can be derived from the root r-h-m, which
means ‘to have mercy, to be compassionate.’ Both utilize known and
common morphological forms: falan for the first and fail for the second.
Before translating the basmala, it is crucial to understand the
grammatical role of these two nouns, as that will decidedly determine
the understanding of the basmala. We shall discuss the alleged origins
of ‘ar-Rahman’ in the next section.

Almost all classical works that I was able to reference (including works
of theology, exegesis, and shuruh al-hadith) appear to understand these
two nouns as adjectives of the first noun, viz., ‘Allah’. Many books of
grammatical analysis do not even mention any other opinion. If these two
nouns are understood as being adjectives (i.e., nat), it will imply that
both ar-Rahman and ar-Rahim describe and characterize God (‘Allah’). So
it is as if the basmala translates as (according to the Kufan
understanding), “With the name of Allah, who is ever Merciful
(ar-Rahman) and extremely Compassionate (ar-Rahim), I begin this
recitation.”

Numerous opinions are found in classical sources regarding the
difference between these two names. Most scholars (but not all) are in
agreement that the two names are not synonymous or even as efficacious
as each other, but rather that ar-Rahman is more indicative of God’s
mercy than ar-Rahim. Some opine that ar-Rahman is indicative of God’s
mercy to believers and unbelievers in this world, and ar-Rahim is
indicative of His special mercy to believers in both worlds. Yet another
opinion is that ar-Rahman indicates that God’s Mercy is an essential
part of His character, whereas ar-Rahim indicates that God’s actions are
always merciful.

Many scholars have sought to understand the wisdom of this particular
order of names. At-Tabari posited that the reason these three names are
in this order is that the Arabs typically start off with the primary
name and then with its descriptions. God’s primary name is ‘Allah’,
hence it was used here. And since ar-Rahman was more specific to God
than ar-Rahim, it was given precedence to it.

So far we have considered both nouns to be adjectives, and this is by
far the ‘standard’ opinion. There seems to be another opinion, rarely
expressed, that considers these two nouns to be substitutes (badal). As
a substitute, the basmala would translate as (according to the Basran
opinion this time, for ease of understanding), ‘My recitation begins
with the name of Allah; my recitation begins with the name of ar-Rahman;
my recitation begins with the name of ar-Rahim.’ The purpose of these
reiterations would obviously not be to express three distinct deities
but rather to express three of God’s 99 names. A modern theologian,
Muhammad Abduh, who appeared to lean towards such an explanation,
claimed that this reiteration was meant as a refutation of the Trinity
of the Christians, who began their rites with ‘In the Name of the
Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost.’ By mentioning three of His Names,
God intended to demonstrate to the Christians that even if He has many
attributes, He is still One in His essence.

Some modern Islamists pose a third position, and that is that only the
first of these two nouns is a substitute (badal), and the second is an
adjective (nat) of it. If this understanding is taken, the basmala would
translate as, ‘My recitation begins with the name of Allah, the merciful
ar-Rahman.’ I was not able to find any scholar within the Muslim
tradition who understood it in this manner. Additionally, since both
ar-Rahman and ar-Rahim are placed after the first noun, in the same
grammatical context, one would have to show why one of these nouns
should be given a different grammatical role than the other, as this
would be an awkward rendering of the Arabic expression.

If this third position is taken, then obviously the question arises as
to why two names are emphasized (‘Allah’ and ‘ar-Rahman’), and what the
relationship is between them. In order to do this, we need to first
discuss the opinions regarding the origins of the name ‘ar-Rahman’.

Origin of the Attribute ar-Rahman
---------------------------------

The discussion regarding the origins of the name ar-Rahman is an ancient
one. The Qur'an itself quite explicitly states that this name was
unknown to the Quraysh (as in Qur'an, 25:60). Most scholars are of the
opinion that ar-Rahman is a unique name of God, and so cannot be used to
describe the creation, unlike most other Divine Names, including
ar-Rahim. This is due to 17:110, where the two names ‘Allah’ and
‘ar-Rahman’ appear to be equivalent in sanctity.

There is also a tradition in the canonical works, a hadith Qudsi, in
which God is reported as saying ‘I am ar-Rahman; I created the ties of
kinship (ar-Rahm), and from it derived one of My Names.’ This was one of
the primary evidences used by those who claimed that this name is
derived from r-h-m. On the other hand, a number of early Islamic
authorities, such as al-Mubarrad, considered ar-Rahman to have a Jewish
origin. Quite a few authorities are on record as stating that this name
was a name given to ‘ancients’ as well.

It is clear that the Qur'an itself considers the name ar-Rahman to be an
ancient name. Apart from the reference in Solomon’s letter (already
given), this name is used as the God of all previous nations in Qur'an,
43:45; Abraham beseeches God with it (Qur'an, 19:44); Aaron uses it to
remind the Israelites of their God (Qur'an, 20:19); it appears on the
tongue of an Israelite community (Qur'an, 36:15); and it appears on the
tongue of Mary, mother of Jesus twice (in 19:18 and 19:26).

It is claimed by some that this name was a Meccan name that was later
not emphasized as much, and perhaps even sidelined by later Muslims as a
primary name of God. However, the name is mentioned in quite a few
Medinan verses as well (for example, Qur'an, 2:163, and 59:22). In
addition, every single Sunni theologian who discussed the Divine Names
considered the name ‘ar-Rahman’ as being one of those 99 names.

To conclude, as with many issues dealing with the academic study of
religion, how one chooses to interpret the basmala has a lot to do with
one’s basic theological and historical premises. If one believes that
Muhammad conjured up a new monotheistic system in order to unite the
Arabs, then it is plausible to suggest that he might have wished to
unite various factions of Arabia under the deities that they would be
familiar with, hence ‘Allah’ for the Arabs of Hijaz and ‘ar-Rahman’ for
the Arabs of Southern Arabia. And this is indeed the position of many
modern Islamists.

But such a position does lead to other questions, such as: why did he
only choose the name of the god of one faction of Arabia (Southern
Arabia), and not other areas and provinces? And why was he so stubbornly
opposed to all the Meccan (and Hijazite) pagan deities, allowing no
compromise with those deities whatsoever? Also the question arises as to
how the name of this obscure divinity reached him. The claim that
Muhammad was reaching out to convert Arabs in Southern Yemen while he
was still in the early stages of his career at Mecca presupposes that he
was envisioning this new religion to be a dominant force in the farthest
corners of Arabia, even while being persecuted and rejected in his own
city.

“That ar-Rahman should have been the name of a single God in central and
southern Arabia is in no way incompatible with the fact that, when
adopted by Islam, it assumes a grammatical form of a word derived from
the root rahm.”

Batil or Baatil باطل: false or falsehood, nullified, voided

Batsh بطش: Despotic behavior, tyranny

Batul or Batool بتول: ascetic. It is ascribed to Fatima (the Prophet's
daughter) and Virgin Mary.

Bawadi بوادي: plural of Badiya

Bay'a or Bay'ah بيعه: oath of allegiance, pledge to a man of authority
or prominence

Bayan بيان: Statement, account, declaration, explanation, clarification,
announcement

Bayt al-Mal بيت المال: State Treasury in the Islamic State

Beed بيض: plural ofأبيض abyad, white

Bid\`a or Bid\`ah بدعه: innovation, novelty, (in religion) heresy

Bigha' بغاء: prostitution

Bismillahir-rahmanir-rahim بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم : This is a
verse/statement from the Qur'an which is articulated before the
recitation of the Qur'an. It is also recited before doing any daily
activity, even when a husband starts making love to his wife, for
love-making between legal spouses is as sacred as anything else can be,
and it is rewardable by the Almighty, too, Who will surely punish those
who permit themselves to have intercourse outside of the sacred limits
of marriage unless they regret, repent and do good deeds to wipe out the
bad ones.

Islam is not just a religion, it is a way of life, the most clean and
the most fulfilling, one which brings happiness in both this life and in
the Hereafter. The Basmala means: "In the name of Allah, the Most
Beneficent, the Most Merciful." In the Fatiha, the first chapter of the
Holy Qur'an, the Basmala is a verse all by itself, whereas in all other
chapters, with the exception of Bara'ah or Tawbah where it is not
recited, it serves as an introduction to other verses. On pp. 39-40,
Vol. 1, of his Tafsir, al-Qummi chronologically arranges the isnad of
one particular statement made by Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (ع) and recounts
the longest list of narrators we have ever come across.

The list of narrators ends with Abu Busayr, a well-known companion of
this great Imam (ع), saying that he once asked Imam as-Sadiq (ع) about
the exegesis of the Basmala. The Imam said the following: "The ب is
derived from بهاء الله "baha-Allah," the Splendor of Allah; the س is
derived from سناء الله "sanaa-Allah," the Majesty of Allah; the م is
derived from ملك الله "mulk-Allah," the Kingdom of Allah; "Allah" is the
God of everything; الرحمان is the One Who is Merciful to all His
creation; الرحيم is the One Who singles out those who believe in Him to
receive the greatest share of His mercy."

On p. 506 of Misbah al-Kaf'ami مصباح الكفعمي, the Messenger of Allah (ص)
is quoted as saying that when a teacher, who teaches a child to recite
the Holy Qur'an, tells the child to recite this Basmala, and when the
child recites it, the Almighty will decree a clearance for the child,
for his parents and for the teacher from hell, and that it is comprised
of nineteen letters, the same number that corresponds to the number of
the keepers of the gates of hell; therefore, whoever pronounces it,
Allah will permit these letters to close the gates of hell against him.

Bi'tha بعثه: the beginning of the Prophet's mission, his call to
Prophethood, which started during the month of Ramadan, 13 years before
the hijra, which coincided in the year 610 A.D.

Burda بردة: garment, gown

Busr بصر: partially ripe dates

Buhtan بهتان: falsehood, untruth


