د، ذ, D
=======

Dafn دفن: burial. In Islam, there are numerous rules relevant to burying
the dead. One is that their dead must not be buried together with
followers of other creeds. Muslims have to have their own cemeteries
when they live in non-Muslim countries. The corpses have to be given
their burial bath then clothed in clean white cotton sheets, shrouds. It
is highly recommended to write verses of the Holy Qur'an on these
shrouds. It is also recommended a small copy of the Holy Qur'an be
buried with the deceased person, and two will be even better, one on
each of his/her sides.

Visiting graves has always been an Islamic tradition especially on
certain religious occasions when the Qur'an is recited at the grave of a
loved one whose soul, rest assured, will hear the recitation and
appreciate it tremendously. The body dies, but the soul is immortal.
Performing prayers on behalf of the dead, especially the parents, has
numerous rewards of which only the Almighty is familiar.

Doing acts of charity on behalf of the dead has its rewards to both the
doer and the person for whom they are done. Graveyards, cemeteries,
burial grounds and the like have their own sanctity in Islam and must
meet certain conditions to qualify to be called as such. There are also
rules restricting the burying of Muslim dead to certain ways and certain
places which must be distinguished from those of non-Muslims. A Muslim
must not be buried at non-Muslims’ cemetery. “Life” in the grave is a
big topic in Islam and is worth researching. This text touches on it
lightly due to space constrictions.

Dahr دهر: time, age, eternity, forever

Da'i داعي: Muslim missionary involved in da'wa دعوه, propagation of
Islam. It can also have a general meaning referring to someone who calls
others to a certain belief or ideology or to a gathering, meeting,
banquet, wedding, etc.

Daim دائم: Permanent, continuous; if preceded by the definite article,
i.e. الدائم, it will then refer to the Almighty Who is always there and
neither time, nor place, nor anything material applies to Him, the One
and only God of everyone and everything.

Da\`iyy دعي: One whose father is unknown and someone joins him to his
own lineage, a foundling, illegitimately born

Dajjal دجال: Impostor, charlatan, deceiver, pretender

Daleel دليل: evidence, proof, argument, indication, clue, guide,
directory

Darij دارج: current, common, familiar, parlance, colloquial, vernacular

Da'wa دعوه: inviting others to Islam, any missionary activity

Dayn دين: debt. It may be debt to other people or to the Almighty. Some
people die leaving debts behind which they owe to others who had loaned
them to the Almighty to Whom they owe everything and Who required them
to do what is surely within their human ability. These debts, to people
or to the Almighty, must be paid by the relatives of these unfortunate
dead, and there is hardly one who leaves this temporary abode without
leaving behind him/her many debts. This is why Islam emphasizes the need
for writing wills. Remember that whatever you owe people, or you owe
your Maker, in this life will be so hard for you to pay in the life to
come.

Deen دين: religion, creed, faith. Islam is all of this and much more; it
is a complete and perfect way of life. Islam is referred to as a "deen"
while it is much, much more than that, it is a complete, perfect and
flawless way of life which leads to one's happiness in the life of this
world and in the Hereafter. It regulates one's relations with other
people on one hand and with his/her Creator on the other. It is provides
a complete social, political and economic system.

Deewan or Diwan Diwan ديوان: a collection of poem; also a place of
meeting

Dhaleel ذليل: undignified, lowly, contemptible, one living in an
undignified one

Dhamm ذم: slander, maligning, vilifying, speaking ill of someone. This
is the habit of many people which will in the end lodge them in hell
unless they regret, repent and amend. Beware of speaking ill of people
unless they are publicly exposing their own sinning and perhaps even
bragging about it. In such case, you should condemn them as should
everyone else.

Dharee\`ah ذريعه: pretext, excuse, ostensible motive, excuse

Dhikr or Thikr or Zikr ذكر: remembrance or the praising of Allah.

Dhimmi or Thimmi or Zimmi ذمي: a non-Muslim individual who lives under
the protection of a Muslim state. He is exempt from Islamic duties and
obligations, including military service, but he must pay a protection
tax called jizya.

Dhurriyya ذريه: offspring, issue, progeny, descendants, children

Dinar or Deenar دينار: an Islamic (now Arab) gold currency varying in
weight

Dirham درهم: (historically an) Islamic silver currency weighing approx.
3.12 grams

Diyya دية: blood money, monetary compensation for manslaughter or
intentional murder

Du \`a' دعاء: supplication, invocation, prayer

Du'at دعاة: plural of da'iya or da\`iyah, a caller to Islam or any
ideology

Dukhan دخان: smoke. Chapter 44 of the Holy Qur'an is called "Al-Dukhan",
the smoke. If you read the first 16 verses (out of a total of 59), you
will notice how the Almighty warns those who disbelieve in the message
brought from Him to Prophet Muhammad (ص):

***"Keep waiting, therefore, for the day when the sky brings an evident
smoke that shall overtake men" (Qur'an, 44:10-11).***

The Prophet, in a tradition dealing with the signs that denote the
approach of the Day of Judgment, is quoted as having said, "The first of
such signs is the smoke [to which reference is made in these verses]."
He was asked what smoke it would be. He said, "It will cover the east of
the earth and the west; it will remain for forty days and nights. It
will affect the believer just like a cold [catarrh]. As to the
unbeliever, he will feel as though he is intoxicated. It [smoke] will
come out of his nostrils, ears and rear end."

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (ع) is quoted as having said, "There will be a
smoke that will overwhelm both ends of the earth (east and west or north
and south), causing the death of two thirds of the world's population."
This "smoke" can now be said as caused by the explosion of nuclear and
hydrogen bombs and by the poison gases they release.

Dunya دنيا: this world or life as opposed to the Hereafter, mortality


