ح،ه H,
======

**Habs حبس:** confinement, imprisonment, detention, jail

**Hadas حدس:** conjucture, presumption, a sense of something

**Hadd حد:** penalty imposed by the Shari\`a, border, adjoin, margin,
frontier, barrier, ceiling, limit

**Hadi هادي:** guide, one who shows the right path to others: It may be
any ordinary person who guides others towards what is good for them,
something which is righteous, useful and beneficial. If the definite
article "the " is added to it, it will have a special meaning, a much
broader one: It will then refer to the Almighty Who guides His servants
to His Right Path, or it may be one of the Infallible Imams who, in
turn, are guided by the Almighty and instructed to show the right way to
people. Here are two examples for you:

**Al-Hadi** **الهادي**, the Almighty God, Allah, **سبحانه و تعالى**
Praise and Exaltation belong to Him and only Him. The Most Glorified and
Exalted One has said, *... and sufficient is your Lord as a Guide and a
Helper* (Qur'an, 25:31). “Al-Hadi” is an Attribute derived,
linguistically, from hidaya, guidance, which means: to attract someone
to something, such as attracting the heart of a believer to al-Hadi, to
the One Who provides such guidance.

Guidance means bringing the hearts closer to the Almighty. Guidance is
the following of one's sound reason and common sense and the graceful
way of bringing someone to the anticipated goal. He guides the elite
from among His servants whom He has chosen to know His Essence, so much
so that they see things through Him, and He guides the commoners among
them to witness His creatures, so much so that they have seen them as
signs of His being their Creator and Sustainer.

He has guided everything He created to whatever means whereby it can
satisfy its needs. He has guided the baby to suck the breast of its
mother, the young birds to pick the seeds, and the bees to build their
honey-combs in hexagonal shapes which are the best to suit the forms of
their bodies, and such examples are quite lengthy indeed.

Al-Hadi guides the guilty to repentance, and those blessed with
knowledge to the facts regarding nearness to Him. Al-Hadi occupies the
hearts by truthfulness and equity, the bodies by life and death. Al-Hadi
has given everything He has created its shape and charac­teristics, and
He guides whom He creates to the goals behind His creating them, to
issues related to their life in this world and to those related to their
creed, in addition to everything else related to them. He guides the
hearts to know Him and the souls to obey Him; He guides the guilty to
the path of repentance, the sincere ones to nearness to Him after being
far from it. He keeps the hearts filled with love for equity and truth;
He enables them to treat people justly. Al-Hadi is in all reality Allah.
Al-Hadi has guided the elite from among His servants to wisdom and
knowledge.

Whenever the Messenger of Allah woke up during the night for prayers, he
would supplicate to his Lord saying, “Lord! God of Gabriel, Michael and
Israfil, Originator of the heavens and the earth, Knower of the unknown
and the Witness! You judge between Your servants regarding that wherein
they dispute! I plead to You to guide me to that wherein they have
differed, by Your will, for You guide whomsoever You please to a
straight path." We know that the Almighty is the source of all guidance,
but we also know that He works through mediums, agents, servants of His
who obey His commandments and guide others to His Path, the Path of
happiness in this life and in the life to come. These guides can be
ordinary men and they can be scholars of theology who dedicate years of
their life to studying His Holy Book, the Qur'an, and His Prophet's
Sunna. Below is information about one of His servants who dedicated his
life to serving his Creator and the servants of this Creator; he is
Infallible Imam Ali al-Hadi, peace be with him and with all Imams from
among the Prophet's Progeny:

**Imam al-Hadi (ﻉ):** His first name is Ali which is usually prefixed by
one of his many titles the most famous of which are: an-Nasih,
al-Muftah, an-Najib, al-Murtada, al-Hadi, an-Naqi, al-Alim, al-Faqih,
al-Amin, al-Mu'taman, at-Tayyib, al-Mutawakkil, a title which he avoided
very much during the Abbasid ruler who also was called "al-Mutawakkil",
and the "Askari *Faqih*". Because both Imams Ali ibn Abu Talib,
al-Murtada, and Ali ar-Rida, peace be with both of them, were called
"Abul-Hassan" each, Imam Ali al-Hadi (ﻉ) is referred to as "Abul-Hassan
III". His mother’s name is Sumana Khatun. He was born in Saria, a suburb
of Medina, now "Saudi Arabia", on Rajab 5, 214 A.H./September 8, 829
A.D.

He enjoyed the love of his father, Imam at-Taqi and also al-Jawad (ﻉ),
for only six years because his father had to leave for Baghdad where he
was martyred on the 29th of Thu al-Qi\`da 220 A.H./November 24, 835 A.D.
and the responsibilities of Imamate devolved on his young son’s
shoulders. Providence was the only tutor and instructor that reared and
raised him to the extreme zenith of learning. For more information about
Imam al-Hadi (ﻉ), refer to our discussion above of the nine Imams who
descended from the hero of this book (ع).

**Hadith or** **Hadeeth** **حديث:** A report on a statement or tradition
(action) of Prophet Muhammad (ص) or what he witnessed and approved of is
called *hadith* (sing.; plural: *ahadith*). These are the explanations,
interpretations and living examples of the Prophet (ص) as he taught the
nation and/or explained the teachings of the Qur'an. Other meanings of
this word include: modern, new, talk, speech, conversation, fresh, novel

**Hadith Qudsi** **حديث** **قدسي:** one of *ahadith* in which the
Prophet cites the Almighty; i.e. the speech of the Almighty as worded by
His Prophet Muhammad. The meaning of these *ahadith* indicates
revelations to the Prophet which the Prophet (ص) put in his own words,
unlike the Qur'an which is the word of Allah Almighty as conveyed to the
Prophet (ص) exactly, *verbatim*.

**Hafi حافض:** one who has learned the entire text of the Holy Qur'an by
heart; plural *huffaz*; another meaning refers to an angel in charge of
protecting a human’s life till it is time for his/her demise

**Hajib حاجب:** doorkeeper, usher

**Hajiz حاجز:** barrier, curtain, separator, obstruction, check or
control post

**Hajj or** **Haj or Hijj** **حج:** Hajj is an Arabic word which means:
the performance of the Islamic pilgrimage to Mecca in Hijaz, northern
Saudi Arabia. It is one of the five pillars of Islam. A Muslim is to
perform *hajj* at least once in his/her life, if he has the means (of
health and financial ability) to do so. There are rules and regulations
as well as specific outfits related to the performance of this rite. The
Islamic pilgrimage takes place during the last month of the Islamic
lunar calendar, namely the month of Thul-Hijja.

**Hajz حجز:** seizure, sequestration, garnishment, confinement,
impounding

**Halal حلال:** something which is lawful, permissible, in Islam, the
opposite of *haram*

**Halif or Haleef** **حليف:** ally, one who enjoys the protection of a
tribe but does not belong to it

**Hakim حاكم:** ruler, governor, judge, magistrate

**Halaqa حلقة:** ring, circle, cycle, a group of students involved in
the study of Islam

**Hamid or Hameed** **: حميد** praiseworthy, commendable, laudable

**Hamim or Hameem** **حميم:** intimate, very close (friend); another
meaning refers to the boiling water or pus given to the residents of
hell whenever they ask for water

**Hamiya حاميه:** garrison, protection force

**Hamil حامل:** bearer, carrier, conveyor,, holder, expectant, pregnant

**Hanan حنان:** affection, tenderness, sympathy, compassion

**Hanif or Haneef** **حنيف:** *Haneefs* are people who, during the
pre-Islamic period of *jahiliyya*, rejected the worship of idols. These
people were in search for the true religion of Prophet Abraham.

**Hanith حانث:** perjurer, guilty of perjury

**Hannata (v.) حنط:** embalmed, (n.) embalming حنوط. A word of caution
here: Do not confuse what the Muslims do to corpses of their dead with
that of non-Muslims, mostly the Christians who embalm their dead by
draining them of blood then injecting a liquid in them. This is not
permissible in Islam. Instead, Muslims anoint/oil the corpse with a
special mixture of herbs which preserve the freshness of the corpse for
some time. The best who excelled in this art are the Pharaohs of ancient
Egypt.

The hardest period that follows death (which, in Islam, means: the
separation of the eternal and indestructible soul from the temporal and
decaying body) is the first three days of our own counting. Researching
true life, eternal life, that is, life after death, is from my viewpoint
a most fascinating research.

For those who wish to research this subject, the best reference I have
come across is Sheikh (mentor) Abbas al-Qummi's *Manazil al-Akhira*
which was originally written in Farsi then translated into Arabic by Dr.
Abdul-Mahdi Yargari who, by the way, did an outstanding job. The edition
I read was published in 1990 by the Balagh Foundation of Beirut,
Lebanon. It falls only in 124 pages, yet it draws a road map for you and
explains what you should expect, and how to be prepared for, as the
stages on the very long and rough road to eternity succeed each other.
To my deep dismay, not a single Publisher has till now asked me to
translate this precious book, and I do not know if I will live long
enough to see this great book translated into English…

**Haqq حق:** the truth, what is right, an obligation, a responsibility,
what belongs to someone

**Harām or Haraam حرام:** a thing or action which is forbidden,
prohibited, made unlawful by Islam

**Haram حرم:** sanctuary, a sacred territory. Mecca has been a *haram*
since time immemorial. All things within the limits/boundaries of the
*haram* are protected and considered inviolable; non-Muslims are not
supposed to enter them. Medina was also declared a *haram* by the
Prophet (ص). The term “Haramain” refers to both sanctuaries of Mecca and
Medina.

**Hasana or Hasaanah** **حصانه:** immunity, privilege, exemption,
liberty

**Hashd حشد:** crowd (of people, etc.), throng, multitude (of persons,
etc.), riotous assembly

**Hashr حشر:** crowding, grouping, gathering together, assembling **يوم
الحشر** (such as for the Day of Judgment). Speaking of the Day of
Judgment, here is the picture I have drawn in my imagination for the
Gathering on that Day: First of all, the place where I believe the
Judgment will take place will be on our Planet Earth since we all are
earthlings. The globe will change its form considerably: The mountains
will be crushed and made to look like cotton being worked by a cotton
carder (**نداف**) as we are told in 101:5 (Chapter 101, Verse 5) of the
Holy Qur'an and the oxygen will be separated from the hydrogen in water
and the oxygen is set ablaze, so much so that you will see oceans set on
fire as we are told in verses such as 81:6 and 52:6, till the entire
earth is flattened like a computer's storage CD.

This completely circular disk will be split into at least 128,000
triangles, this number corresponding to the number of prophets whom the
Almighty sent to various nations of the human species. If you place many
triangles side by side, you will come up with a circle. On tip of each
pyramid will be the prophet who will face the nation to whom he was sent
as those closest to him will be the nearest followed those who emulated
them, and so on and so forth.

For example, immediately facing the prophet will be his *wasis*
**الأوصياء** (successors to prophets), then the *walis* **الأولياء**,
then the martyrs **الشهداء**, then the scholars **العلماء**, that is,
the people of knowledge who did not profit by their knowledge, who did
not sell their religion, who did not become wealthy or politically
powerful (or who gained both wealth and power while losing all their
balance with God), those who did not write for fame or reputation but to
benefit the public and hopefully earn the Almighty's Pleasure and
rewards.

Another tough condition for these scholars is that they should have
acted upon what they had taught the people, a condition which not many
of them can meet, and this includes the writer of this book who,
therefore, needs your prayers and supplications, perhaps these prayers
and supplications will benefit him on the Day of Gathering **يوم
الحشر**.

These will be followed by others and others who disseminated knowledge
or who in some way benefited the people especially in assisting them in
getting closer to know and to worship their Maker rather than worship
their ego, whims and desires. Within each triangle, there will be
numerous groups. Each group will share one or more characteristic.
People, we are told by a number of *ahadith* (traditions), will be
gathered in the company of those whom they love the most, and "love"
here does not mean only emotional but in actuality, in practicality, in
reality, in degree of emulation and following.

So, it is now up to you to give your heart to whomsoever you please: the
movie stars, the singers, the dancers and their likes, or those who
sacrificed their lives for the sake of humanity, setting immortal models
for self-denial and self-sacrifice, rather than self-worship, such as
the prophets and messengers of God who we, Muslims, respect and revere
without making distinctions, as we are instructed to do in the Holy
Qur'an. Now, and only now, you have an option. When the Day of Gathering
comes, there will be no options left.

The angels will know exactly where to place you for judgment; they are
the judgment angels, for each angel has a function for which the
Almighty creates him, and "him" here is used loosely since angels in
Islam have no gender nor will have the souls. After the judgment is done
and the accounts are settled (make sure you do not die while owing
people some money or a past due apology!), the fortunate ones will be
transported, in groups or individually, to the gardens of bliss **جنات
النعيم**, which I think will occupy the vast cosmos at that time—and
only God knows if that cosmos will be similar to this cosmos, and most
likely it will not—whereas those doomed will remain on earth. At that
time, the earth will take another shape, becoming an inferno with
numerous methods and chambers of torture described vividly in the Holy
Qur'an for our admonishment. This is just an imagined picture, that is
all, and you can say that I have a "wild imagination"! If you have a
better idea, let us hear it! Surely Allah knows best.

**Hasra** **or Hasrah** **حسره**: regret, sorrow, remorse

**Hawza حوزه:** place of acquisition (of higher learning), religious
seminary; among the world's most famous *hawzas* are located in Najaf,
Iraq, and Qum, Iran.

**Haya' حياء:** timidity, shyness, feeling of decorum or propriety,
modesty

**Hayawan حيوان:** animal. It also means "eternal life", everlasting
life, eternity, as we read in Ch. 29 (Al-Ankabut, Spider), Verse 64.
Most Arabic words have more than one meaning.

**Hayawi حيوي:** vital, full if vitality and energy, of utmost
importance, essential

**Hayawiyya حيويه:** vitality, energy

**Hayd or Haydh or Hayz** **حيض:** menstruation period

**Hayta or Heeta حيطه”** precaution, safeguard; *al-ahwat* **الأحوط**
refers to what is regarded by the creed as the most precautionary
measure

**Hazan (or Huzn) حزن:** grief, agony, sorrow

**Hazim حازم:** strict, stringent, stern

**Hifz حفظ:** preservation, protection from loss, memorization (usually
of the Holy Qur'an). Anyone who memorizes the entire text of the Holy
Qur'an is called *hafiz*.

**Hila or Heelah** **حيله:** trick, cunning, ruse, artifice, stratagem,
ingenuity, contrivance

**Hijab حجاب:** veil, curtain, barrier

**Hijama** or Hijaamah **حجامه:** cupping

**Hikma حكمه:** wisdom, sagacity, prudence

**Hilal هلال:** crescent, singular of *ahilla*

**Hilf حلف:** alliance, confederation, an oath

**Hijra هجره:** migration. The *hijra* or hegira refers to the Prophet's
migration from Mecca to Madinah. This journey took place in the 13th
year of his mission (which coincided at the time with the month of
September of 622 A.D.). This is the beginning of the Muslim calendar.
The word *"hijra*" means: leaving a place in order to seek sanctuary or
freedom from persecution or to go where there is freedom of religion, or
for any other purpose. *Hijra* can also mean to leave a bad way of life
for a good or more righteous way, or to leave the company of bad folks
and choose that of good folks.

**Hiqd حقد:** grudge, animosity, intense hatred, hostility, malice. (Do
not let any of these diseases eat your heart up. Instead, pray for the
wrongdoers to see the light of the Right Path so they may return to
their senses, amend their ways and spare people their mischief. Do not
harbor such negative feelings towards any human being, animal, plant or
even stone, for all these are servants of the Almighty.

Direct such sentiments towards bad actions caused through the
insinuations of the Devil, arch-enemy Satan, Lucifer, and those of his
tribe. Direct your contempt towards the deed rather than the doer for
the doer may not be aware of what he does or why he does it. Empty your
heart of hatred and fill it with love for everyone and everything, and
this love will return back to you multiplied many times. Those who sow
good seeds will reap a good harvest. Try it! It comes with a guarantee!)

**Hisab حساب:** accounting, accounting (or right and wrong, etc.),
arithmetic, computation

**Hisar حصار:** siege, boycott, blockade, embargo

**Hiwar حوار:** dialogue, conversation (usually between two persons or
groups)

**Hizb حزب:** literally, it means party (plural *azab*); another meaning
is each 60th portion of the text of the Holy Qur'an

**Hisn حصن:** fortress, fortified place, chateau, citadel, protection
against or a protective place or measure, security against, immunity

**Hudud** **or Hudood حدود:** limits ordained by Allah. This includes
the punishment for crimes; it also refers to the plural of *hadd*
**حد**, specific penalty

**Hujja حجة:** proof, argument, evidence, authority

**Huri حوري:** heavenly wives known for their extreme whiteness and
large lovely eyes married to the male residents of Paradise

**Hurr حر:** free, liberal, open-minded


