إ،ع, I
======

**I\`ara or I\`aarah** إعاره: lending, loaning

**Ibada عباده:** worship, adoration, religious service, rite, cult;
Muslims feel honored when described as "obedient servants of Allah".
They testify that Prophet Muhammad (ص), the very best not only of
mankind but of all creation, is the servant and Messenger of Allah.
Anyone who serves anyone else other than Allah is a mean, humiliated and
miserable loser in both this life and the life to come, whereas a
sincere servant of the Almighty is a winner of both.

**Ibaha** **or Ibaahah** **إباحة**: Sufferance, tolerance or toleration,
passive consent, disclosure, divulgence and sometimes it means:
promiscuity, pornography **إباحية**

**Ibham or Ibhaam إبهام**: ambiguity, obscurity; it also means thumb

**Ibtal or Ibtaal إبطال**: nullification, annulment, voiding

**Ibtihal** **ابتهال**: supplication, invocation

**Ida or Idha or Iza عظه:** admonition, lesson, warning sermon

**Iddi\`a'** **إدعاء**: allegation, claim, contention, assertion,
declaration

**Idman إدمان**: addiction

**Iffa** **عفه**: uprightness, probity, modesty, honesty,
incorruptibility, continence

**Iftar إفطار:** time or meal for breaking the fast; breakfast

**Ifti\`al** **إفتعال**: contriving, designing, scheming

**Iftirad إفتراض**: supposition, hypothesis, assumption

**Ihram إحرام:** pilgrimage garb, white unwoven cotton shroud worn by
pilgrims

**Ihsan or Ihsaan** **إحسان**: benevolence, charity, beneficence,
kindness

**Ihtifal** **احتفال**: festivity, celebration, a merry occasion;
plural: **احتفالات** ***ihtifalat*** **Islamic** **Festivities:** Other
than the two major Islamic feasts or \`Īds, there are few festivities
which Muslims enjoy. These are related to different activities or
special occasions. Some of these special occasions are:

**عقيقة** **Aqiqa**: It is a dinner reception held after a child is
born. Relatives, friends, and neighbors are invited for such an
occasion.  
**وليمة** **Walima:** It is a dinner reception during or after marriage
is consummated. It is offered by the parents and/or the married couple.
Friends, relatives, and neighbors are also invited.

**Ihtijaj or Ihtijaaj** **إحتجاج**: protesting, remonstrance, under
protest, the producing of evidence, proof, rebuttal

**Ihtikar** **or Ihtikaar إحتكار**: monopoly, monopolization

**Ihtiraz** **or Ihtiraaz إحتراز**: taking precaution, precautionary
measure

**Ihtiyat** **or Ihtiyaat إحتياط**: precaution, taking precautionary
measures, advance care/measure

**Ijhaf or Ijhaaf إجحاف**: injustice, inequity

**Ijma\` or Ijmaa\` إجماع**: **unanimity, consensus**

**Ijtihad or** **Ijtehad, Ijtihad, Ijtehad** **إجتهاد:** the degree one
reaches in order to be qualified as a *mujtahid*, one who is capable of
deriving religious decisions on his own. It is exerting one's total
ability to uncover Allah's rulings on issues from their sources (Qur'an,
Sunnah, consensus, etc.).

**Ikhtilaq** **or Ikhtilaaq إختلاق**: fabrication, invention, innovation

**Ikrah** **or Ikraah إكراه**: coercion, imposition, forcing

**Ikram** **or Ikraam** **إكرام**: honoring, being generous to,
revering, respecting, esteeming, recognizing, venerating

**Ilhaf** **or Ilhaaf إلحاف**: insistence, importunity, soliciting or
requesting while being too pushy

**\`Illiyeen or \`Illiyoon** **عليون**: the highest pinnacle of
Paradise; see Holy Qur'an, 83:18.

**\`Ilm علم:** knowledge, learning, knowing, science; **علم الأجواء** :
aerology; **علم الأمراض** : pathology**; علم أمراض الجلد**: dermatology;
**علم أمراض النساء** : gynaecology; **علم الأمراض النفسيه**:
psychiatrics; **علم الأنساب** : genealogy; **علم الأنسان** :
anthropology; **علم البيئه** : ecology; **علم التربيه الزراعيه** :
agrology; **علم التشريح** : anatomy; **علم الجرائم** : criminology;
**علم الحشائش**: agrostology; **علم الحشرات** : entomology; **علم
الصحه** : hygiene; **علم الصخور** : petrology; **علم طبقات الأرض** :
geology; **علم الطبيعيات الأرضيه** : geophysics; **علم الفلك** :
astronomy; **علم الفنون الصناعيه** : technology; **علم الكونيات** :
cosmology; **علم النفس** : psychology; **علم النوويات**: nucleonics;
**علم الوراثه** : genetics.

**Iltibas** **or Iltibaas** **إلتباس**: confusion, complication,
predicament

**Imam or** **Imam, Emam, Emaam** **مام** **إ**: leader of an *ummah*, a
group of people (small or big); he may be the one who leads others in
congregational prayers, or a supreme religious or political authority or
both, or one of the Twelve Infallible Imams (ع). An *imam* is a
religious community leader. Any person who leads a congregational prayer
is called an *imam*. A religious leader who also leads his community in
the political affairs may be called an *imam*, an *amir* (or *emir*) or
caliph.

**Iman** **or** **Iman, Eman** **إيمان:** faith and trust in Allah,
conviction

**Imtiyaz or Emtiyaaz إمتياز**: distinction, excellence, eminence,
privilege, concession, franchise

**Infilaq** **or Infilaaq إنفلاق**: cleaving, fission (of nucleus,
molecules, etc.)

**Infirat or Infiraat** **إنفراط**: dispersal, breaking down (of group,
coalition, etc.), disruption, separation, falling apart

**Injil إنجيل:** the revelations that were sent down during the time of
Prophet Isa (Jesus). It is referred to as the New Testament.

***Inna lillahi wa inna ilahi raji'un or Inna Lillahi Wa Inna Ilahi
Rajioon*** **إنا لله و إنا إليه راجعون**: When a Muslim is struck with a
calamity, such as when he loses one of his loved ones, or when he
becomes bankrupt, he should be patient and utter this statement with
full conviction. It means: "We are from Allah and to Him do we return."
Muslims believe that Allah is the One who gives and who takes away. He
tests us.

A true Muslim submits himself to Allah wholeheartedly, during good times
and bad times. He is grateful and thankful to Allah for whatever He
decrees for him. He is patient and says this expression during times of
turmoil and calamity.

***Insha-Allah*** **or** **Insha** ***Allah, In Sha' Allah*** ***إنشاء
الله*****:** When a person wishes to plan to do something in the future,
when he promises someone to do something for him or to give him
something, when he makes resolutions, and when he makes a pledge…, he
does so only with permission of the Almighty Who enables him to do so,
Who provides him with the means, tools, resources, etc., to achieve this
end.

For this reason, a Muslim uses the Qur'anic instructions by saying
"In-Sha' Allah", which means: "If Allah so wills." Muslims are supposed
to strive hard and to trust in Allah, not in themselves, not in anyone
else. They leave the results in the hands of Allah.

**Inshiqaq or Inshiqaaq** **إنشقاق**: separating from, breaking open,
cleaving, breaking apart; title of Ch. 84 of the Holy Qur’an

**Inshitar** **or Inshitaar** **إنشطار**: fission, cleaving, splitting,
dividing, tearing apart

**Intihal** **or Intihaal إنتحال**: impersonation, simulation

**Intikas or Intikaas** **إنتكاص**: recanting, repudiation, renunciation
(of a previous assertion or conviction)

**Iq'ad إقعاد:** paralysis in the lower half of the body

**Iqama** **or Iqamah** **إقامه:** the pronouncement of certain
statements in preparation for the performing of the prayers. It usually
follows the *athan*. *Iqama* means that the prayer ritual is ready to
start, to be performed, whether individually or collectively (in a
congregation). It is to be recited in Arabic before every obligatory
prayer.

**Iqna\` إقناع** : convincing, persuading, inducing

**Irhab إرهاب:** terrorism, terrorizing, intimidation

**Irtidad** **إرتداد**: reneging, defection, apostasy, reversion

**Irtiyab إرتياب**: suspicion, doubt, apprehension

**Isha or** **Isha'** **عشاء:** nighttime, evening, time for obligatory
evening *salat*, prayer, after sunset, later in the evening. It also
means supper.

**Ishtiqaq** **إشتقاق**: derivation, deduction

**Islam إسلام:** Islam is an Arabic word the root of which is "silm",
peace, and "salam", which also means peace. Among its other meanings are
these: greeting, salutation, obedience to the Almighty, loyalty,
allegiance, and submission to the will of the Creator of the Universe.
Islam is the last and final religion to all mankind and to all
generations irrespective of color, race, nationality, ethnicity,
language or one's social, political or any other position.

The religion of Islam is not to be confused with so-called
"Mohammedanism", a misnomer created by some ignorant folks in order to
tarnish the image of this pristine faith. Muslims do not accept this
name as it gives wrong information about Islam and Muslims. If you
really wish to know what Islam is all about, ask Muslims, not those who
are hostile to the adherents to this religion of peace, and
unfortunately there are many such folks.

**Isnad إسناد:** the method whereby one *adath* is traced and in the end
attributed to a *muhaddith*, traditionist, one who first transmitted it

**Isra' إسراء:** night journey; usually a reference to the Prophet's
night journey from Mecca to Jerusalem, an incident which took place in
the year 622 A.D.

**Israf إسراف:** extravagance, eccessiveness, going to extremes

**Ithbat** **or Ithbaat إثبات**: proof or proving, evidence (or
presenting an evidence)

**Ith\`an** **ذعان إ**: surrender, submission, obedience, resignation,
succumb-ing, acceding

**Ithna-Asheris or Ithna-Ashariyya** **الاثنا عشرية**: Shi’ite (or Shi’a
or Shi’i) Muslims who follow the path of the 14 Infallibles, namely the
Prophet of Islam (ص), Fatima (ع) daughter of the Prophet (ص) and the
Infallible Imams who descended from Ali (ع). Ithna-Asheris are also
called Ja’faris, after Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (ع) whose biography is
detailed in this book. Here is a brief narrative of their biographies
for you:

The 14 Infallibles
------------------

1. **Prophet Muhammad:** He is Muhammad ibn (son of) Abdullah ibn
Abdul-Muttalib ibn Hashim ibn Abd Munaf ibn Qusayy ibn Kilab ibn Murrah
ibn Ka\`b ibn ibn Ghalib ibn Fahr ibn Malik ibn Nadar ibn Kinanah ibn
Khuzaymah ibn Mudrikah ibn Ilyas ibn Mazar ibn Nazar ibn Ma\`ad ibn
Adnan ibn Isma\`eel (Ishmael) ibn Ibrahim (Abraham), peace and blessings
of Allāh be upon him, his progeny, and righteous ancestors, especially
his great grandfathers Isma\`eel and Ibrahim.

**Prophet’s Father:** Abdullāh ibn Abdul-Muttalib (545 - 570 A.D.). The
Blessed Prophet's father, Abdullāh ibn Abdul-Muttalib, was born in 545
A.D., 25 years before the Year of the Elephant. Abu Tālib and az-Zubair
were his brothers by the same father and mother. So were the girls,
except Safiyya. When his father died, the Prophet of Allāh (ص) was two
months old, though reports about this differ. Abdul-Mualib loved
\`Abdullāh immensely because he was the best of his children, the most
chaste and the most noble among them. Once Abdul-Muttalib sent his son
on business, and when the caravan passed by Yathrib (Medina), Abdullāh
died there. He was buried in the house of Arqam ibn Ibrāhim ibn Surāqah
al-Adawi.

**Prophet’s Foster Father:** Al-Hārith son of Abd al-Uzza ibn Rifā\`ah
ibn Millān ibn Nāirah ibn Fuayya ibn Nar ibn Sa\`d ibn Bakr ibn Hawāzin.

**Prophet’s Foster Mothers:** Thawbiyya; she was a bondmaid of Abu
Lahab, the paternal uncle of the Messenger of Allāh (ص). She breast-fed
him with the milk of her son Masruh.

**Halima**, the Prophet's foster mother. She was the daughter of "Abu
Thu'aib" Abdullāh ibn Shajnah ibn Jābir ibn Rizām ibn Nāirah ibn Sa\`d
ibn Bakr ibn Hawāzin al-Qaisi. She breast-fed the Messenger of Allāh (ص)
with the milk of her son Abdullāh and reared him (ص) for four years
(till the year 574 A.D.).

**Prophet’s Children:** 1) Ibrāhim, 2) Abdullāh; 3) al-Qāsim; 4)
stepdaughter (some say daughter) Zainab (d. 629 A.D.); 5) stepdaughter
(some say daughter) Ruqayya (d. 624 A.D.), 6) stepdaughter (some say
daughter) Umm Kulthum (d. 630 A.D.); 7) the Prophet's daughter Fāima,
peace be upon her and her progeny. For more details, refer to my book
titled *Muhammad: Prophet and Messenger of Allah*.

2. **Fatima (ع) Daughter of Muhammad (ص):** Fatima (615 – 632 A.D.),
mother of the Imams (ع), is the daughter of the Messenger of Allah (ص)
by his first wife, Khadija daughter of Khuwaylid, may the Almighty be
pleased with her. Fatima was born in Mecca on a Friday, the 20th of
Jumada II in the fifth year after the declaration of the Prophetic
message which corresponds, according to the Christian calendar, to the
year 615.

She was only 18 and 75 days when she died in Medina few days only (some
say 75) after the death of her revered father (ص): The Prophet (ص)
passed away on Safar 28/May 28 according to the Christian Gregorian
calendar, or the 25th according to the Julian calendar, of the same
year. Fatima passed away on the 14th of Jumada I of 11 A.H. which
corresponded to August 7, 632 A.D. She was buried somewhere in the
graveyard of Jannatul-Baqi' in Medina in an unmarked and unknown grave.
According to her will, her husband, Imam Ali (ع), did not leave any
marks identifying her grave, and nobody knows where it is. According to
Shiite Muslims, she was the only daughter of the Holy Prophet (ص).

Fatima has nine names/titles: Fatima **فاطمة**, al-Siddiqa **الصديقة**
(the truthful one), al-Mubaraka **المباركة** (the blessed one),
al-Tahira **الطاهرة** (the pure one), al-Zakiyya **الزكية** (the chaste
one), al-Radhiayya **الرضية** (the grateful one), al-Mardhiyya
**المرضية** (the one who shall be pleased [on Judgment Day]),
al-Muhaddatha **المحدثة** (the one, other than the Prophet, to whom an
angel speaks) and al-Zahra **الزهراء** (the splendid one).

The Prophet (ص) taught Fatima ‎(‎ع‎) divine knowledge and endowed her
with special intellectual brilliance, so much so that she realized the
true meaning of faith, piety, and the reality of Islam. But Fatima
‎(‎ع‎) also was a witness to sorrow and a life of anguish from the very
beginning of her life. She constantly saw how her revered father was
mistreated by the unbelievers and later how she herself fell a victim to
the same abuse, only this time by some “Muslims”.

A number of chronicles quote her mother, Khadija, narrating the
following about the birth of her revered daughter: “At the time of
Fatima’s birth, I sent for my neighboring Qurayshite women to assist me.
They flatly refused, saying that I had betrayed them by marrying and
supporting Muhammad. I was perturbed for a while when, to my great
surprise, I saw four strange tall women with halos around their faces
approaching me. Finding me dismayed, one of them addressed me thus, ‘O
Khadija! I am Sarah, mother of Ishaq (Isaac). The other three are: Mary
mother of Christ, Asiya daughter of Muzahim and Umm Kulthum sister of
Moses. We have all been commanded by God to put our nursing knowledge at
your disposal.’ Saying this, all of them sat around me and rendered the
services of midwifery till my daughter Fatima was born.”

The motherly blessings and affection received by Fatima (ع) were only
for five years after which Khadija left for her heavenly home. The Holy
Prophet brought her up thereafter.

The Holy Prophet said: “Whoever injures (bodily or otherwise) Fatima, he
injures me; and whoever injures me injures Allah; and whoever injures
Allah practices unbelief. O Fatima! If your wrath is incurred, it incurs
the wrath of Allah; and if you are pleased, it makes Allah pleased,
too.”

M.H. Shakir writes the following: “Fatima, the only daughter of the Holy
Prophet of Islam, was born in Mecca on 20th of Jumada al-Thaniya 18 B.H.
(Before Hijra). The good and noble lady Khadija and the Apostle of Allah
bestowed all their natural love, care and devotion on their lovable and
only child, Fatima, who in her turn was extremely fond of her parents.
The Princess of the House of the Prophet was very intelligent,
accomplished and cheerful. Her speeches, poems and sayings serve as an
index to her strength of character and nobility of mind. Her virtues
gained her the title ‘Our Lady of Light’. She was moderately tall,
slender and endowed with great beauty which caused her to be called
‘az-Zahra’ (the Lady of Light)".

Fatima (ع) was called az-Zahra' because her light used to shine among
those in the heavens. After arriving in Medina, she was married to Ali
in the first year of Hijra, and she gave birth to three sons. Her sons
were: Hassan, Husayn, Masters of the youths of Paradise, and Muhsin.
Muhsin never saw the light because he was aborted as his mother was
behind her house door fending for herself while rogues were trying to
break into it and force her husband to swear the oath of allegiance to
Abu Bakr. She had two daughters, Zainab, the heroine of Karbala’, and
Umm Kulthum. Her children are well-known for their piety, righteousness
and generosity. Their strength of character and actions changed the
course of history.

The Holy Prophet said **فاطمة بضعة مني**, "Fatima is part of me". He
would go out to receive his daughter whenever she came from her
husband's house. Every morning on his way to the Mosque, he would pass
by Fatima's house and say, *"as-Salamu \`alaykum ya Ahla Bay annnubuwwah
wa* *ma\`din arr-risala "* (Peace be with you, O Ahl al-Bayt (Household
of the Prophet) and the Substance of the Message).

Fatima (ع) is famous and acknowledged as the "Sayyidatu nisa
'1-\`alamin" (Leader of all the women of the world for all times)
because the Prophethood of Muhammad would not have been everlasting
without her. The Prophet is the perfect example for men, but could not
be so for women. For all the verses revealed in the Holy Qur'an for
women, Fatima is the perfect model, who translated every verse into
action. In her lifetime, she was a complete woman, being Daughter, Wife
and Mother at the same time.

Fatima inherited the genius and wisdom, the determination and will
power, piety and sanctity, generosity and benevolence, devotion and
worship of Allah, self-sacrifice and hospitality, forbearance and
patience, knowledge and nobility of disposition of her illustrious
father, both in words and in actions. “I often witnessed my mother,”
says Imam Husain, "absorbed in prayer from dusk to dawn."

Her generosity and compassion for the poor was such that no destitute or
beggar ever returned from her door empty-handed. She (ع) worked,
dressed, ate and lived very simply. She was very generous; and none who
came to her door ever went away empty handed. Many times she gave away
all the food she had had, staying without any food at all. As a
daughter, she loved her parents so much that she won their love and
regard to such an extent that the Holy Prophet (ص) used to stand up
whenever she came to him.

**Marriage:** When Fatima came of age, a number of hopefuls sought her
hand in marriage. The Holy Prophet was awaiting the Divine order in this
respect until Imam \`Ali approached him and asked for her hand in
marriage. The Holy Prophet came to Fatima (ع) and asked, "My daughter!
Do you consent to be wedded to \`Ali, as I am so commanded by Allah?"
Fatima (ع) thereupon bowed her head in modesty. Umm Salamah narrates the
following: "Fatima’s face Fatima bloomed with joy and her silence was so
suggestive and conspicuous that the Holy Prophet stood up to shout:
*Allahu Akbar'* (Allah is great)! Fatima's silence is her acceptance."

On Friday, Thul Hijja 1, 2 A.H., which corresponded to May 25, 624 A.D.
according to the Julian Christian calendar or to the 28th of May of the
same year according to the Gregorian Christian calendar which is widely
used in the text of this book, the marriage ceremony took place. All the
Muhajirun (emigrants) and Ansar (supporters) of Medina assembled in the
mosque while Imam \`Ali was seated before the Holy Prophet with all the
ceremonious modesty of a bridegroom.

The Holy Prophet first recited an eloquent sermon then declared: “I have
been commanded by Allah to get Fatima wedded to \`Ali, and so I do
hereby solemnize the matrimony between \`Ali and Fatima on a dower of
four hundred *mithqal* of silver.” Then he asked Imam Ali, "Do you
consent to it, O Ali? " "Yes, I do, O Holy Prophet of Allah!" replied
Imam Ali (ع). Then the Holy Prophet raised his hands and supplicated
thus: “O Lord! Bless both of them, sanctify their progeny and grant them
the keys of Your beneficence, Your treasures of wisdom and genius; and
let them be a source of blessing and peace to my *umma.*” Her children;
Imam Hasan, Imam Husayn, Zainab and Umm Kulthum, are well-known for
their piety, righteousness and generosity. Their strength of character
and actions changed the course of history and fortified Islam which
otherwise would have been lost to mankind.

As a wife, she was very devoted. She never asked Ali for anything in her
entire life. As a mother, she cared for and brought up wonderful
children; they have left their marks on the pages of world history which
time and the plots of enemies of Ahl al-Bayt (ع) will never be able to
erase.

After The Prophet’s Demise
--------------------------

> قال ابن الجوزي (أبو الفرج عبد الرحمن بن أبي الحسن علي بن محمد القرشي
> التيمي البكري، الفقيه الحنبلي الحافظ المفسر الواعظ المؤرخ الأديب
> المعروف بابن الجوزي، رحمه الله رحمة واسعة، وأدخله فسيح جناته، فقيه
> حنبلي محدث ومؤرخ ومتكلم 510]هـ/1116م - 12 رمضان 592 هـ [ ولد وتوفي في
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بغداد) : روي عن علي (عليه السلام) قال: لما مات رسول الله (صلى الله
عليه وآله وسلم) جاءت فاطمة (عليها السلام) فأخذت قبضة من تراب القبر
فوضعته على عينيها، فبكت وأنشأت تقول:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نفسي على زفراتها محبوسة يا ليتها خرجت مع الزفرات
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا خير بعدك في الحياة وإنما أبكي مخافة أن تطول حياتي
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ibn al-Jawzi, namely Abul-Faraj Abdul-Rahman ibn Abul-Hassan Ali ibn
Muhammad al-Qarashi al-Taymi al-Bakri, was a Hanbali *faqih* who knew
the Holy Qur’an by heart, an orator, historian and a man of letters. He
was born in Baghdad in 510 A.H./1117 A.D. and died there on the 12th of
the month of Ramadan of 592 A.H. which coincided with August 16, 1196
A.D. according to the Gregorian Christian calendar or the 9th of the
same month and year according to the Julian calendar. May the Almighty
shower him with His broad mercy and admit him into His spacious
Paradise. He quotes Imam Ali (ع) saying that when the Messenger of Allah
(ص) died, Fatima (ع) went to his gravesite, took a handful of its dust,
put it on her eyes, wept and composed these verses of poetry:

*My soul is confined with every sigh,*  
*How I wish it departed as sighs depart.*  
*No good is there in life after you so I*  
*For fear my life will prolong do I cry.*

Property of Fadak
-----------------

The Prophet (ص) taught Fatima ‎(‎ع‎) divine knowledge and endowed her
with special intellectual brilliance, so much so that she realized the
true meaning of faith, piety, and the reality of Islam. But Fatima
‎(‎ع‎) also was a witness to sorrow and a life of anguish from the very
beginning of her life. She constantly saw how her revered father was
mistreated by the unbelievers and later how she herself fell a victim to
the same abuse, only this time by some “Muslims”. For more details about
Fadak, refer to its proper place in this Glossary.

### Digression: Jews of Medina

One may wonder what brought those Jews to Medina to live among people
whom they regarded as their inferior, polytheist pagans who regarded as
profession other than trade to be beneath their status. There are two
theories. One says that those Jews were motivated by the desire to be
the first to believe in the new Arabian Prophet whose name was written
in their religious books and whose mission was about to start, so they
made a mass immigration to Medina. Their high rabbis had told them that
Medina would be the place where the new Prophet, Muhammad (ص), would be
preaching the divine message. This view is supported by verses 40 – 103
of Surat al-Baqara (Chapter of the Cow, i.e. Ch. 2) which repeatedly
admonishes the Israelites and strongly rebukes them for seeing the truth
but turning away from it. According to this theory, those Jews with
religious fervor had come from Jerusalem in particular and Greater Syria
(Sham) in particular.

The other theory seeks an explanation from the historic events that took
place in southern Arabia, particularly Yemen, concluding that those Jews
had migrated from there seeking religious freedom and better economic
conditions. This is how advocates of this theory reason:

The immigration of the majority of Jews into Yemen from abroad appears
to have taken place about the beginning of the 2nd century A.D. But the
province is mentioned neither by Josephus, better known as Yoseph ben
(ibn, i.e. son of) Mattithyahu (37 – cir. 100 A.D.), a Romano-Jewish
historian and hagiographer of priestly and royal ancestry, nor by the
main books of the Jewish oral law, namely the Mishnah and Talmud.

According to some sources, the Jews of Yemen enjoyed prosperity until
the 6th century A.D. The Himyarite King, Abu-Karib Asad Toban, converted
to Judaism at the end of the 5th century, while laying siege to Medina.
It is likely some of his soldiers preferred to stay there for economic
and perhaps other reasons. His army had marched north to battle the
Aksumites who had been fighting for control of Yemen for a hundred
years. The Aksumites were only expelled from the region when the newly
Jewish king rallied the Jews from all over Arabia, together with pagan
allies. But this victory was short-lived.

In 518 A.D., the kingdom of Yemen was taken over by Zar’a Yousuf, who
was of “royal descent” but was not the son of his predecessor, Ma'di
Karib Ya’fur. Yousuf converted to Judaism and instigated wars to drive
the Aksumite Ethiopians from Arabia. Zar'a Yousuf is chiefly known by
his cognomen “Thu Nuwas”, in reference to his "curly hair." The Jewish
rule lasted till 525 A.D., only 85 years before the inception of the
Islamic Prophetic mission. Some historians, however, date it later, to
530, when Christians from the Aksumite Kingdom of Ethiopia defeated and
killed Thu Nuwas, taking power in Yemen.

According to a number of medieval historians, Thu Nuwas announced that
he would persecute the Christians living in his kingdom, mostly in
Najran, because Christian states had persecuted his fellow
co-religionists (the Jews) in their realms. This persecution, which took
place in the year 524 A.D., is blamed on one Dimnon in Najran, that is
modern al-Ukhdud area of Saudi Arabia. Any reader of the Holy Qur’an
must have come across verse 4 of Surat al-Buruj (Chapter 85) of the Holy
Qur’an which refers to **أَصْحَابُ الأُخْدُودِ**, fellows of the Ukhdud,
which is imprecisely translated as “the ditch self-destructed” in some
English translations of the Holy Qur’an.

To the author of this book, who speaks Arabis as his mother tongue, my
dear reader, “the ditch self-destructed” does not make much sense at
all. Actually, this “ukhdud” was a long ditch filled with firewood. It
was lit and the believers were thrown into it if they refused to abandon
their faith. Some ran away from this inferno, which may remind one of a
similar situation which took place with Prophet Ibrahim (Abraham) at the
hands of Nimrud of 13th Century B.C. Assyria. The survivors, most likely
Christians and Jews, fled up north in the direction of Medina which they
made home. The Almighty in 85:4 condemns this massacre in the strongest
of terms, and Christians and Jews ought to appreciate this fact.

According to some sources, after seizing the throne of the Himyarites,
in 518 or 523 A.D., Thu Nuwas attacked the Aksumite (mainly Christian)
garrison at Zafar, capturing them and burning their churches. He then
moved against Najran, a Christian and Aksumite stronghold. After
accepting the city's capitulation, he massacred those inhabitants who
would not renounce Christianity in this *ukhdud* incident. Estimates of
the death toll from this event range up to 20,000 in some sources. So,
believers in God, Christians and Jews, had reasons to go somewhere else
where they would practice their religion freely while enjoying better
business opportunities among Arabs who, at the time, were mostly nomads.

Khutba of Fatima Zahra (as) Demanding Fadak
-------------------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خطبة فاطمة الزهراء بنت النبي محمد في مسجد أبيها (ص) عند مطالبتها بفدك
وميراثها من أبيها:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
روى عبد الله بن الحسن باسناده عن آبائه ، أنه لما أجمع أبوبكر وعمر على
منع فاطمة عليها السلام فدكا و بلغها ذلك لاثت خمارها على رأسها و اشتملت
بجلبابها وأقبلت في لمةٍ من حفدتها ونساء قومها تطأ ذيولها، ما تخرم
مشيتها مشية رسول الله ( ص )، حتى دخلت على أبي بكر وهو في حشد من
المهاجرين والأنصار وغيرهم فنيطت دونها ملاءة فجلست ثم أنَت أنَةً أجهش
القوم لها بالبكاء فأرتج المجلس ثم أمهلت هنيئة حتى إذا سكن نشيج القوم
وهدأت فورتهم افتتحت الكلام بحمد الله و الثناء عليه والصلاة على رسوله
فعاد القوم في بكائهم فلما أمسكوا عادت في كلامها فقالت عليها السلام:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحمد لله على ما أنعم وله الشكر على ما ألهم والثناء بما قدم من عموم
نعم ابتداها وسبوغ آلاء أسداها وتمام منن أولاها جم عن الإحصاء عددها
ونأى عن الجزاء أمدها وتفاوت عن الإدراك أبدها وندبهم لاستزادتها بالشكر
لاتصالها واستحمد إلى الخلائق بإجزالها وثنى بالندب إلى أمثالها وأشهد أن
لا إله إلا الله وحده لا شريك له كلمة جعل الإخلاص تأويلها وضمن القلوب
موصولها وأنار في التفكر معقولها الممتنع من الأبصار رؤيته ومن الألسن
صفته ومن الأوهام كيفيته ابتدع الأشياء لا من شي‏ء كان قبلها وأنشأها بلا
احتذاء أمثلة امتثلها كونها بقدرته وذرأها بمشيته من غير حاجة منه إلى
تكوينها ولا فائدة له في تصويرها إلا تثبيتا لحكمته وتنبيها على طاعته
وإظهارا لقدرته تعبدا لبريته وإعزازا لدعوته ثم جعل الثواب على طاعته
ووضع العقاب على معصيته ذيادة لعباده من نقمته وحياشة لهم إلى جنته وأشهد
أن أبي محمدا عبده ورسوله اختاره قبل أن أرسله وسماه قبل أن اجتباه
واصطفاه قبل أن ابتعثه إذ الخلائق بالغيب مكنونة وبستر الأهاويل مصونة
وبنهاية العدم مقرونة علما من الله تعالى بمآيل الأمور وإحاطة بحوادث
الدهور ومعرفة بمواقع الأمور ابتعثه الله إتماما لأمره وعزيمة على إمضاء
حكمه وإنفاذا لمقادير رحمته فرأى الأمم فرقا في أديانها عكفا على نيرانها
عابدة لأوثانها منكرة لله مع عرفانها فأنار الله بأبي محمد ص ظلمها وكشف
عن القلوب بهمها وجلى عن الأبصار غممها وقام في الناس بالهداية فأنقذهم
من الغواية وبصرهم من العماية وهداهم إلى الدين القويم ودعاهم إلى الطريق
المستقيم ثم قبضه الله إليه قبض رأفة واختيار ورغبة وإيثار فمحمد ( ص )
من تعب هذه الدار في راحة قد حف بالملائكة الأبرار ورضوان الرب الغفار
ومجاورة الملك الجبار صلى الله على أبي نبيه وأمينه وخيرته من الخلق
وصفيه والسلام عليه ورحمة الله وبركاته.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثم التفتت إلى أهل المجلس وقالت : أنتم عباد الله نصب أمره ونهيه وحملة
دينه ووحيه وأمناء الله على أنفسكم وبلغاءه إلى الأمم زعيم حق له فيكم
وعهد قدمه إليكم وبقية استخلفها عليكم كتاب الله الناطق والقرآن الصادق
والنور الساطع والضياء اللامع بينة بصائره منكشفة سرائره منجلية ظواهره
مغتبطة به أشياعه قائدا إلى الرضوان اتباعه مؤد إلى النجاة استماعه به
تنال حجج الله المنورة وعزائمه المفسرة ومحارمه المحذرة وبيناته الجالية
وبراهينه الكافية وفضائله المندوبة ورخصه الموهوبة وشرائعه المكتوبة فجعل
الله الإيمان تطهيرا لكم من الشرك والصلاة تنزيها لكم عن الكبر والزكاة
تزكية للنفس ونماء في الرزق والصيام تثبيتا للإخلاص والحج تشييدا للدين
والعدل تنسيقا للقلوب وطاعتنا نظاما للملة وإمامتنا أمانا للفرقة والجهاد
عزا للإسلام والصبر معونة على استيجاب الأجر والأمر بالمعروف مصلحة
للعامة وبر الوالدين وقاية من السخط وصلة الأرحام منسأة في العمر ومنماة
للعدد والقصاص حقنا للدماء والوفاء بالنذر تعريضا للمغفرة وتوفية
المكاييل والموازين تغييرا للبخس والنهي عن شرب الخمر تنزيها عن الرجس
واجتناب القذف حجابا عن اللعنة وترك السرقة إيجابا للعفة وحرم الله الشرك
إخلاصا له بالربوبية فاتقوا الله حق تقاته ولا تموتن إلا وأنتم مسلمون
وأطيعوا الله فيما أمركم به ونهاكم عنه فإنه إنما يخشى الله من عباده
العلماء.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثم قالت: أيها الناس اعلموا أني فاطمة و أبي محمد ص أقول عودا وبدوا ولا
أقول ما أقول غلطا ولا أفعل ما أفعل شططا ، لَقَدْ جاءَكُمْ رَسُولٌ مِنْ
أَنْفُسِكُمْ عَزِيزٌ عَلَيْهِ ما عَنِتُّمْ حَرِيصٌ عَلَيْكُمْ
بِالْمُؤْمِنِينَ رَؤُفٌ رَحِيمٌ ، فإن تعزوه وتعرفوه تجدوه أبي دون
نسائكم وأخا ابن عمي دون رجالكم ، ولنعم المعزى إليه ص فبلغ الرسالة
صادعا بالنذارة مائلا عن مدرجة المشركين ضاربا ثبجهم آخذا بأكظامهم داعيا
إلى سبيل ربه بالحكمة والموعظة الحسنة يجف الأصنام وينكث الهام حتى انهزم
الجمع وولوا الدبر حتى تفرى الليل عن صبحه وأسفر الحق عن محضه ونطق زعيم
الدين وخرست شقاشق الشياطين وطاح وشيظ النفاق وانحلت عقد الكفر والشقاق
وفهتم بكلمة الإخلاص في نفر من البيض الخماص وكنتم على شفا حفرة من النار
مذقة الشارب ونهزة الطامع وقبسة العجلان وموطئ الأقدام تشربون الطرق
وتقتاتون القد و الورق أذلة خاسئين تخافون أن يتخطفكم الناس من حولكم
فأنقذكم الله تبارك وتعالى بمحمد ص بعد اللتيا واللتي وبعد أن مني ببهم
الرجال وذؤبان العرب ومردة أهل الكتاب كلما أوقدوانارا للحرب أطفأها الله
أو نجم قرن الشيطان أو فغرت فاغرة من المشركين قذف أخاه في لهواتها فلا
ينكفئ حتى يطأ جناحها بأخمصه ويخمد لهبها بسيفه مكدودا في ذات الله
مجتهدا في أمر الله قريبا من رسول الله سيدا في أولياء الله مشمرا ناصحا
مجدا كادحا لا تأخذه في الله لومة لائم وأنتم في رفاهية من العيش وادعون
فاكهون آمنون تتربصون بنا الدوائر وتتوكفون الأخبار وتنكصون عند النزال
وتفرون من القتال. فلما اختار الله لنبيه دار أنبيائه ومأوى أصفيائه ظهر
فيكم حسكة النفاق وسمل جلباب الدين ونطق كاظم الغاوين ونبغ خامل الأقلين
وهدر فنيق المبطلين فخطر في عرصاتكم وأطلع الشيطان رأسه من مغرزه هاتفا
بكم فألفاكم لدعوته مستجيبين وللعزة فيه ملاحظين ثم استنهضكم فوجدكم
خفافا وأحمشكم فألفاكم غضابا فوسمتم غير إبلكم ووردتم غير مشربكم هذا
والعهد قريب والكلم رحيب والجرح لما يندمل والرسول لما يقبر ابتدارا
زعمتم خوف الفتنة ألا في الفتنة سقطوا وإن جهنم لمحيطة بالكافرين فهيهات
منكم وكيف بكم وأنى تؤفكون وكتاب الله بين أظهركم أموره ظاهرة وأحكامه
زاهرة وأعلامه باهرة وزواجره لائحة وأوامره واضحة وقد خلفتموه وراء
ظهوركم أرغبة عنه تريدون أم بغيره تحكمون بئس للظالمين بدلا ومن يتبع غير
الإسلام دينا فلن يقبل منه وهو في الآخرة من الخاسرين ثم لم تلبثوا إلا
ريث أن تسكن نفرتها ويسلس قيادها ثم أخذتم تورون وقدتها وتهيجون جمرتها
وتستجيبون لهتاف الشيطان الغوي وإطفاء أنوار الدين الجلي وإهمال سنن
النبي الصفي تشربون حسوا في ارتغاء وتمشون لأهله وولده في الخمرة والضراء
ويصير منكم على مثل حز المدى ووخز السنان في الحشا وأنتم الآن تزعمون أن
لا إرث لنا ، أ فحكم الجاهلية تبغون ومن أحسن من الله حكما لقوم يوقنون
أفلا تعلمون ، بلى قد تجلى لكم كالشمس الضاحية أني ابنته أيها المسلمون
أأغلب على إرثي يا ابن أبي قحافة أفي كتاب الله ترث أباك ولا أرث أبي لقد
جئت شيئا فريا أفعلى عمد تركتم كتاب الله ونبذتموه وراء ظهوركم إذ يقول”
:وَوَرِثَ سُلَيْمانُ داوُد"َ وقال فيما اقتص من خبر يحيى بن زكريا إذ
قال : "فَهَبْ لِي مِنْ لَدُنْكَ وَلِيًّا يَرِثُنِي وَ يَرِثُ مِنْ آلِ
يَعْقُوبَ" وقال” : وَ أُولُوا الْأَرْحامِ بَعْضُهُمْ أَوْلى بِبَعْضٍ
فِي كِتابِ اللَّهِ" وقال”:يُوصِيكُمُ اللَّهُ فِي أَوْلادِكُمْ
لِلذَّكَرِ مِثْلُ حَظِّ الْأُنْثَيَيْنِ “وقال” : إِنْ تَرَكَ خَيْراً
الْوَصِيَّةُ لِلْوالِدَيْنِ وَ الْأَقْرَبِينَ بِالْمَعْرُوفِ حَقًّا
عَلَى الْمُتَّقِينَ"، وزعمتم أن لا حظوة لي ولا إرث من أبي ولا رحم
بيننا أ فخصكم الله بآية أخرج أبي منها أم هل تقولون إن أهل ملتين لا
يتوارثان أو لست أنا وأبي من أهل ملة واحدة أم أنتم أعلم بخصوص القرآن
وعمومه من أبي وابن عمي فدونكها مخطومة مرحولة تلقاك يوم حشرك فنعم الحكم
الله والزعيم محمد والموعد القيامة وعند الساعة يخسر المبطلون ولا ينفعكم
إذ تندمون ولكل نبأ مستقر وسوف تعلمون من يأتيه عذاب يخزيه ويحل عليه
عذاب مقيم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

**  
**

ثم رمت بطرفها نحو الأنصار فقالت

**  
**
:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا معشر النقيبة وأعضاد الملة وحضنة الإسلام، ما هذه الغميزة في حقي
والسنة عن ظلامتي أما كان رسول الله أبي يقول المرء يحفظ في ولده سرعان
ما أحدثتم وعجلان ذا إهالة ولكم طاقة بما أحاول وقوة على ما أطلب و أزاول
أتقولون مات محمد ( ص ) فخطب جليل استوسع وهنه واستنهر فتقه وانفتق رتقه
وأظلمت الأرض لغيبته وكسفت الشمس والقمر وانتثرت النجوم لمصيبته وأكدت
الآمال وخشعت الجبال وأضيع الحريم وأزيلت الحرمة عند مماته، فتلك والله
النازلة الكبرى والمصيبة العظمى لا مثلها نازلة ولا بائقة عاجلة أعلن بها
كتاب الله جل ثناؤه في أفنيتكم وفي ممساكم ومصبحكم يهتف في أفنيتكم هتافا
وصراخا وتلاوة وألحانا ولقبله ما حل بأنبياء الله ورسله حكم فصل وقضاء
حتم "وَ ما مُحَمَّدٌ إِلَّا رَسُولٌ قَدْ خَلَتْ مِنْ قَبْلِهِ
الرُّسُلُ أَ فَإِنْ ماتَ أَوْ قُتِلَ انْقَلَبْتُمْ عَلى أَعْقابِكُمْ
وَ مَنْ يَنْقَلِبْ عَلى عَقِبَيْهِ فَلَنْ يَضُرَّ اللَّهَ شَيْئاً وَ
سَيَجْزِي اللَّهُ الشَّاكِرِينَ . “إيها بني قيله أأهضم تراث أبي وأنتم
بمرأى مني ومسمع ومنتدى ومجمع تلبسكم الدعوة وتشملكم الخبرة وأنتم ذوو
العدد والعدة والأداة والقوة وعندكم السلاح والجنة توافيكم الدعوة فلا
تجيبون وتأتيكم الصرخة فلا تغيثون؟ أنتم موصوفون بالكفاح معروفون بالخير
والصلاح والنخبة التي انتخبت والخيرة التي اختيرت لنا أهل البيت قاتلتم
العرب وتحملتم الكد والتعب وناطحتم الأمم كافحتم البهم لا نبرح أو تبرحون
نأمركم فتأتمرون حتى إذا دارت بنا رحى الإسلام ودر حلب الأيام وخضعت ثغرة
الشرك وسكنت فورة الإفك وخمدت نيران الكفر وهدأت دعوة الهرج واستوسق نظام
الدين فأنى حزتم بعد البيان وأسررتم بعد الإعلان ونكصتم بعد الإقدام
وأشركتم بعد الإيمان؛بؤسا لقوم نكثوا أيمانهم من بعد عهدهم وهموا بإخراج
الرسول وهم بدءوكم أول مرة أ تخشونهم فالله أحق أن تخشوه إن كنتم مؤمنين
ألا وقد أرى أن قد أخلدتم إلى الخفض وأبعدتم من هو أحق بالبسط والقبض
وخلوتم بالدعة ونجوتم بالضيق من السعة فمججتم ما وعيتم ودسعتم الذي
تسوغتم فإن تكفروا أنتم ومن في الأرض جميعا فإن الله لغني حميد ألا وقد
قلت ما قلت هذا على معرفة مني بالجذلة التي خامرتكم والغدرة التي
استشعرتها قلوبكم ولكنها فيضة النفس ونفثة الغيظ وخور القناة وبثة الصدر
وتقدمة الحجة فدونكموها فاحتقبوها دبرة الظهر نقبة الخف باقية العار
موسومة بغضب الجبار وشنار الأبد موصولة بنار الله الموقدة التي تطلع على
الأفئدة ، فبعين الله ما تفعلون وسيعلم الذين ظلموا أي منقلب ينقلبون
وأنا ابنة نذير لكم بين يدي عذاب شديد فاعملوا إنا عاملون و انتظروا إنا
منتظرون.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abullah son of Imam al-Hassan (ع) quotes his forefathers saying that Abu
Bakr and Omer decided to prevent Fatima (ع) from her Fadak property.
When she came to know about it, she put her veil on her head, wrapped
herself with her outer cloak and, accompanied by some of her relatives
and men of her folks, stepping on her gown, her gait not differing from
that of the Messenger of Allah (ص), went till she entered [the Mosque of
the Prophet] where Abu Bakr was.

Abu Bakr was in the company of a crowd of the Muhajirun and Ansar and
others. A curtain was placed behind which she sat and moaned. Hearing
her thus moaning, everyone present burst in tears, so much so that the
meeting place shook. She waited for a moment till the sobbing stopped
and the fervor abated. She started her speech by praising Allah and
lauding Him, sending blessings to His Messenger, whereupon people
resumed their cries. When they stopped, she resumed her speech saying,

“Praise to Allah for that which He bestowed (us). We thank and laud Him
for all that which He inspired and offered, for the abundant boons which
He initiated, the perfect grants which He presented. Such boons are too
many to compute, too vast to measure. Their limit is too distant to
grasp. He commended them (to His beings) so they would gain more by
being grateful for their continuity. He ordained Himself praiseworthy by
giving generously to His creatures.

I testify that there is no God but Allah, the One without a partner, a
statement which sincere devotion is its interpretation, the hearts
guarantee its continuation, and in the minds and hearts is its
perpetuation. He is the One Who cannot be perceived with vision, nor can
He be described by tongues, nor can imagination comprehend how He is. He
originated things but not from anything that existed before them,
created them without pre-existing examples. Rather, He created them with
His might and spread them according to His will. He did so not for a
need for which He created them, nor for a benefit (for Him) did He shape
them, but to establish His wisdom, bring attention to His obedience,
manifest His might, lead His creatures to humbly venerate Him and exalt
His decrees. He then made the reward for obedience to Him and punishment
for disobedience so as to protect His creatures from His Wrath and amass
them into His Paradise.

“I also testify that my Father, Muhammad, is His servant and messenger
whom He chose and prior to sending him when the [souls of all] beings
were still concealed in that which was transcendental, protected from
anything appalling, associated with termination and nonexistence. Allah
the Exalted One knew that which was to follow, comprehended that which
would come to pass and realized the place of every event. Allah sent him
(Muhammad) to perfect His commands, a resolution to accomplish His
decree, and an implementation of the dictates of His Mercy.

So he (Muhammad) found nations differing in their creeds, obsessed by
their fires [Zoroastrians], worshipping their idols [Pagans], and
denying Allah [atheists] despite their knowledge of Him. Therefore,
Allah illuminated their darkness with my Father, Muhammad, uncovered
obscurity from their hearts, and cleared the clouds from their insights.
He revealed guidance to the people. He delivered them from being led
astray, taking them away from misguidance, showing them the right
religion and inviting them to the Straight Path (*as-Sirat
al-Mustaqeem*).

“Allah then chose to recall him mercifully, with love and preference.
So, Muhammad is now in comfort, released from the burden of this world,
surrounded angels of devotion, satisfied with the Merciful Lord and with
being near the powerful King. So, peace of Allah with my Father, His
Prophet, the trusted one, the one whom He chose from among His servants,
His sincere friend, and peace and blessings of Allah with him.”

Fatima ‎(‎ع‎)‎ then turned to the crowd and said:

“Surely you (people) are Allah's servants at His command and
prohibition, bearers of His creed and revelation. You are the ones whom
Allah entrusted to fare with your own selves, His messengers to the
nations. Amongst you does He have the right authority, a covenant which
He brought forth to you and an legacy which He left to guard you: The
eloquent Book of Allah, the Qur’an of the truth, the brilliant light,
the shining beam. Its insights are indisputable, its secrets are
revealed, its indications are manifest and those who follow it are
surely blessed. (The Qur’an) leads its adherents to righteousness.
Listening (and acting upon) it leads to salvation. Through it are the
enlightening divine arguments achieved, His manifest determination
acquired, His prohibited decrees avoided, His manifest evidence
recognized, His convincing proofs made apparent, His permissions granted
and His laws written. So Allah made belief (in Islam) a purification for
you from polytheism. He made prayers an exaltation for you from conceit,
Zakat purification for the soul and a (cause of) growth in subsistence,
fasting an implantation of devotion, pilgrimage a construction of the
creed and justice (Adl) the harmony of the hearts. And He made obedience
to us (Ahl al-Bayt) the management of the affairs of the nation and our
leadership (Ahl al-Bayt) a safeguard from disunity. He made *jihad*
(struggle) a way for strengthening Islam and patience a helping course
for deserving (divine) rewards. He made commending what is right (Amr
Bil Ma’ruf) a cause for public welfare, kindness to parents a safeguard
from (His) wrath, the maintaining of close ties with one's kin a cause
for a longer life and for multiplying the number of offspring, in-kind
reprisal (*qisas* **قصاص**) to save lives, fulfillment of vows the
earning of mercy, the completion of weights and measures a cause for
avoiding neglecting the rights of others, forbidding drinking wines an
exaltation from atrocity, avoiding slander a veil from curse, abandoning
theft a reason for deserving chastity. Allah has also prohibited
polytheism so that one can devote himself to His Mastership. Therefore;
Fear Allah as He should be feared, and die not except in a state of
Islam; Obey Allah in that which He has commanded you to do and that
which He has forbidden, for surely those truly fear among His servants,
who have knowledge.'

“O People! Be informed that I am Fatima, and my father is Muhammad I say
that repeatedly and initiate it continually; I say not what I say
mistakenly, nor do I do what I do aimlessly. Now has come unto you an
Apostle from amongst yourselves; It grieves him that you should perish;
ardently anxious is he over you; To the believers he is most kind and
merciful. Thus, if you identify and recognize him, you shall realize
that he is my father and not the father of any of your women; the
brother of my cousin (Ali ‎(‎ع‎)‎) rather than any of your men. What an
excellent identity he was, may the peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him and his descendants Thus, he propagated the Message, by coming out
openly with the warning, and while inclined away from the path of the
polytheists, (whom he) struck their strength and seized their throats,
while he invited (all) to the way of his Lord with wisdom and beautiful
preaching He destroyed idols, and defeated heroes, until their group
fled and turned their backs. So night revealed its dawn; righteousness
uncovered its genuineness; the voice of the religious authority spoke
out loud; the evil discords were silenced; The crown of hypocrisy was
diminished; the tightening of infidelity and desertion were untied, So
you spoke the statement of devotion amongst a band of starved ones; and
you were on the edge of a hole of fire;(you were) the drink of the
thirsty one; the opportunity of the desiring one; the fire brand of him
who passes in haste; the step for feet; you used to drink from the water
gathered on roads; eat jerked meat. (Lady Fatima (ع) was stating their
lowly situation before Islam) You were despised outcasts always in fear
of abduction from those around you. Yet, Allah rescued you through my
father, Muhammad after much ado, and after he was confronted by mighty
men, the Arab beasts, and the demons of the people of the Book Who,
whenever they ignited the fire of war, Allah extinguished it; and
whenever the thorn of the devil appeared, or a mouth of the polytheists
opened wide in defiance, he would strike its discords with his brother
(Ali, (ع)), who comes not back until he treads its wing with the sole of
his feet, and extinguishes its flames with his sword. (Ali is) diligent
in Allah's affair, near to the Messenger of Allah, A master among
Allah's worshippers, setting to work briskly, sincere in his advice,
earnest and exerting himself (in service to Islam); While you were calm,
gay, and feeling safe in your comfortable lives, waiting for us to meet
disasters, awaiting the spread of news, you fell back during every
battle, and took to your heels at times of fighting. Yet, When Allah
chose His Prophet from the dwell of His prophets, and the abode of His
sincere (servants); The thorns of hypocrisy appeared on you, the garment
of faith became worn out, The misguided ignorant(s) spoke out, the
sluggish ignorant came to the front and brayed. The he camel of the vain
wiggled his tail in your courtyards and the your courtyards and the
Devil stuck his head from its place of hiding and called upon you, he
found you responsive to his invitation, and observing his deceits. He
then aroused you and found you quick (to answer him), and invited you to
wrath, therefore; you branded other than your camels and proceeded to
other than your drinking places. Then while the era of the Prophet was
still near, the gash was still wide, the scar had not yet healed, and
the Messenger was not yet buried. A (quick) undertaking as you claimed,
aimed at preventing discord (trial), Surely, they have fallen into trial
already! And indeed Hell surrounds the unbelievers. How preposterous!
What an idea! What a falsehood! For Allah's Book is still amongst you,
its affairs are apparent; its rules are manifest; its signs are
dazzling; its restrictions are visible, and its commands are evident.
Yet, indeed you have cast it behind your backs! What! Do you detest it?
Or according to something else you wish to rule? Evil would be the
exchange for the wrongdoers! And if anyone desires a religion other than
Islam (submission to Allah), it never will it be accepted from him; And
in the hereafter, he will be in the ranks of those who have lost. Surely
you have not waited until its stampede seized, and it became obedient.
You then started arousing its flames, instigating its coal, complying
with the call of the misled devil, quenching the light of the manifest
religion, and extinguished the light of the sincere Prophet. You
concealed sips on froth and proceeded towards his (the Prophet) kin and
children in swamps and forests (meaning you plot against them in
deceitful ways), but we are patient with you as if we are being notched
with knives and stung by spearheads in our abdomens, Yet-now you claim
that there is not inheritance for us! What! "Do they then seek after a
judgment of (the Days of) ignorance? But How, for a people whose faith
is assured, can give better judgment than Allah? Don't you know? Yes,
indeed it is obvious to you that I am his daughter. O Muslims! Will my
inheritance be usurped? O son of Abu Quhafa! Where is it in the Book of
Allah that you inherit your father and I do not inherit mine? Surely you
have come up with an unprecedented thing. Do you intentionally abandon
the Book of Allah and cast it behind your back? Do you not read where it
says: And Solomon (Sulayman) inherited David (Dawood)'? And when it
narrates the story of Zacharias and says: \`So give me an heir as from
thyself (One that) will inherit me, and inherit the posterity of Jacob
(Yaqoob)' And: \`But kindred by hood have prior rights against each
other in the Book of Allah' And: Allah (thus) directs you as regards
your children's (inheritance) to the male, a portion equal to that of
two females' And, If he leaves any goods, that he make a bequest to
parents and next of kin, according to reasonable usage; this is due from
the pious ones.' You claim that I have no share! And that I do not
inherit my father! What! Did Allah reveal a (Qur’anic) verse regarding
you, from which He excluded my father? Or do you say: \`These (Fatima
and her father) are the people of two faiths, they do not inherit each
other?!' Are we not, me and my father, a people adhering to one faith?
Or is it that you have more knowledge about the specifications and
generalizations of the Qur’an than my father and my cousin (Imam Ali)?
So, here you are! Take it! (Ready with) its nose rope and saddled! But
if shall encounter you on the Day of Gathering; (thus) what a wonderful
judge is Allah, a claimant is Muhammad, and a day is the Day of Rising.
At the time of the Hour shall the wrongdoers lose; and it shall not
benefit you to regret (your actions) then! For every Message, there is a
time limit; and soon shall ye know who will be inflicted with torture
that will humiliate him, and who will be confronted by an everlasting
punishment. (Fatima then turned towards the Ansar and said:) O you
people of intellect! The strong supporters of the nation! And those who
embraced Islam; What is this shortcoming in defending my right? And what
is this slumber (while you see) injustice (being done toward me)? Did
not the Messenger of Allah, my father, used to say: A man is upheld
(remembered) by his children'? O how quick have you violated (his
orders)?! How soon have you plotted against us? But you still are
capable (of helping me in) my attempt, and powerful (to help me) in that
which I request and (in) my pursuit (of it). Or do you say: "Muhammad
has perished;" Surely this is a great calamity; Its damage is excessive
its injury is great, Its wound (is much too deep) to heal. The Earth
became darkened with his departure; the stars eclipsed for his calamity;
hopes were seized; mountains submitted; sanctity was violated, and
holiness was encroached upon after his death. Therefore, this, by Allah,
is the great affliction, and the grand calamity; there is not an
affliction-which is the like of it; nor will there be a sudden
misfortune (as surprising as this). The Book of Allah-excellent in
praising him-announced in the courtyards (of your houses) in the place
where you spend your evenings and mornings; A call, A cry, A recitation,
and (verses) in order. It had previously came upon His (Allah's)
Prophets and Messengers; (for it is) A decree final, and a
predestination fulfilled: "Muhammad is not but an Apostle: Many were the
apostles that passed away before him. If he died or was slain, will ye
then turn back on your heels? If any did turn back on his heels, not the
least harm will he do to Allah; but Allah (on the other hand) will
swiftly reward those who (serve Him) with gratitude." O you people of
reflection; will I be usurped the inheritance of my father while you
hear and see me?! (And while) You are sitting and gathered around me?
You hear my call, and are included in the (news of the) affair? (But)
You are numerous and well equipped! (You have) the means and the power,
and the weapons and the shields. Yet, the call reaches you but you do
not answer; the cry comes to you but you do not come to help? (This)
While you are characterized by struggle, known for goodness and welfare,
the selected group (which was chosen), and the best ones chosen by the
Messenger for us, Ahlul- Bayt. You fought the Arabs, bore with pain and
exhaustion, struggled against the nations, and resisted their heroes. We
were still, so were you in ordering you, and you in obeying us. So that
Islam became triumphant, the accomplishment of the days came near, the
fort of polytheism was subjected, the outburst of was subjected, the
outburst of infidelity calmed down, and the system of religion was
well-ordered. Thus, (why have you) become confused after clearness?
Conceal matters after announcing them? Do you thus turn on your heels
after daring, associating (others with Allah) after believing? Will you
not fight people who violated their oaths? Plotted to expel the Apostle
and became aggressive by being the first (to assault) you? Do ye fear
them? Nay, it is Allah Whom you should more justly fear, if you believe!
Now I see that you are inclined to easy living; having dismissed one who
is more worthy of guardianship [referring to Ali (ع)]. You secluded
yourselves with meekness and dismissed that which you accepted. Yet, if
you show ingratitude, ye and all on earth together, yet, Allah free of
all wants, worthy of all praise. Surely I have said all that I have said
with full knowledge that you intent to forsake me, and knowing the
betrayal that your hearts sensed. But it is the state of soul, the
effusion of fury, the dissemination of (what is) the chest and the
presentation of the proof. Hence, Here it is! Bag it (leadership and)
put it on the back of an ill she camel, which has a thin hump with
everlasting grace, marked with the wrath of Allah, and the blame of ever
(which leads to) the Fire of (the wrath of Allah kindled (to a blaze),
that which doth mount (right) to the hearts; For, Allah witnesses what
you do, and soon will the unjust assailants know what vicissitudes their
affairs will take! And I am the daughter of a warner (the Prophet) to
you against a severe punishment. So, act and so will we, and wait, and
we shall wait.'”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فأجابها أبو بكر وقال : يا بنت رسول الله لقد كان أبوك بالمؤمنين عطوفا
كريما رءوفا رحيما وعلى الكافرين عذابا أليما وعقابا عظيما إن عزوناه
وجدناه أباك دون النساء وأخا إلفك دون الأخلاء آثره على كل حميم وساعده
في كل أمر جسيم لا يحبكم إلا سعيد ولا يبغضكم إلا شقي بعيد فأنتم عترة
رسول الله الطيبون الخيرة المنتجبون على الخير أدلتنا وإلى الجنة
مسالكنا. وأنت يا خيرة النساء وابنة خير الأنبياء صادقة في قولك سابقة في
وفور عقلك غير مردودة عن حقك ولا مصدودة عن صدقك والله ما عدوت رأي رسول
الله ولا عملت إلا بإذنه والرائد لا يكذب أهله وإني أشهد الله وكفى به
شهيدا أني سمعت رسول الله ( ص ) يقول نحن معاشر الأنبياء لا نورث ذهبا و
لا فضة و لا دارا و لا عقارا و إنما نورث الكتاب والحكمة والعلم والنبوة
وما كان لنا من طعمة فلولي الأمر بعدنا أن يحكم فيه بحكمه وقد جعلنا ما
حاولته في الكراع والسلاح يقاتل بها المسلمون ويجاهدون.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقالت عليها السلام ، سبحان الله ما كان أبي رسول الله ( ص ) عن كتاب
الله صادفا ولا لأحكامه مخالفا بل كان يتبع أثره ويقفو سوره؛ أفتجمعون
إلى الغدر اعتلالا عليه بالزور وهذا بعد وفاته شبيه بما بغي له من
الغوائل في حياته هذا كتاب الله حكما عدلا وناطقا فصلا يقول يَرِثُنِي وَ
يَرِثُ مِنْ آلِ يَعْقُوبَ و يقول وَ وَرِثَ سُلَيْمانُ داوُدَ وبين عز
وجل فيما وزع من الأقساط وشرع من الفرائض والميراث وأباح من حظ الذكران
والإناث ما أزاح به علة المبطلين وأزال التظني والشبهات في الغابرين كلا
بل سولت لكم أنفسكم أمرا فصبر جميل والله المستعان على ما تصفون . فقال
أبو بكر: صدق الله ورسوله وصدقت ابنته معدن الحكمة وموطن الهدى والرحمة
وركن الدين وعين الحجة لا أبعد صوابك ولا أنكر خطابك هؤلاء المسلمون بيني
وبينك قلدوني ما تقلدت وباتفاق منهم أخذت ما أخذت غير مكابر ولا مستبد
ولا مستأثر وهم بذلك شهود.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فالتفتت فاطمة عليها السلام إلى الناس و قالت:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
معاشر المسلمين المسرعة إلى قيل الباطل المغضية على الفعل القبيح الخاسر
أفلا تتدبرون القرآن أم على قلوب أقفالها كلا بل ران على قلوبكم ما أسأتم
من أعمالكم فأخذ بسمعكم وأبصاركم ولبئس ما تأولتم وساء ما به أشرتم وشر
ما منه اغتصبتم لتجدن والله محمله ثقيلا وغبه وبيلا إذا كشف لكم الغطاء
وبان بإورائه الضراء وبدا لكم من ربكم ما لم تكونوا تحتسبون و خسر هنا لك
المبطلون.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu Bakr responded to her by saying, “O daughter of the Messenger of
Allah! Your father was always affectionate with the believers, generous,
kind and merciful, and towards the unbelievers was a painful torment and
a great punishment. Surely the Prophet is your father, not anyone
else's, the brother of your husband, not any other man's; he surely
preferred him over all his friends and (Ali) supported him in every
important matter, no one loves you save the lucky and no one hates you
save the wretched. You are the blessed progeny of Allah's Messenger, the
chosen ones, our guides to goodness our path to Paradise, and you-the
best of women-and the daughter of the best of prophets, truthful is your
sayings, excelling in reason. You shall not be driven back from your
right... But I surely heard your father saying: \`We the, group of
prophets do not inherit, nor are we inherited Yet, this is my situation
and property, it is yours (if you wish); it shall not be concealed from
you, nor will it be stored away from you. You are the Mistress of your
father's nation, and the blessed tree of your descendants. Your property
shall not be usurped against your will nor can your name be defamed.
Your judgment shall be executed in all that which I possess. This, do
you think that I violate your father's (will)?"

Fatima then refuted Abu Bakr's claim that the Prophet had stated that
prophets cannot be inherited, and said: "Glory be to Allah!! Surely
Allah's Messenger did not abandon Allah's Book nor did he violate His
commands. Rather, he followed its decrees and adhered to its chapters.
So do you unite with treachery justifying your acts with fabrications?
Indeed this—after his departure—is similar to the disasters which were
plotted against him during his lifetime. But behold! This is Allah's
Book, a just judge and a decisive speaker, saying: \`One that will
(truly) inherit Me, and inherit the posterity of Yaqub,' (19:6) and 'And
Sulaiman (Solomon) inherited Dawood (David).' (27: 16) Thus, He (Glory
be to Him) made clear that which He made share of all heirs, decreed
from the amounts of inheritance, allowed for males and females, and
eradicated all doubts and ambiguities (pertaining to this issue which
existed with the) bygones. Nay! But your minds have made up a tale (that
may pass) with you, but (for me) patience is most fitting against that
which ye assert; it is Allah (alone) whose help can be sought." It is
apparent that Abu Bakr chanced the mode with which he addressed Lady
Fatima ‎(‎ع‎)‎ after delivering her speech. Listen to his following
speech; which is his reply to Fatima's just reported speech.

Abu Bakr said: "Surely Allah and His Apostle are truthful, and so has
his (the Prophet's) daughter told the truth. Surely you are the source
of wisdom, the element of faith, and the sole authority. May Allah not
refute your righteous argument, nor invalidate your decisive speech. But
these are the Muslims between us-who have entrusted me with leadership,
and it was according to their satisfaction that 1 received what 1 have.
I am not being arrogant, autocratic, or selfish, and they are my
witnesses." Upon hearing Abu Bakr speak of the people's support for him,
Lady Fatima Zahra ‎(‎ع‎)‎ turned towards them and said:

"O people, who rush towards uttering falsehood and are indifferent to
disgraceful and losing actions! Do you not earnestly seek to reflect
upon the Qur’an, or are your hearts isolated with locks? But on your
hearts is the stain of the evil, which you committed; it has seized your
hearing and your sight, evil is that which you justified cursed is that
which you reckoned, and wicked is what you have taken for an exchange!
You shall, by Allah, find bearing it (to be a great) burden, and its
consequence disastrous. (That is) on the day when the cover is removed
and appears to you what is behind it of wrath. When you will be
confronted by Allah with that which you could never have expected, there
will perish, there and then, those who stood on falsehoods." Although
parts of Abu Bakr's speeches cannot be verified with authentic evidence,
and despite the fact that we have already mentioned part of the actual
speech, which Abu Bakr delivered after Lady Fatima's arguments, it
appears certain that Abu Bakr was finally persuaded to submit Fadak to
her. Nevertheless, when Fatima was leaving Abu Bakr's house, Omer
suddenly appeared and exclaimed: "What is it that you hold in your
hand?"

Abu Bakr replied: 'A decree I have written for Fatima in which I
assigned Fadak and her father's inheritance to her." Omer then said:
"With what will you spend on the Muslims if the Arabs decide to fight
you?!"

> وفي سيرة الحلبي ج 3 ص 391 :- أن عمر أخذ الكتاب فشقه.

According to p. 391, Vol. 3, of al-Halabi’s *Seera* book, Omer [ibn
al-Khattab] seized the decree and tore it to pieces…

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثم عطفت على قبر النبي ( ص ) و قالت:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قد كان بعدك انباء وهنبثة لوكنت شاهدها لم تكثر الخطب
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
انا فقدناك فقد الارض وابلها واختل قومك فاشهدهم فقد نكبوا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وقد رُزينا بما لم يرزه أحد من البرية لا عجم ولا عرب
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ضاقت عليَّ بلادي بعدما رحبت وسيم سبطاك خسفاً فيه لي نصب
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و كل أهل له قربى و منزلة عند الاله على الأدنين مقترب
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أبدت رجال لنا نجوى صدورهم لما مضيت و حالت دونك الترب
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تجهمتنا رجال وآستخف بنا اذ غبت عنا فنحن اليوم نغتصب
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وكنت بدرا ونورا يستضاء به عليك ينزل من ذي العزة الكتب
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قد كان جبريل بالآيات يؤنسنا فقد فقدت و كل الخير محتجب
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فليت قبلك كان الموت صادفنا لما مضيت و حالت دونك الكثب
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فسوف نبكيك ما عشنا وما بقيت من العيون بتهمال لها سكب
  </p>
</blockquote>

*After you, reports and momentous chaotic events we found,*  
*Had you witnessed them, calamities would not abound.*  
*We missed you as sorely as earth would miss its rain,*  
*Your folks lost balance, see how from the creed they did refrain,*  
*We, like no others, have suffered affliction,*  
*Unlike all Arabs, or others from among Allah’s creation.*  
*My homeland is now narrow after its great expanse indeed,*  
*Both your grandsons have been wronged, so my heart is grieved,*  
*Every family has relatives and a place*  
*With the Almighty Who is close to those of grace,*  
*Certain men what their chests hid did they to us reveal,*  
*When you went, and now you from our sights did a grave conceal,*  
*Men assaulted and slighted us, when you became far away*  
*So, now what rightfully belongs to us is being taken away.*  
*You were the moon, your light showed us what we should heed,*  
*Messages from the Exalted One were to you revealed.*  
*With the Verses did Gabriel make our day,*  
*Now you are gone, every good thing is kept away.*  
*How we wish in our direction death did the Almighty guide*  
*Before you left us, and you did the dunes from us hide.*  
*We shall cry over you so long as our tears can pour,*  
*So long as floods of tears can withstand and endure.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ـ من أشار إلى خطبة الصديقة فاطمة (عليها السلام( أو روى شيئاً منها نذكر
بعضاً منهم على سبيل المثال لا حصر، وهم كالتالي:
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 1 ـ الخليل بن أحمد الفراهيدي (ت 175 هـ) في كتاب العين: 8 / 323 في كلمة
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللمّة، وقال: وفي الحديث جاءت فاطمة (عليها السلام) إلى أبي بكر في
لُميمة من حفدتها ونساء قومها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 2 ـ جار الله محمد بن عمر الزمخشري (ت 538 هـ).

> في الفائق: 3 / 331 في مادة اللمة أيضاً قال: وفي حديث فاطمة (عليها
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السلام): إنّها خرجت في لمة من نسائها تتوطّأ ذيلها، حتى دخلت على أبي
بكر.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 3 ـ أبو الفرج عبد الرحمن بن علي بن الجوزي، (ت 597 هـ(.

> في غريب الحديث: 2 / 333 وقال: وفي الحديث: أنّ فاطمة (عليها السلام)
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خرجت في لمة من نسائها إلى أبي بكر فعاتبته. أي في جماعة ; وقيل: من
الثلاث إلى العشر.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 4 ـ مجد الدين أبو السعادات ابن الأثير (ت 606 هـ(.

> في النهاية في غريب الحديث والأثر: 4 / 273 وقال: في حديث فاطمة (عليها
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السلام): إنّها خرجت في لمة من نسائها تتوطّأ ذيلها، إلى أبي بكر
فعاتبته.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 5 ـ أبو الفضل جمال الدين بن منظور (ت 711 هـ).

> في لسان العرب: 12 / 548 وقال: وفي حديث فاطمة (عليها السلام): إنّها
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خرجت في لمة من نسائها تتوطّأ ذيلها إلى أبي بكر فعاتبته. ذكرها في مادة
لمم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

References to this speech by the Truthful One, Fatima, peace with her,
including some who cited excerpts of it, include the following:

1. Al-Khalil ibn Ahmed al-Farahidi **الخليل بن أحمد الفراهيدي** (d. 175
A.H./792 A.D.) on p. 323, Vol. 8, of *Kitab al-Ayn*,

2. Jarallah Muhammad ibn Omer al-Zamakhshari **الزمخشري** (d. 538
A.H./1144 A.D.) on p. 331, Vol. 3, of Al-Faiq;

3. Abul-Faraj Abdul-Rahman ibn Ali ibn al-Jawzi **ابن الجوزي** (d. 597
A.H./1201 A.D.),

4. Majd ad-Deen Abu al-Sa’adat Ibn al-Atheer **ابن الأثير** (d. 606
A.H./1210 A.D.) on p. 273, Vol. 4 of his book titled *Al-Nihaya*,

5. Abul-Fadl Jamal ad-Deen ibn Manzour **ابن منظور** (d. 711 A.H./1312
A.D.) on p. 548, Vol. 12 (old edition) of his lexicon titled *Lisan
al-Arab*.

Fatima Further Oppressed
------------------------

Throughout her life, Fatima (ع) never spoke to those who had oppressed
her and deprived her of her rightful claims. She kept her grief to
herself. During her sickness which preceded her death, she requested
that her oppressors should be kept away even from attending her funeral.
Her ill-wishers even resorted to physical violence. Once the door of her
house was pushed on her, and the child she was carrying was hurt and the
baby-boy was stillborn. This incident took place, and it is very well
documented by Shi’ite and Sunni historians and chroniclers, when Omer
ibn al-Khattab was urging, sometimes even beating, people to go to the
Prophet’s Mosque to swear allegiance to his friend, Abu Bark.

Omer promoted Abu Bakr to the seat of “caliph”, being the very first
person to swear allegiance to him after being convinced that it would
not be long before he, too, would occupy the same seat. Fatima’s house
was set on fire. Having been mistreated and stricken with grief, which
crossed all limits of forbearance and endurance, she expressed her
sorrows in an elegy which she composed to mourn her father the Holy
Prophet (ص). In that elegy, she makes a particular reference to her
woeful plight saying, after having taken a handful of earth from her
father’s grave, putting it on her eyes, crying and saying,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ماذا على من شمَّ تربةَ أحمد أن لا يشمّ َ مدى الزمان غواليا؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صُبّت عليَّ مصائبٌ لو أنّها صُبّت على الأيّام صِرْنَ لياليا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قد كنت ذات حمى بظل محمد لا أختشي ضيماً و كان جماليا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فاليوم أخشع للذليل وأتقي ضيمي، و أدفع ظالمي بردائيا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فإذا بكت قمرية في ليلها شجناً على غصن بكيت صباحيا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فلأجعلن الحزن بعدك مؤنسي و لأجعلن الدمع فيك وشاحيا
  </p>
</blockquote>

*What blame should be on one who smells Ahmed’s soil*  
*That he shall never smell any precious person at all?*  
*Calamities have been poured on me (like waters boil)*  
*Were they poured on days, they would become nights.*  
*In the shade of Muhammad, I enjoyed all protection*  
*And he was my beauty, and I feared no oppression,*  
*But now I surrender to the lowly and fear I am done*  
*Injustice, pushing my oppressor with only my gown.*  
*So, if a dove cries during its night, forlorn,*  
*Out of grief on its twig, I cry in my morn.*  
*So, I shall after you let grief be a companion for me,*  
*And my tears that mourn you my cover they shall be.*

On p. 218, Vol. 2, of al-Tabari’s *Tarikh* (Dar al-Amira for Printing,
Publishing and Distribution, Beirut, Lebanon, 2005), it is stated that
when Fatima could not get her inheritance, Fadak, from Abu Bakr, she
boycotted him and never spoke to him till her death.

The death of the Apostle, affected her very much and she was very sad
and grief-stricken and wept her heart out crying all the time.
Unfortunately, after the death of the Prophet, the Government
confiscated her famous land of Fadak. Fatima (ع) was pushed behind her
home door (when they attacked Ali’s house and took him away in order to
force him to accept the caliphate of Abu Bakr), so the fetus she was
carrying, namely Muhsin, was subsequently aborted. Omer ibn al-Khattab
ordered his servant, Qunfath, to set her house on fire, an incident
which is immortalized by verses of poetry composed by the famous
Egyptian poet Hafiz Ibrahim which is reproduced here but without English
translation. The author has preferred not to translate it in order not
to hurt the feelings of his Sunni brethren, especially non-Arabs:

On p. 220, Vol. 2, of al-Tabari’s *Tarikh* (Arabic text), it is stated
that the Holy Prophet (ص) remained unburied for three days. His sacred
body finally received the burial bath by his cousin and son-in-law,
Fatima’s husband Ali (ع). Besides Ali (ع), those who attended the burial
of the Prophet (ص) were: al-Abbas ibn Abdul-Muttalib, his son al-Fadhl,
Qutham ibn al-Abbas, Usamah ibn Zaid, and Shuqran, a freed slave of the
Prophet (ص), according to the same page. According to Ibn Ishaq, Aws ibn
Khawli, who had taken part in the Battle of Badr, earnestly requested
Ali (ع) to let him assist in burying the Messenger of Allah (ص) which
the Commander of the Faithful accepted (ع).

The tragedy of her father's death and the unkindness of her father's
followers, were too much for the good, gentle and sensitive lady and she
breathed her last on Jumda I 14, 11 A.H., exactly seventy-five days
after the death of her revered father, the Holy Prophet of Islam.
Grieved about the way she was treated by certain “sahaba” of the Prophet
(ص), the confiscation of her property, Fadak, the aborting of her son,
Musin, and the confiscation of the right to caliphate from her husband,
Ali, were all too much for her, so much so that they eventually put an
end to her life when she was in the prime of her life at the age of
eighteen, although historians provide different dates, and was buried in
Jannatul-Baqi', Medina.

Fatima’s Death
--------------

On p. 218, Vol. 2, of al-Tabari’s Tarikh, al-Tabari says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فدفنها علي ليلا، و لم يؤذن بها أبا بكر
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Ali buried her at night, and Abu Bakr did not call the athan (to
announce her death).”

Fatima (ع) did not survive more than seventy-five days after the demise
of her father. She breathed her last on the 14th Jumdi I, 11 A.H. Before
her demise, she told her will to her husband, Imam Ali (ع), thus:

1. O Ali, you will personally perform my funeral rites.  
 2. Those who have displeased me should not be allowed to attend my
funeral.  
 3. My corpse should be carried to the graveyard at night.

Thus, Imam Ali (ع), in compliance with her will, performed all the
funeral rites and accompanied exclusively by her relatives and sons
carried her at night to Jannatu'l-Baqi \`, where she was laid to rest
and her wishes fulfilled.

Having buried her, in the darkness of the night, her husband, the
Commander of the Faithful Ali (ع) composed these verses of poetry:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذي قصيدة الامام علي بن ابي طالب عندما كان عند قبر فاطمة الزهراء (ع):
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ما لي وقفت على القبـورِ مُسلمـا قبر الحبيـب فلـم يـردّ جوابـي؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَحبيـب، ما لك لا تـرد جوابنـا أَنسيت بعـدي خلَّـة الأَحبـاب؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال الحبِيب: وكيف لي بجوابكم و أنـا رهيـن جنـادل و تراب؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَكل الترابُ محاسنـي فنسيتكُـم وحجبـت عن أَهلي وعن أَترابـي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فعليكم منـي السـلام تقطعـت منـي و منكـم خلـة الأحبـاب
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Why did I stand at the graves to greet,*  
*The tomb of the loved one, but it did not respond?*  
*O loved one! Why do you not answer us?*  
*Have you forgotten the friendship among loved ones?*  
*The loved one said: How can I answer you*  
*While I am held hostage by soil and stones?*  
*Earth has eaten my beauties, so I forgot about you,*  
*And I now am kept away from family and peers;*  
*So, peace from me to you, the ties are now cut off*  
*And so are the ties with loved ones.*

On p. 136 of Dalaa’il al-Imama **دلائل الامامة**, we are told that those
who attended Fatima’s burial in the darkness of the night were, besides
her husband Ali (ع), none other than both her sons al-Hassan and
al-Husayn (ع), her daughters Zainab and Umm Kulthum, her maid Fidda and
Asmaa daughter of Umays. The author, as quoted on p. 92, Vol. 10 of the
newly published edition of *Bihar al-Anwar*, adds the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و أصبح البقيع ليلة دفنت و فيه أربعون قبرا جددا، و ان المسلمين لما
علموا وفاتها جاءوا الى البقيع فوجدوا فيه أربعين قبرا، فأشكل عليهم
قبرها من سائر القبور، فضج الناس و لام بعضهم بعضا و قالوا: لم يخلف
نبيكم فيكم الا بنتا واحدة تموت و تدفن و لم تحضروا وفاتها و الصلاة
عليها و لا حتى تعرفوا قبرها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثم قال ولاة الأمر منهم: هاتم من نساء المسلمين من ينبش هذه القبور حتى
نجدها فنصلي عليها و نزور قبرها. فبلغ ذلك أمير المؤمنين صلوات الله
عليه، فخرج مغضبا قد احمرت عيناه و درت أوداجه و عليه قباه الأصفر الذي
كان يلبسه في كل كريهة و هو متوكيء على سيفه ذي الفقار حتى ورد البقيع،
فسار الى الناس النذير و قال: هذا علي بن أبي طالب قد أقبل كما ترونه
يقسم بالله لئن حول من هذه القبور حجر ليضعن السيف على غابر الآخر.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فتلقاه عمر (بن الخطاب) و من معه من أصحابه و قال له: ما لك يا أبا
الحسن؟ و الله لننبشن قبرها و لنصلين عليها. فضرب علي (ع) بيده الى جوامع
ثوبه ( يعني ثوب عمر) فهزه، ثم ضرب به الأرض و قال: يا ابن السوداء! أما
حقي (في الخلافة) فقد تركته مخافة أن يرتد الناس عن دينهم، و أما قبر
فاطمة، فو الذي نفس علي بيده، لئن رمت و أصحابك شيئا من ذلك، لأسقين
الأرض من دمائكم. فان شئت، فأعرض يا عمر.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فتلقاه أبو بكر فقال: يا أبا الحسن بحق رسول الله و بحق من (هو) فوق
العرش الا خليت عنه، فانا غير فاعلين شيئا تكرهه. فتخلى عنه و تفرق الناس
و لم يعودوا الى ذلك.
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the morning of the eve in which she (Fatima) was buried, al-Baqi’ was
found to have forty new graves. When the Muslims came to know about her
death, they went to al-Baqi’ where they found forty freshly built
graves, so they were confused and could not identify her grave from
among all of them. People fussed and blamed each other. They said, “Your
Prophet left only one daughter among you. She dies and is buried while
you do not attend her demise or perform the prayers for her or even know
where her grave is.”

Those in authority among them said, “Bring from among the Muslims’ women
those who would inter these graves till we find her, perform the prayers
for her and visit her grave.” The report reached the Commander of the
Faithful, Allah’s blessings with him, so he came out furious, his eyes
reddened, his veins swollen and wearing his yellow outer garment which
he always put on whenever there was trouble, leaning on his sword,
Thul-Fiqar, till he reached al-Baqi’. A warner rushed to people to warn
them saying, “Here is Ali ibn Abu Talib has come as you can see,
swearing by Allah that if anyone moves a brick of these graves, he will
kill each and every one of them.”

He was met by Omer [ibn al-Khattab] and some of his companions and said,
“What is wrong with you, O father of al-Hassan?! By Allah, we shall
inter her grave, and we shall perform the [funeral] prayers for her.”
Ali (ع) took hold of Omer’s garment, shook him and threw him on the
ground and said, “O son of the black woman! As regarding my right [to
succeed the Prophet as the caliph], I have abandoned it for fear people
might revert from their religion. As for Fatima’s grave, I swear by the
One Who holds Ali’s soul in His hands that if you and your fellows want
to do any such thing, I shall let the earth drink of your blood, all of
you; so, if you want, stay away from it, O Omer.”

Abu Bakr met him and said, “O father of al-Hassan! By the right of the
Messenger of Allah (ص) and by the right of the One on the Arsh, leave
him, for we shall not do anything which you dislike.” Ali (ع) left Omer
alone. People dispersed and did not make any further attempt. This
incident shows the reader how Abu Bakr was blessed with a higher degree
of wisdom than Omer.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذه الابيات من قصيدة فاطمة سيدة نساء العالمين للمرحوم الشيخ محسن أبو
الحب الكبير أهديها الى كل الفاطميات:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فإن قــيل حـوّا قـلت فـاطم فـخرها أو قــيل مــريم قـلت فـاطم أفـضل
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أفــهل لحـــوّا والـــد كــمحمّدٍ أم هــل لمــريم مــثل فـاطم أشـبل؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كـــلّ لهــا عــند الولادة حــالة مــنها عــقول ذوي البــصائر تـذهل
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هــذي لنــخلتها التـجت فـتساقطت رطــبا جــنيّاً فــهي مــنه تأكــلّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وضعت بـعيسى وهـي غـير مـروعةٍ أنّــي وحــارسها السّـرىّ الأبسـل؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وإلى الجـدار وصفحة البــاب التـجت بـنت النّــــبيّ فأسـقطت مـا تـحمل
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سـقطت وأسـقطت الجــنين وحـولها مــن كــلّ ذي حسبٍ لئـيم جـــحفل
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هـــذا يـــعنّفها وذاك يـــدعّها ويـــردها هـــذا وهـــذا يــركل
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وأمــامها أســد الأســود يــقوده بــالحبل قــنفذ، هــل كـهذا مـعضل؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولســوف تأتـي فـي القـيامة فـاطم تشكـــو الى رب الســماء وتـــعول
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولتـــعرفنّ جـــنينها وحـــنينها بشكـــايةٍ مــنها السّــما تـــتزلزل:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ربّـــاه مــيراثـي وبــعلي حـقّه غــصبوا، وأبــنائي جــميعاً قـتّلوا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Following are verses of poetry in honor of Fatima, Head of the Women of
Mankind, composed by the late Shaikh Muhsin Abu al-Hubb Senior presented
to all ladies who descended from Fatima:

*When they mention Eve, I say that Fatima is her pride,*  
*Or if Mary is mentioned, I say that Fatima is superior.*  
*Can anyone underestimate a father such as Muhammad?*  
*Or does Mary have a lion cub more brave than Fatima’s?*  
*Each had a status at her birth that puzzles sages’ minds:*  
*This to her date tree resorted, so of fresh ripe dates she ate,*  
*Giving birth to Jesus without fright, how so when the guard*  
*Is the most brave night sojourner?*  
*And to the wall and the door’s slab did this resort,*  
*Prophet’s daughter, so she aborted what she was bearing.*  
*She fell, and her fetus [Muhsin] fell with her, surrounded by*  
*Every one of a mean descent and lowly birth:*  
*This rogue rebukes her, that one reprimands her,*  
*This one dismisses her, that one even kicks her…*  
*Though before her was the lion of lions being led*  
*By the rope…, so, is there a greater calamity?*  
*Fatima will come on the Judgment Day to complain*  
*To the Lord of the Heavens, and she will wail,*  
*And you will know who her fetus was, why she wails*  
*Why she presents a complaint from which the heavens shake:*  
*“Lord! My inheritance and my husband’s right did they confiscate*  
*“And, moreover, all my sons did they kill, O Lord!”*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قصيدة للشاعر المسيحي عبد المسيح الأنطاكي يمدح فيها فاطمة الزهراء (ع)
فالسيدة الزهراء (ع) قد شهد بفضلها المخالف والمؤالف لأنها سيدة نساء
العالمين من الأولين والأخرين:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و إنها فزَّةٌ بين النساء فلا بنتُ لحواءَ تدنو من معاليها
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومن يُشعُّ شَعَاعَ الشمس جبهتُها و لا تُلالي إذا لاحت كلاليها
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هي الجديرةُ بالكُفءِ الكريم لها مَن بالمفاخِرِ والعُليا يُحاكيها
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والعُرْبُ تطلبُ أكفاءٌ تَزّوجُهُمْ بناتها، سّنيةُ تأبى تعدّيْها
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وكُلُ عقدٍ بغير الكُفءِ تحسَبُهُ عاراً عليها لدى الأقرانِ يُخزيها
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فمن يليقُ ببنتِ المُصطفى حسباً ومَن مِن العَرَب العَربَاء كافيها؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومَن يناسَب طه كي يُصاهَرهُ وهي المصاهرّةُ المسعودُ مُلقيَها؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
غيُر العليّ حبيب المصُطفى و له سَبَقُ الهدايةِ مُذ نادى مناديها
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فانه بعدَ طه خيرُ من ولدَتْ قُريشَ مُنذَ برا الباري ذراريها
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و أنه بطلُ الإسلامِ تعرفُهُ تلك الحروب التي أمسى مُجليّها
  </p>
</blockquote>

Here is a poem composed by the Christian poet Abdul-Maseeh al-Antaki (of
Antioch city) in praise of Fatima al-Zahra (ع), for those who agree with
our [religious] views and those who do not have all testified to
Fatima’s distinction: She is the Mistress of all Women of Mankind from
the early generations to the very last:

*Among women, hers is a unique birth:*  
*No other daughter of Eve comes to her distinctions close.*  
*One from whose forehead the sun’s rays shine,*  
*From her standing places glitter glows.*  
*She is the peer of the honored one and only who*  
*In his feats and supreme honors is her only match.*  
*Arabs seek competent peers for daughters to marry*  
*A tradition which they refuse to forgo.*  
*Any marriage without a competent peer they regard*  
*As a shame on them that debases them among peers.*  
*Who can match in lineage the daughter of the Chosen one?*  
*Who among the Arabs in honors matches her?*  
*Who suits Taha (ص) to be his son-in-law,*  
*A marriage tie that brings happiness to one who wins it*  
*Other than Ali, the one loved by the Chosen One?*  
*He accepted Guidance since the Messenger called for it.*  
*Next to the Chosen One, he is the best of Quraish*  
*Since the Almighty created its souls.*  
*And he is the hero of Islam well known*  
*By those wars that raised his status.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ما هو "مصحف فاطمة"؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

> ((وخلفت فاطمة عليها السلام مصحفاً، ما هو قرآن، ولكنه كلام من كلام
> الله، أنزله عليها، إملاء رسول الله، وخط على عليه السلام))(بحار الأنوار
> ج26 ص41 رواية73 باب1) ولذا سمِّيت فاطمة، فهي مظهر فاطر السموات والأرض.
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وحيث أن الملك المرسل من قبَله تعالى يحدِّثها، سمِّيت المحدَّثة، كما
مرَّ أنه كان يخبرها عمّا سيحدث بعدها في ذريّتها من المصائب والبلايا،
والأهم من ذلك ما ستكتسبها الذرية، من انتصارات عظيمة، ونجاح كبير في عصر
الغيبة، ومن ثمّ ظهور ابنها المهدي المنتظر، عجلّ الله تعالى فرجه
الشريف.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عليٌّ عليه السلام كاتبُ المصحـف
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أنَّ الزهراء، سلام الله عليها، كانت تحسُّ بالملك، وتسمع صوته، ولم تكن
تشاهده، فبمجرَّد أن حصل ذلك، شكت إلى أمير المؤمنين عليٍ، عليه السلام،
حيث لم تكن تتوقَّع هذا الأمر بهذه الصورة المستمرَّة. اذن كان أمير
المؤمنين عليٍ، عليه السلام صاحب فكرة كتابة المصحف، حيث يسمع صوت روح
الأمين، فيكتب كلما يسمعه، إلى أن اجتمع في مصحف متكامل، وهو مصحف
الزهراء عليها السلام. ولا يخفى عليك ، أنّه ليس من السهل كتابة ما يلقيه
جبرئيل، بل كان ذلك ضمن العلوم الخاصَّة الإلهيَّة التي امتاز بها أمير
المؤمنين، عليه السلام، فهو الذي كتب من قبل ما أملاه رسول الله عليه،
وهو الذي جمعَ القرآن الكريم في المصحف الشريف كما هو ثابت في محلِّه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
محتـوى المصحـف
  </p>
</blockquote>

> إنَّ المصحف يشتمل على أمورٍ كثيرةٍ تتلخص في كلمة واحدة وهي: استيعابه
> لجميع الحوادث الخطيرة الآتية، خصوصاً ما سيواجه ذريتُها، من المصائب
> والبلايا، وأيضاً الانتصارات، ويشتمل على أسماء جميع الملوك والحكّام إلى
> يوم القيامة، كما ورد في الحديث: ((ما من نبي و لا وصي ولا ملك إلا وفي
> مصحف فاطمة)) (بحار الأنوار ج47 ص32 رواية29 باب4). ويحتوى على أمور ترجع
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إلى شخص رسول الله، صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم، وأيضاً يشتمل على وصيتها
سلام الله عليها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> ((ابن هاشم عن يحيى بن أبي عمران عن يونس عن رجل عن سليمان بن خالد قال :
> قال أبو عبد الله عليه السلام.. فإن فيه وصية فاطمة عليها
> السلام..))(بحار الأنوار ج26 ص43 رواية76 باب1). ومن الطبيعي أنَّ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الوصيَّة تشتمل على أمورٍ خاصَّة، تتعلَّق بحزنها عليها السلام،
وبالمصائب الواردة عليها، من أعدائها، ليُنفِّذها ابنها الإمام الثاني
عشر المهدي المنتظر، عجَّل الله تعالى فرجه الشريف، لأنَّه هو الإمام
مبسوط اليد، الذي به يملأ الله الأرض قسطاً وعدلاً، كما مُلئت ظلماً
وجوراً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الأئِّمَّة عليهم السلام ومصحف فاطمة
  </p>
</blockquote>

> كان الإمام الصادق عليه السلام، يؤكِّد دائماً على علوم أهل البيت عليهم
> السلام، ففي الحديث أنَّه كان يقول "أنَّ علمهم عليهم السلام غابر ومزبور
> ونكتٌ في القلوب ونقر في الأسماع" وأنَّهم يمتلكون "الجفر الأحمر، والجفر
> الأبيض، ومصحف فاطمة، والجامعة" فهم عليهم السلام رغم ارتباطهم وسماعهم
> صوت الملائكة ورغم تبعيّتهم لمصحف الإمام عليٍّ الذي هو الجامعة المشتملة
> على جميع الأحكام حتى أرش الخدش، ورغم معرفتهم بعلم الجفر الذي يشتمل على
> "علم ما يحتاج إليها الناس إلى يوم القيامة من حلال و حرام" إلاّ أنَّهم
> كانوا يعتمدون في فهم الحوادث الخطيرة على مصحف فاطمة عليها السلام كما
> ورد في الحديث "فنحن نتبع ما فيها فلا نعدوها" حيث يشتمل على الحوادث
> الخارجية جميعاً. وأيضاً أسماء الملوك إلى يوم القيامة، ففي الحديث:
> ((سئل عن محمد بن عبد الله بن الحسن فقال عليه السلام: ما من نبي ولا وصى
> ولا ملك إلاّ وهو في كتاب عندي. يعنى مصحف فاطمة، والله ما لمحمد بن
> عبدالله فيه اسم)) (بحار الأنوار ج47 ص32 رواية29 باب4).

> لقد وصل المصحف إلى مستوى من الرفعة والسموّ بحيث صار مصدر سرورهم
> واستبشارهم، كما يستفاد من جملة قرت عينه في الحديث التالي: ((عن فضيل بن
> عثمان عن الحذاء قال: قال لي أبو جعفر عليه السلام يا أبا عبيدة كان عنده
> سيف رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم ودرعه ورايتُه المغلبة ومصحف
> فاطمة عليها السلام قرَّتْ عينُه)) (بحار الأنوار ج26 ص211 رواية22
> باب16).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هل مصـحف فاطمة هو القرآن؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

> إنَّ الكثير من الناس كانوا ولا زالوا يتصوَّرون أنَّ المصحف يشتمل على
> الآيات القرآنية الشريفة، أو أنَّ هناك قرآناً آخر عند الشيعة، كما يزعم
> بعضُ الجُهالُ من العامَّة. ولكنَّ الواقع هو خلاف ذلك، فإنَّ المصحف لا
> يشتمل حتى على آية واحدة من آيات القرآن الكريم، كما هو المستفاد من
> الأحاديث الكثيرة ،كما أنَّه ليس من قبيل القرآن ولا يشبهه من ناحية
> المحتوى أصلاً، فهو من مقولةٍ أخرى، فأحاديثنا صريحةٌ في ذلك فقد ورد في
> حديث: ((...عن على بن سعيد عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام... ما فيه آيةٌ
> من القرآن)) (بحار الأنوار ج26 ص42 رواية74 باب1).

> وفي أحاديث أخر: ((...عن على بن الحسين عن أبى عبد الله عليه السلام ..
> عندنا مصحف فاطمة، أما والله ما فيه حرفٌ من القرآن))(بحار الأنوار ج26
> ص46 رواية84 باب1).

> - ((عبد الله بن جعفر عن موسى بن جعفر عن الوشاء عن أبي حمزة عن أبي عبد
> الله عليه السلام قال: مصحف فاطمة عليها السلام ما فيه شيء من كتاب
> الله..))(بحار الأنوار ج26 ص48 رواية89 باب1).

> - ((عن عنبسة بن مصعب قال: كنا عند أبي عبد الله عليه السلام.. ومصحف
> فاطمة أما والله ما أزعم أنه قرآن))(بحار الأنوار ج26 ص33 رواية50 باب1).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عند ملاحظة الأحاديث تعرف أنَّ الشبهة كانت منتشرة في عصر الأئمة عليهم
السلام، ولهذا نراهم يستنكرون بكلِّ حزم وجدّ، ويتوسَّلون بالقسم لنفي
ذلك،‎ غير أنَّ هناك حديثا يدلّ على أنّ المصحف:
  </p>
</blockquote>

> ((فيه مثل قرآنكم هذا ثلاث مرات))(بحار الأنوار ج26 ص38 رواية70 باب).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والظاهر أنّ المقصود هو من ناحية الكميّة وحجم المعلومات، لا من حيث
المحتوى. ثمَّ لا يخفى عليك ما في كلمة قرآنكم من معانٍ فتأمَّل جيِّداً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وأيضـاً:
  </p>
</blockquote>

> المستفاد من أحاديث كثيرة أنَّ مصحف الزهراء عليها السلام ليس فيه شيء من
> الحلال والحرام أصلاً، ومن تلك الأحاديث قوله عليه السلام: ((أما إنَّه
> ليس من الحلال والحرام))(بحار الأنوار ج26 ص44 رواية77 باب1).

What is Fatima’s Mushaf?
------------------------

Fatima (ع) has left us a book behind her which is not a Qur’an but
speech of the Almighty revealed to her, dictated by the Messenger of
Allah (ص) and written down by Ali (ع), according to p. 41, Vol. 26 of
*Bihar al-Anwar*.

This is why she is named “Fatima”: the one who manifests the speech of
the Fatir (Creator) of the heavens and earth. Since the angel sent by
Him speaks to her on behalf of the Almighty, she is called “muhaddatha
**المحدثة**”, one spoken to. Also, the angel used to tell her the
calamities and afflictions that will happen after her death to her
progeny and, more importantly, the gains such progeny will achieve, the
great victories and success during the Time of Occultation then during
the time when her descendant, al-Mahdi, the Awaited One, may the
Almighty speed up his holy ease, reappears.

Ali (ع) was the scribe of this *mushaf*. Al-Zahra used to sense the
presence of the angel and hear his voice, but she did not see him. When
this took place, she complained about it to the Commander of the
Faithful Ali (ع) because she did not expect the matter would thus
continue taking place.

Ali (ع), then, was the one who thought about writing the *mushaf* down
since he heard the voice of the trusted angels, so he would write down
what he heard till a complete *mushaf* was gathered which is al-Zahra’s
*mushaf*, peace with her. You realize that it is not easy to write down
what Gabriel was dictating; rather, this was among the special divine
sciences which characterized the Commander of the Faithful (ع). He was
the one who used to write down what the Messenger of Allah (ص) used to
dictate to him, and he was the one who compiled together the Holy Qur’an
as is confirmed.

Mushaf’s Contents
-----------------

Fatima’s *mushaf* (book) contains many matters which can be summarized
thus: It absorbs all upcoming serious events, especially the calamities
and afflictions her progeny would face as well as the victories. It
contains names of all kings and rulers till Judgment Day, according to
this tradition which is recorded on p. 32, Vol. 47, of *Bihar al-Anwar*:
“There is no prophet or *wasi* or king except that he is mentioned in
Fatima’s *mushaf*.” It also contains matters relevant to the person of
the Messenger of Allah (ص) as well as her own will (ع).

Ibn Hisham quotes Yahya ibn Abu Omran quoting other sources citing Abu
Abdullah (Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq [ع]) saying that it contains the will of
Fatima (ع) as stated on p. 43, Vol. 26, of *Bihar al-Anwar*. Naturally,
the said will contains personal matters relevant to her grief and the
predicaments she had to go through which her enemies caused so her
descendant, the 12th Imam, the Awaited Mahdi, may Allah Almighty hasten
his sacred ease, would carry it. This is so because the Mahdi is the one
who will have the power to do so, who will be empowered by Allah to fill
the earth with justice and equity after having been filled with
injustice and iniquity.

The Imams (ع) and Fatima’s Mushaf
---------------------------------

Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (ع) used to always emphasize the significance of
the sciences of Ahl al-Bayt (ع). In one tradition, he used to say,
“Their knowledge, peace with them, transcends time, comprehended and
recorded, effective in the hearts, having an impact on those who hear
it,” that they have **الجفر الأحمر و الجفر الأبيض**, the Red Wide Well
(or pool) and the White one, Fatima’s *mushaf* and al-Jami’a.” The red
and white wells or pools referred to above are connotations of what is
prohibitive and permissible in Islam.

As for al-Jami’a , it is a collection of writings by the Commander of
the Faithful Ali (ع) who held them so precious, he attached them to his
sword, Thul-Fiqar. The contents of this Jami’a were recorded on animal’s
skin and used to be inherited, as is the case with Fatima’s book, by the
immediate family of the Prophet (ص), the Ahl al-Bayt (ع), who were
subjected to untold trials and tribulations, persecution, imprisonment,
poisoning, beheading and a host of injustices because of which these
precious writings are now lost. Ahl al-Bayt (ع) used to maintain
connection with the angels and adhere to the contents of Imam Ali’s
book, the Jami’a which contained all judicial rulings, including the
penalty for one slightly scratching someone else’s cheek.

Their knowledge included the “science of Jafr” which contains branches
of knowledge relevant to what is permissible in Islam and what is not
needed by people of all times till the Judgment Day. But they used to
depend in understanding serious events on Fatima’s book according to a
tradition that says, “We follow its contents and do not go beyond them.”
Such contents include all external [beyond the Household of the Prophet
{ص}] incidents as well as the names of kings till the Day of Judgment.
One tradition states that Muhammad son of Abdullah son of Imam al-Hassan
(ع) was once asked and he said this in his answer: “The names of every
prophet, *wasi*, king… is with me in a book,” meaning Fatima’s book,
adding, “By Allah! It does not contain any mention of [Prophet] Muhammad
ibn Abdullah,” according to p. 32, Vol. 47, of *Bihar al-Anwar*.

This *mushaf* reached a high level of loftiness, so much so that it
became a source of happiness and optimism as is concluded from the
phrase “apple of his eyes” in the following tradition: “Fudhail ibn
Othman quotes al-Haththa saying that Imam Abu Ja’far [al-Baqir] (ع) said
to him, ‘O Abu Ubaidah! He used to have the sword of the Messenger of
Allah (ص), his shield, winning banner and Fatima’s *mushaf*, the apple
of his eyes,” as indicated on p. 211, Vol. 26, of *Bihar al-Anwar*.

Is Fatima’s Mushaf The Holy Qur’an?
-----------------------------------

Most people used to, and still do, imagine that this *mushaf* contains
the sacred Qur’anic verses, or that there is another Qur’an the Shi’as
have, as ignorant commoners claim. But the reality is contrary to this:
This *mushaf* does not contain a single verse of the verses of the Holy
Qur’an, as is understood from many traditions. Also, it is not similar
to the Qur’an, nor is it like it from the standpoint of context at all.
It tells quite a different tale. Traditions are clear in this regard:
One tradition says, “… quoting Ali ibn Sa’eed citing Abu Abdullah (ع),
‘It does not contain any verse of the Qur’an,’” according to p. 42, Vol.
26, of *Bihar al-Anwar*.

In another tradition, it is indicated that “… from Ali son of al-Husayn
who quotes Abu Abdullah (ع), ‘We have Fatima’s *mushaf*. By Allah! It
does not contain a single syllable of the Qur’an,” as stated on p. 46,
Vol. 26, of *Bihar al-Anwar*.

• Abdullah ibn Ja’far quotes Mousa ibn Ja’far quoting al-Washa citing
Abu Hamzah citing Abu Abdullah (ع) saying, ‘The *mushaf* of Fatima,
peace with her, does not contain anything of the Book of Allah,’”
according to p. 48, Vol. 26, of *Bihar al-Anwar*.

• Anbasah ibn Mus’ab has said, “We were in the company of Abu Abdullah
(ع)… and Fatima’s *mushaf*; by Allah, he did not claim at all that it is
a Qur’an,” as we read on p. 33, Vol. 26, of *Bihar al-Anwar*.

When examining these traditions, you will come to know that this
confusion spread even during the time of the Imams (ع); therefore, we
find them strictly and seriously denouncing it, swearing about denying
it. There is one tradition which indicates that this *mushaf* “contains
three times the like of your Qur’an,” according to p. 38, Vol. 26, of
*Bihar al-Anwar*. It is quite obvious the comparison is with regard to
the quantity and size of information, not from that of context. You can
conclude that from the phrase “your Qur’an”; so, carefully ponder.

Many traditions conclude that the *mushaf* of al-Zahra (ع) does not
contain anything about what is permissible and what is not; among such
traditions is this statement (by Imam al-Sadiq, peace with him): “It is
not about what is permissible and what is not,” as stated on p. 44, Vol.
26, of *Bihar al-Anwar*.

The list of the other Infallible Fourteen (ع) is as follows:

3. Ali ibn Abu Talib (ع): He is discussed in detail in this book

4. Al-Hassan ibn Ali (ع): He is discussed in detail in this book.

5. Al-Husayn ibn Ali (ع): He is discussed in detail in this book.

6. Ali ibn al-Husayn (ع): He is discussed in detail in this book.

7. Muhammad ibn Ali al-Baqir (ع): He is discussed in detail in this
book.

8. Ja’far ibn Muhammad al-Sadiq (ع): He is discussed in detail in this
book.

9. Mousa ibn Ja’far al-Kadhim (ع): He is discussed in detail in this
book.

10. Ali ibn Mousa al-Rida (ع): He is discussed in detail in this book.

11. Muhammad ibn Ali al-Taqi (ع): He is discussed in detail in this
book.

12. Ali ibn Muhammad al-Naqi (ع): He is discussed in detail in this
book.

13. al-Hassan ibn Ali al-Askari (ع): He is discussed in detail in this
book.

14. Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Mahdi (ع): He is discussed in detail in
this book.

The author of this book, his family and ancestors up to about 150 years
back are followers of the Shi’a Ithna-Asheri faith. Earlier than that,
his ancestors were Sunnis, and the convesion of his first ancestor took
place in al-Kadhimiyya city following a bloody incident which shok him.
Details of this incident and the persecution to which early Jibouri
(author’s tribesmen) Shi’as were exposed, as well as the prejudice the
author received from Sunnis in Atlanta, Georgia, where he was studying
for his higher degree, are all recorded in his Memoirs. These Memoirs
are available for all to read on an Internet web page by clicking on
this link: **<http://www.scribd.com/yasinaljibouri>**/.

**Istidrak إستدراك**: retraction, catching up (with), overtaking
(somebody ahead)

**Istighfar إستغفار:** seeking Allah's forgiveness

**Istihqaq إستحقاق**: entitlement, worth, value, merit, maturity (of
debt, etc.)

**Istihsan** **إستحسان**: preference, finding something to be valuable,
worthwhile, commending, advising

**Istihtar إستهتار:** rash behavior, disregard (for laws, customs,
traditions, ethics, etc.), wantonness, recklessness, disregard for
others' feelings, sentiments, interests, etc.

**Istinsakh إستنساخ:** copying, duplicating, cloning

**Istintaj إستنتاج:** reaching conclusion, deduction (from certain
events or facts) by inference

**Istitan إستيطان:** settling (usually on someone else's land)

**Istithna' إستثناء**: exception, exclusion

**I\`tikaf إعتكاف:** the act of remaining most of the time at a mosque
for prayers and supplications

**Itrat** **عترة**: progeny (usually) of Prophet Muhammad

**Itmam** **or Itmam** **إتمام**: Completion, conclusion, consummation

**Ittikal** or Ittikaal **إتكال**: reliance (on), dependence on,
dependency

**Ittizan** **or Ittizan** **إتزان**: rationality, sobriety, the keeping
of sedateness (of conduct), balance, poise

**Izdiwajiyya** **إزدواجية**: duplicity, duality (of control,
allegiance, jurisdiction, etc.), measuring by two scales, judging by two
standards


