ج, J
====

**Jadaf جدف:** (v. or n.) to blaspheme (the name of God) or blashempy,
to revile or reviling, to swear to a lie

**Jahannam جهنم:** Hell; reference to and description of it has already
been made in my book titled Mary and Jesus in Islam. However, if you do
not have a copy of it, here is what I wrote in explaining the Hebrew
origin of this word: “Ge hen Hinnom,” Hebrew for “the valley of the son
of Hinnom.” Jews believe that this valley is a place near Jerusalem
where, according to Jeremiah 19:5, [Gentile] children were burnt in
sacrifice to Baal.

The latter was the fertility god of then polytheist Canaanites (Arabs,
descendants of Ken\`an, who inhabited Greater Syria. According to Vol.
1, p. 24 of *Civilization: Past and Present*, “'Phoenician' is the name
which the Greeks gave to those Canaanites who dwelt along the
Mediterranean coast of Syria, an area that is today Lebanon.”). The
Greeks, then, were the ones who called those Arabs "Phoenicians". *Ge
hen Hinnom* is Arabized as “Jahannam.”

Before the advent of Islam, Arabs believed neither in heaven nor in
hell; they had no clear concept of the afterlife. They, therefore, had
no words for Paradise or hell in their very rich and extensive
vocabulary. “Janna **جنة**,” by the way, means: a garden, an orchard,
but it really does not describe Paradise fully. Paradise is a lot more
than an orchard or a garden. It is a whole world by itself.
Incidentally, the word “Paradise” (*firdaws*) is also a loan word, some
say from Persian, others from Babylonian.

**Jahid جاحد:** ingrate, unappreciative, denies favors, denies the
existence of the Creator (apostate), atheist

**Jahil جاهل:** ignorant, illiterate, unlettered

**Jahiliyya جاهليه:** period of overwhelming ignorance, a reference to
the conditions of the Arabs before the advent of Islam. It implies is a
combination of views, ideas, and practices that totally defy and reject
commonsense and the guidance sent down by God through His Prophets.

**Ja’ir** **جائر**: oppressive, unfair, unjust, unequitable,
transgressing, encroaching, transgressing

**Ja'iz جائز:** permissible, allowable, admissible, possible, probable

**Jalbab جلباب:** long loose fitting garment worn by the Arabs

**Jalda** or Jaldah **جلده:** lash, whip

**Jallad جلاد:** executioner, headsman, hangman

**Jami \`a جامعه:** inclusive, universal, university; it also means
handcuffs

**Janaba جنابه:** uncleanness caused by seminal discharge

**Jannat** **or Jannah** **جنه:** heaven, Paradise, garden, the eternal
abode of those with whom the Almighty is pleased; plural: *jannaat*

**Janih جانح:** devious, errant, delinquent, misdemeanant

**Jami\` جامع:** mosque, house of congregational worship, same as
*masjid* مسجد; literally, it means "place where people *gather for*
يتجمع prayers"

**Janin جنين:** fetus

**Jard جرد:** stock-taking, inventory

**Jarrada جرد:** stripped one (of property, clothes, etc.), deprived of,
despoiled, denuded

**Jariya جاريه:** bondmaid, slave girl, servant

**Jasha\` جشع:** greed, avarice, avidity; one who is greedy is called
**jashi\`** **جشع**

**Jaza'i جزائي:** punitive, penal, vindicatory

**Jazak Allahu khayran or** **Jazak Allahu Khairan, Jazak Allah Khair,
Jazak Allahu Khair** **جزاك الله خيرأ:** This is a statement of thanks
and appreciation said to the person who does a favor. Instead of saying
"thanks" (Shukran), the Islamic statement of thanks is to say this
phrase. Its meaning is: " May Allah reward you for the good deed which
you have done." It is understood that human beings can't repay one
another enough, especially and particularly his parents and educators.
Hence, it is better to plead to the Almighty, Allah, to reward the
person who did you a favor to grant him what is best for him.

**Jawhara جوهره:** jewel, precious (stone, etc.)

**Jazim جازم:** positive, sure, categorical

**Jidal جدال:** arguing, argument, debate, discussion

**Jihad or Jihaad جهاد:** It is an Arabic word the root of which is
"jahada" which implies one who has strived for a worthy cause, a better
way of life, etc. The nouns from which the word is derived are: juhd
(effort, endeavor, exertion, exhaustion), mujahid (one who exerts
himself or defends the creed, provided such defense is not done through
aggression or through any means not allowed by Islam), jihad (struggle,
defense of the Islamic creed) and ijtihad (ultimate effort in order to
derive a solution for a problem related to jurisprudence; one who does
so is called *mujtahid*, a highly learned jurist capable of deriving
Islamic rulings). The other meanings are: strain, exertion, effort,
diligence, fighting to defend one's life, land and religion. Jihad has
commonly been mis-translated or misrepresented to the world to mean
"holy war".

In the absence of the Prophet, such a war does not exist in Islam, nor
will Islam allow its followers to be involved in this so-called "holy
war". Unfortunately, the past few years have witnessed the rising of a
number of extremist movements that justify the shedding of the blood not
only of non-Muslims but even of Muslims who do not agree with their
ideologies. Those who are hostile to Islam have utilized the acts of
terrorism committed by these groups, mostly identified as Takfiri
groups, groups that label all others as "kafirs", apostates, to tarnish
Islam's image. They use Islam as a pretext for their criminal acts just
as the crusaders had done during the Middle Ages when even some
crusaders shed the blood of their own Christian brethren.

Jihad is not a war to force the Islamic faith on others, as many
ignorant people think or portray. Contrariwise, there is an explicit
verse in the Qur'an that says the following:

***"There is no compulsion in religion" (Chapter Al-Baqarah, 2: 256).***

Jihad is not only a defensive war but a struggle, through peaceful
means, against any unjust regime or any injustice, period. If such a
regime exists—and there are many which do exist—such an effort has to be
exerted against the leaders, the decision-makers, not against the
people. Islam strongly prohibits terrorism, kidnapping, hijacking and
depriving one of his freedom, even if this "one" is an animal or a bird.
One statement made by the Prophet of Islam (ص) says, "A woman entered
hell because of a cat which she confined, neither feeding it nor letting
it eat of what is available on the ground."

As for some "Muslim" political figures, leaders and rulers who waged
wars against non-Muslims in the pretext of "spreading Islam", they were
further from Islam than the earth is from the sun and did what they did
for political, economic or selfish reasons. They were ignorant of the
true message of Islam. Unfortunately, there are many such "Muslims" in
our time and in all times and climes.

**Jinaya or Jinayah** **جنايه:** serious crime, felony

**Jinn** **or Jin, Ginn** **جن:** These are spiritual beings, “genies”,
that inhabit the world and, like humans, are required to follow the
commandments of their Creator. They are held accountable for their
deeds. Some of them are good while most of them are not, as is the case
with humans. The meaning of the word "jinn" in Arabic is "hidden",
invisible, because they cannot be seen by most humans. They were created
by the Almighty from smokeless fire. I discussed the jinns in more
detail in my book titled *Allah: The Concept of God in Islam*.

**Jirab جراب**: pouch, bag, sack

**Jizya or Jizyah جزيه:** tribute, protection tax paid to Muslims by
non-Muslims residing in areas under Islamic control. The Muslims collect
this tax in exchange for protecting the lives and possessions of these
non-Muslims, exempting them from the military service and awarding them
full freedom to practice their religion, whatever it may be.

If the Islamic State cannot protect those who have paid the *jizya*,
they are entitled to get it back. In all reality, such tax is hardly
collected because even in Pakistan, where the majority are Muslims
living with mostly Hindu and Buddhist minorities, the latter do not pay
any *jizya*.

**Jumood جمود:** stagnation, freezing, inaction, inactivity, passiveness
(to influence, change, etc.)

**Junha or Junhah** **جنحه:** misdemeanor

**Junoon or Jinoon جنون:** madness, insanity

**Jutham جذام:** leprosy

**Juzaf جزاف:** at random, haphazard, casual


