ن, N
====

**Nabi or** **Nebi, Nabee** **نبي:** The meaning of the word Nabi is a
prophet. To be a prophet he should receive a revelation from Allah that
does not necessarily mean a revealed book. When a prophet is instructed
to deliver his message to a certain group of people, he is a messenger.
It is stated in the Qur'an that there are no more prophets and
messengers after Muhammad (ص).

**Naddaf نداف:** cotton carder, cotton teaser, one who works cotton into
some usable form

**Nafaqa نفقة:** maintainence expenses; *nafaqa* applies to the
obligation of the husband towards the wife while they are married.
*Alimony,* on the other hand, applies in the West to the "spousal
support" which the ex-husband has to pay his divorced wife.

**Nafl نفل: (also Nafila** **نافلة)** optional, non-compulsory,
supererog­atory, highly recommended act of worship; plural *nawafil*

**Najasa نجاسه:** uncleanness, impurity; adjective *najis*

**Najwa** **نجوى:** silent supplication, invocation, the time when one
pleads silently to his Maker; recommended periods for such supplications
are: evenings, before dawn, during times of trials and tribulations or
when one is sick

**Nasab نسب:** lineage or genealogy

**Nasiha or Naseehah نصيحه:** sincere good advice

**Nathr نذر:** one's pledge to do something to show appreciation for the
Almighty's favorable response to his supplication and the attainment of
his worldly wish; plural: *nuthur*

**Nikah** **نكاح**: Islamic marriage

**Nisab** **نصاب:** amount of savings or capital or product a Muslim has
so the payment of zakat becomes obligatory on him; it is also applied in
courts where it means “legal quorum”

**Nifas** **نفاس**: period of a woman’s pre-natal bleeding

**Noor نور:** divine or celestial light; Muslims believe that the angels
are created of such *noor*. Human eyes cannot withstand the intensity of
their light, so they are veiled by their Maker from being seen by
humans. Humans will see the angels starting from the moment when the
soul starts its journey out of the body and into the afterlife.

**Nubuwwah نبوه:** prophethood, the belief in prophets and their
messages


