ق, Q
====

**Qadi or Qadhi قاضي:** judge.

**Qa\`ideen or Qa\`idoon قاعدين أو قاعدون:** people who remain inactive
and do not actively fight; the opposit of mujahid

**Qanieen** **or Qanitoon** **قانتون**: those who constantly supplicate

**Qanitun or Qanitoon قانطون:** those who lose hope of the mercy of
Allah

**Qard قرض:** a loan given for a good cause in the name of Allah, in
hopes of repayment or reward in the Hereafter

**Qari قاريء:** someone who recites the Qur'an being knowledgeable of
the rules of such recitation

**Qayyim** **قيم**: person in charge of something, one charged with
authority or responsibility

**Qaa قضاء:** compensatory, making up for a missed rite

**Qibla قبلة:** the direction that Muslims face when they perform their
*salat*. It is in the direction of the Ka'bah in Mecca

**Qisas قصاص:** retaliation/reprisal in kind (an eye for an eye). In
Islam, though, retaliation should be forgone as an act of charity; see
Sura 5, Aya 48. According to some Muslim jurists, *qiyas* is a method, a
yardstick, for measuring or reaching a legal decision on the basis of
evidence (precedent) in which a common reason, or an effective cause, is
applicable.

**Qiyam قيام:** standing (usually, but not necessarily, during the
performance of the prayers)

**Qiyama or Qiyaamah قيامة:** Day of Judgment, resurrection, the dead
rising from their graves and are herded for their Judgment

**Qudat قضاة:** plural form of *qadi*, judge

**Qudsi قدسي:** divine, related to the Almighty

**Qunoo قنوت:** optional but very highly recommended supplication during
the prayer rite's second *rek\`at*

**Quraysh or Quraish قريش:** the Arabian tribe of the Prophet of Islam;
for the meaning of “quraish”, refer to my book titled *Muhammad: Prophet
and Messenger of Allah*.

**Qur'an or Koran or Kuran قرآن:** The holy book of Islam is called the
Qur'an. It was revealed to Prophet Muhammad (ص) through arch-angel
Gabriel (Jibril) during a period of 23 years. There is only one Qur'an
in the whole world and it is in Arabic. The Qur'an has one text, one
language, and one dialect. It has been memorized by millions of Muslims
in different parts of the world. The Qur'an is composed of 114 *suras*
(chapters). Rules and regulations apply to its methods of recitation and
chanting.  
 The authenticity and pristine originality of the Qur'an have been
documented and recognized. It is the ultimate source of guidance for
people in all aspects of their spiritual and material lives. It also is
described as being bounteous, glorious, mighty, honored, exalted,
purified, wonderful, blessed, and confirming the truth of previous
revelations to prophets who preceded Muhammad (ص).


