س،ص, S
======

**Sabeel سبيل:** path, way, avenue, same as Sirat

**Sabirin or Sabiroon صابرين أو صابرون:** people who are patient and
steadfast, who persevere

**Sabr صبر:** patience, steadfastness, perseverence

**Sadaq or Sedaq صداق:** same meaning as *mahr*, dower

**Sadaqa صدقة:** (singular) charity offered voluntarily; plural:
*sadaqat*

**Sadeed صديد:** pus collected from bleeding wounds and served to the
sinners in hell to drink when they ask for water to quench their thirst

**Safa صفا:** a mound near the Ka'bah referred to in the Qur'an as one
of the spots held sacred by Allah. It is in conjunction with Marwah.

**Safawis or Safavids or as-Safawiyyoon** **الصفويون**: Some ignorant
fanatics apply the misnomer “Safawis” to taunt Shiite Muslims, not even
knowing exactly what the word means. For this reason, we decided to go
into details to narrate to you the history of these Safawis, perhaps one
of these fanatics will wake up.

The Internet’s Wikipedia tells us that the Safavids (Persian:
**صفویان**; Azerbaijani: *Səfəvilər*) formed one of the most significant
ruling dynasties in Iran’s history. They ruled one of the greatest
Persian empires since the Muslim conquest of Persia and established the
Twelver school of Shi'a Islam as the official religion of their empire,
marking one of the most important turning points in Muslim history. This
Shi'i dynasty was of mixed ancestry (Kurdish and Azerbaijani, with
intermarriages with Georgian and Pontic Greek dignitaries), ruling Iran
from 1501 to 1722 A.D.

The Safavid dynasty had its origin in the Safaviyya Sufi order which was
established in the city of Ardabil in the Azerbaijan region. From their
base in Ardabil, the Safavids established control over all of Greater
Iran and reasserted the Iranian identity of the region, thus becoming
the first native dynasty since the Sassanid Empire to establish a
unified Iranian state.

Despite their demise in 1736 A.D., the legacy that they left behind was
the revival of Persia as an economic stronghold between East and West,
the establishment of an efficient state and bureaucracy based on “checks
and balances”, their architectural innovations and patronage of fine
arts. The Safavids have also left their mark down to the present era by
spreading Shi'a Islam in major parts of the Caucasus and West Asia.
Perhaps this is why the Wahhabis of Saudi Arabia are so hostile to the
Shi’ites in general and to Iranians in particular.

Even though the Safavids were not the first Shi’a rulers in Iran, they
played a crucial role in making Shi’a Islam the official religion in all
of Iran. There were large Shi’a communities in some cities like Qum and
Sabzevar as early as the 8th century. In the 10th and 11th centuries,
the Buwayhids, who were of the Zaidiyya branch of Shi’a Islam, ruled in
Fars, Isfahan and Baghdad. As a result of the Mongol conquest and the
relative religious tolerance of the Ilkhanids, Shi’a dynasties were
re-established in Iran, Sarbedaran in Khorasan being the most important.
The Ilkhanid ruler Öljaitü and converted to Twelver Shi’ism in the 13th
century.

Following his conquest of Iran, Isma’il I made conversion mandatory for
the largely Sunni population. The Sunni ulema, clergy, were reportedly
either killed or exiled. Isma’il I, despite his heterodox Shi’a beliefs,
brought in Shi'a religious leaders and granted them land and money in
return for loyalty. Later, during the Safavid, especially the Qajar
period, the Shi’a ulema's power increased, and they were able to
exercise a role, independent of or compatible with the government.
Despite the Safavid's Sufi origins, most Sufi groups were prohibited,
except the Ni’matullahi order.

Iran became a feudal theocracy: The Shah was held to be the divinely
ordained head of state and religion. In the following centuries, this
religious stance cemented both Iran's internal cohesion and national
feelings, provoking attacks by its Sunni neighbors. After the disastrous
invasion of the Mongols, in the 1200s, migrated Turks and Mongolian
tribes adopted the Persian customs and even language. In the 1300s, the
Ilkhanids, a dynasty founded by "Genghis Khan's" grandson, Holagu Khan,
had been an influential factor in Persia. During these turbulent years
of 13th century, the Persians had submerged themselves deeper in Islamic
devotion and Sufism.

Towards the end of the 14th century, Timur (Tamberlane) claimed to be a
descent from Genghis Khan's family. The disturbed conditions in Mongol
Transoxania gave him in the town of Kish the chance to build up a
kingdom in Central Asia. He entered Iran in 1380, and in 1393 he reduced
the Jalayirids’ power and domination after taking their capital,
Baghdad. In 1402 A.D., he captured the Ottoman Sultan Bayezid at Ankara
and conquered Syria then turned his attention to campaigns to the east
of his quickly acquired and ill-cemented empire. He died in 1405 on an
expedition to China. He showed interest in Sufism, a form of mysticism.
Timur may have hoped to find popular leaders whom he could use for his
own purposes. But he encountered ill-treated Iranians who proved that
they knew him perhaps better than he knew himself. His legacy was the
reverse of stability to Iran; and division of his ill-assimilated
conquests among his sons ensured that an integrated Timurid Empire would
never be achieved.

The Timurid state came to being an integrated Iranian empire under
Timur's son, Shahrokh Shah (1405-47), who endeavored to weld Azerbaijan,
which demanded three military expeditions, as well as western Persia to
Khurasan (which means in Persian “land of sunshine”) and eastern Persia
in order to form a united Timurid state for a short and troubled period
of time. He only succeeded in loosely controlling western and southern
Iran from his beautiful capital at Herat. He made Herat the seat of a
splendid culture, the atelier of great miniature painters of Herat
school, Behzad notable among them, and the home of a revival of Persian
poetry and philosophy. This revival was not unconnected with an effort
to claim for an Iranian center once more the leadership in the
propagation of Sunni ideology; Herat used to send copies of Sunni
canonical works on request to Egypt. The reaction in Shi'ism's ultimate
victory under the Safavid shahs of Persia was, however, already in
preparation.

In the mean time, the "*Qara Qoyunlu*" (Black Sheep) Turkman, used to
dominate Western Iran. In Azerbaijan they had replaced their former
masters, the Jalayirids. Timur had put these Qara Qoyunlu to run away,
but in 1406, they regained their capital, Tabriz. On Shahrokh's death,
Jahan Shah (reigned c. 1438-67) extended Qara Qoyunlu rule out of the
northwest deeper into Iran. The Timurids relied on their old allies, the
Qara Qoyunlus' rival Turkman of the "*Aq Qoyunlu*" (White Sheep) clans,
whose Jahan Shah was destroyed by the Uzun Hassan of Aq Qoyunlu by the
end of 1467.

Uzun Hassan (1453-78) achieved a short-lived Iranian empire, but under
his son Yaqub (1478-90), the state was subjected to fiscal reforms
associated with a government-sponsored effort to reapply hard purist
principles of orthodox Islamic rules for revenue collection. Yaqub
attempted to purge the state of taxes introduced under the Mongols and
not sanctioned by the Muslim canon. His Sunni fanaticism was discredited
when the inquiries made into his activities by the orthodox religious
authorities.

The attempts to revive religious orthodoxy through revenue reform gave
momentum to the spread of Safavid Shi'a faith. Economic decline, which
had resulted from fiscal reforms introduced by Yaqub, must have been
another factor as well.

Shaikh Jonayd's son, Shaikh Heydar (or Haider), led a movement that had
begun as a Sufi order under his ancestor, Shaikh Safi ud-Din Ardabili
(of Ardabil 1252-1334). This order may be considered to have originally
represented a puritanical, but not legalistically so, reaction against
the corruption of Islam, the staining of Muslim lands, by the Mongol
infidels. What began as a spiritual, unearthly reaction against
irreligion and the betrayal of spiritual aspirations developed into a
manifestation of the Shi'a quest for dominion over Islamic authority.

By the 15th century, the Safavid movement could draw on both the
mystical emotional force and the Shi'a appeal to the oppressed masses to
gain a large number of dedicated adherents. Shaikh Heydar toke his
numerous followers to warfare by leading them on expeditions from
Ardabil into the nearby Caucasus. He was killed on one of these
campaigns in 1488. His son Esma'il, then was one year old, was to avenge
his death and lead his devoted army to a conquest of Iran whereby Iran
gained a great dynasty, a Shi'a regime, and in most essentials its shape
as a modern nation state. Yaqub did not kill Shaikh Heydar's sons, whose
mother was Yaqub's sister, but instead sent them to exile in Fars
province. Death of Yaqub in 1490 caused turmoil and paved the path for
Esmail and his brothers to leave their exile and secretly taking refuge
in Lahijan, Gilan province, as its governor had sympathy toward Shi'a.

A militant Islamic Sufi order, the Safavids, appeared among Turkish
speaking people of west of the Caspian Sea, at Ardabil. The Safavid
order survived the invasion of Timur to that part of the Iran in the
late 13th century. By 1500 the Safavids had adopted the Shi'a branch of
Islam and were eager to advance Shi'ism by military means. Safavid males
used to wear red headgear. They had great devotion for their leader as a
religious leader and perfect guide as well as a military chieftain, and
they viewed their leaders position as rightly passed from father to son
according to the Shi'a tradition. In the year 1500, Esma'il the
thirteen-year-old son of a killed Safavid leader, Shaikh Heydar, set out
to conquer territories and avenge death of his father. In January 1502,
Esma'il defeated the army of Alvand Beig of Aq Qoyunlu, ruler of
Azerbaijan, and seized Tabriz and made this city his capital. Safavids
went on and conquered rest of Azerbaijan, Armenia and Khorasan; They
became the strongest force in Iran, and their leader, Esma'il, now
fifteen, was declared Shah (King) on 11 March 1502.

In that era Iran had a variety of settled peoples; in addition to
Persians it had Kurds, Arabs, Turkmans and Baluchis to name a few.
Safavid's power over various tribes was not strong enough to consolidate
an absolute supremacy; tribal leaders remained those who had been tribal
chieftains and consider their tribes to be independent. However, the
Safavids laid claim to authority over all that had been Persia.

Turkish language was spoken at Shah Esma'il's court, but having adopted
Persian as official language and much of Persian culture the Safavids
were mistakenly thought by outsiders to be Persian, but they were truly
Iranian with a unifying spirit. To help organize the state the Safavids
used Persian bureaucrats with a tradition in administration and tax
collecting, and they tried to create a religious unity. Shah Esma'il
described himself as a descendant, on their father's side, of the
Prophet Mohammad and claimed to have royal Sassanian blood as well.
Shi'ism became the state religion, Esma'il ignored the Sunni branch of
Islam and tried to force people to become Shi'a, which was a difficult
task with a variety of tribes and less than complete authority.

The newly established Iranian Empire lacked the resources that had been
available to the Islamic Caliphs of Baghdad in former times through
their dominion over Central Asia and the West in order to consolidate
their power over the Islamic authority. Asia Minor and Transoxania were
gone, and the rise of maritime trade in the West was unfavorable to a
country whose wealth had depended greatly on its position on important
east-west overland trade routes like the famous Silk Road. The rise of
the Ottomans held back Iranian westward advances and contested with the
Safavids' control over both the Caucasus and Mesopotamia. By 1506, Shah
Esma'il had conquered Arak, Esfahan, Fars, Kerman, Yazd, Kashan, Semnan,
Astarabad (Gorgan or Jurjan) and, in 1507, he added Shi'a holy cities of
Najaf and Karbala’ to Iran.

In 1507, the Portuguese invaded what is called the “Persian Gulf” and
captured Hormuz Island. It became a naval base and a trade outpost which
lasted for more than a hundred years. Shah Esma'il, having no navy,
reluctantly accepted this European presence. In the mean time, the
Safavids extended their rule by capturing Baghdad and Iraq in 1508.
Later on, after defeating the Uzbeks and killing their leader, Mohammad
Sheybani (Shaibani), nicknamed Sheibak Khan, in a battle near Merv on
December 1510, Shah Esma'il absorbed the large province of Khorasan into
his state as well as Merv, Herat and Qandahar. But Uzbeks remained a
formidable rival to the Safavids’ domination of Northern Khorasan
throughout the 16th century.

In his message, the Ottoman sultan Bayezid II congratulated Shah Esma'il
on his victories and advised him to stop destroying the graves and
mosques of Sunni Muslims. Shah Esma'il was convinced of the
righteousness of his cause, ignoring the request. With many Shi'a
Muslims in Asia Minor under the authority of the Ottoman sultan, Bayezid
II was concerned about the power of the Safavids. The new sultan in
Constantinople after 1512, Sultan Selim (Salim), fought against Shi'a
Muslims under his rule, killing thousands and displacing others. Sultan
Selim waged war also against the Safavids.

On August 23, 1514, just west of Tabriz in the Chalderan plain, the army
of Shah Esma'il suffered a crushing defeat. His cavalry and infantry
were armed with spears, bows and swords and were fighting against
Ottoman's superior numbers as well as field artillery and musketeers.
Shah Esma'il and his followers firmly believed that Allah was on their
side, but they were confused by their military setback. Tabriz, their
capital, was briefly occupied. This battle and defeat of Safavid Shah
paved the path for the Ottoman conquest of Diyarbakr, Erzinjan and other
parts of eastern Anatolia as well as northern Iraq. Shah Esma'il himself
found relief from psychological depression in wine and died ten years
later at the age of only thirty-seven.

Shah Esma'il's descendants, namely Shah Tahmasp I (1524-1576), Shah
Esma'il II (1576-1577) and Shah Muhammad (1577-1587), ruling in
succession, recovered some of the original Safavid confidence and
expanded in the opposite direction of the Ottomans, as far as
Transoxania. Safavid shahs tightened their controls over Iran; each
district had its own Safavid leader, a "Qezelbash" chief who answered to
the shah. In time of war, the Qezelbash chiefs were responsible for
providing soldiers for the shah's army and to collect revenues to pay
for war. The local Qezelbash chiefs grew wealthy in land and in
collecting taxes. Shah Tahmasp I the eldest son of Shah Esma'il ascended
the throne at the age of ten, and for the first ten years of his reign,
real power was held by a number of leaders of competing Qezelbash
factions, which caused much political instability.

In 1533, Shah Tahmasp I asserted his authority. One of his legacies was
the introduction of converted slaves into court and the military. They
were drawn from thousands of Georgian, Circassian and Armenian prisoners
captured in campaigns fought in the Caucasus in the 1540s and 1550s.
Female slaves entered the royal harem, becoming mothers of princes and a
force in court politics and dynastic quarrels. Some of the male slaves
began to acquire positions of influence, under Shah Abbas I, reaching
high offices that challenged the supremacy of the Qezelbash.

During the reign of Shah Tahmasp I, Uzbeks launched as many as five
major invasions of Khorasan with the intent of retaking the area.
Safavids were successful in driving back the Uzbeks threat; and in 1545
they captured of Qandahar from the Mughal Empire. The Safavid capital
was moved to Qazvin in 1548, following the temporary capture of Tabriz
by the Ottomans. Despite periodic wars between Iran and the Ottoman
Empire, they maintained an extensive trade, especially in the highly
prized Iranian silk, which large quantities of silk were shipped from
Iran to commercial centers such as Aleppo and Bursa and from there
re-exported to Marseilles, London, and Venice.

Shah Tahmasp I, encouraged carpet weaving on the scale of a state
industry. The exquisite miniatures illustrating the Iranian national
epic known as the "Shahnama" (Epic of Kings) were painted at the request
of Shah Tahmasp. This masterpiece is known as "Shahnameh of Tahmaspi"
and was presented by the Safavid ruler to the Ottoman sultan Selim II in
1568.

In 1576 Qezelbash faction interested in a prince whose mother was
Turkman rather than Circassian or Georgian, brought Shah Esma'il II son
of Shah Tahmasp I to power. Shah Esma'il II reign was marked by
brutality and a pro-Sunni policy. Consequently in November 1577, he was
poisoned with the participation of his sister Pari Khan Khanom.  
 Mohammad Shah was the only surviving brother of Shah Esma'il II, proved
to be a weak leader. His wife Mahd-e Olya initially dominated him; but
after her assassination in 1579 the Qezelbash took control. Meanwhile
Ottomans took advantage of Iran's political turmoil to launch a major
invasion of the country. Consequently extensive territories were lost to
Ottomans, including most of Azerbaijan, with Tabriz, and Georgia.

With their self-esteem and power derived from their increased wealth,
some local Qezelbash chiefs wished to have more freedom from the shah's
authority. They tried to convince Mohammad Shah that he should select a
successor agreeable to them. Some of these chiefs tried to reduce the
chances of another choice by executing the heir apparent, his mother and
some other possible heirs within the royal family. As often happens,
politics by murder was less than efficient. The younger brother of the
murdered heir apparent was secretly send away to Khorasan, and Qezelbash
chiefs loyal to the royal family fought and defeated Qezelbash chiefs
who were not, and full power was returned to the old dynasty of shahs.

Abbas I (1587-1629), who succeeded Mohammad Shah, learnt from his
family's experience with the local Qezelbash chiefs, and he broke their
power and confiscated their wealth. He extended state-owned lands and
lands owned by the shah. Provinces were now to be administered by the
state replacing the Qezelbash chiefs. He strengthened his government's
bureaucracy and managed to relocate tribes in order to weaken their
power. The Sufi bands, Qezelbash, which had been formed into artificial
tribal units mainly for military purposes during the dynasty's formative
period, as a source of recruitment, were replaced by a standing strong
army of his own. He recruited soldiers from Persian villages and from
among Christians, Georgians, Circassian, Armenians and others, equipped
them with artillery and muskets. The Christians were proud to serve the
shah and to call themselves "*Ghulams*" (slaves) of the shah although
slaves they were not. To finance the new army, Shah Abbas converted
large pieces of land traditionally granted to tribal chiefs as
assignments into crown lands that he taxed directly. This new military
force was trained on European lines with the advice of Robert Sherley.
Sherley was an English adventurer expert in artillery tactics who,
accompanied by a party of cannon founders, reached Qazvin (the Caspian
Sea) with his brother Anthony Sherley in1598. In a short time Shah Abbas
created a formidable army, consisting of cavalry, infantry and
artillery.

Shah Abbas was open to the ideas and was mentally active as well. He was
curious and in ways more tolerant than his predecessors. Previously,
"infidels" (foreigners and non-Muslim subjects) had been denied entry to
the shah's court. He welcomed foreigners and his non-Muslims subjects to
his court, and enjoyed discussing with foreigners the complexities of
religious ideology. He took an unusual step among Islamic rulers by
allowing Christians to wear what they wanted and allowing them to own
their own home and land.

Shah Abbas defeated the Uzbeks in April 1598 and recovered Herat and
territories in Khorasan, including Mashhad, lost several years earlier.
He consolidated the Safavid power strongly in Khorasan. He rebuilt and
developed the shrine of Ali ar-Reza (Imam Reza or Rida) at Mashhad, the
eighth Shi'a Imam, as a pilgrim, which was damaged by the Uzbeks. The
shrine became a major center for Shi'a pilgrimage, and a rival to Shi'a
holy places in Mesopotamia like Najaf and Karbala’ where visiting
pilgrims took currency and attention out of Safavid into Ottoman
territory.

The Safavids had earlier moved their capital from the vulnerable Tabriz
to Qazvin. Since the Uzbek threat from east of the Caspian had been
overcome, Shah Abbas could move to his newly built capital at Esfahan
(or Isfahan) in 1598, more centrally placed than Qazvin for control over
the whole country and for communication with the trade outlets of the
Persian Gulf.

Under Shah Abbas I, Iran prospered; he also transplanted a colony of
industrious and commercially astute Armenians from Jolfa in Azerbaijan
to a new Jolfa next to Esfahan. He patronized the arts, and he built
palaces, mosques and schools, Esfahan becoming the cultural and
intellectual capital of Iran. Shah Abbas encouraged international trade
and the production of silks, carpets, ceramics and metal ware for sale
to Europeans. Shah Abbas also founded a carpet factory in Esfahan. Royal
patronage and the influence of court designers assured that Persian
carpets reached their zenith in elegance during the Safavid period. He
advanced trade by building and safeguarding roads. He welcomed tradesmen
from Britain, the Netherlands and elsewhere to Iran. His governmental
monopoly over the silk trade enhanced state revenues. Merchants of the
English East India Company established trading houses in Shiraz and
Esfahan. After Shah Abbas ousted the Portuguese from the island of
Hormuz at the entrance to the Persian Gulf in 1622, Bandar Abbas (Port
of Abbas) became the center of the East India Company's trade. But Later
the Dutch East India Company received trade capitulations from Shah
Abbas. The Dutch soon gained supremacy in the European trade with Iran,
outdistancing British competitors. They established a spice-trading
center at Bandar Abbas. In 1623-24 Shah Abbas I launched an offensive
against Ottomans and established control over Kurdish territories,
Baghdad and the Shi'a Holy Cities of Najaf and Karbala’.

During his reign, Shah Abbas I paid considerable attention to the
welfare institutions in Esfahan and other cities like establishing
hospitals. Medical practice was still depended on medieval guides for
the treatment of most illnesses. The standard reference work remained
the Canon of Ebn Sina (Avicenna) (d. 1037), but new clinical works were
written during the Safavid period as well. In the 17th century, a unique
work, The Treasury of Surgery, was written by an army surgeon known as
Hakim Mohammad and was dedicated to Shah Safi I. It included a detailed
list of the instruments available to surgeons, including a special
device for the removal of bullets; outlined various forms of anesthesia;
and advocated surgery for cancerous tumors.

The bureaucracy, too, was carefully reorganized, bold reforms in the
military, administrative, and fiscal structures helped to centralize
state authority to a degree not achieved by Shah Abbas I predecessors.
But the seeds of the sovereignty's weakness lay in the royal house
itself, which lacked an established system of inheritance by
primogeniture. One of Shah Abbas I innovations, however, weakened the
Safavid state in the long run; fear of revolts by his sons led him to
abandon the traditional practice of employing the princes to govern
provinces. Instead, he instituted the practice of confinement of infant
princes in the palace gardens away from the direct reach of conspiracies
and the world at large. A reigning shah's nearest and most acute objects
of suspicion were his own sons. Among them, brother plotted against
brother over who should succeed on their father's death; and
conspirator, ambitious for influence in a subsequent reign, supported
one prince against another. The new practice, followed also by his
successors, resulted in ill-educated, indecisive shahs of lower
competence, easily dominated by powerful religious dignitaries to whom
the Safavids had accorded considerable influence in an attempt to make
Shi'ism the state religion

After the death of Shah Abbas I in 1629, his son, Shah Safi I, who ruled
from 1629 to 1642, known for his cruelty, sat on the throne. He was the
first of the Safavid shahs to be raised in the palace gardens. Shah Safi
I put to death potential rivals to the throne as well as some of his
male and female relatives on his accession. He executed most of the
generals, officers and councilors he had inherited from his father's
reign. The dominant influence of Mirza Taqi, known as Saru Taqi, the
Grand Vezir (chancellor, prime minister) at the Safavid court allowed
the government to be run smoothly despite the shah's lack of interest in
affairs of state.

On May 17, 1639, a peace treaty with the Ottomans was signed which
established the Ottoman-Safavid frontier and put an end to more than a
hundred years of sporadic conflict. The treaty forced Shah Safi I to
accept the final loss of Baghdad in Mesopotamia, recaptured by the
Ottomans in 1638, and instead gave Yerevan in the southern Caucasus to
Iran.

The era of Shah Abbas II, who ruled from 1642 to 1667, was the last
fully competent period of rule by a Safavid shah. Shah Abbas II took an
active role in government matters. Under his rule Iran revived, and some
of Persia's glory in the eyes of the outside world returned. He
increased the central authority of the state by increasing crown lands
and often intervened in provincial affairs on the side of the peasants,
but with peace on the frontiers the army declined in size and quality.
He stuck to the notion that the Safavid ruler was sacred and perfect and
openly disputed with members of the Shi'a religious establishment who
had begun to articulate the idea that in the absence of the occult Imam
Zaman (twelfth Shi'a Imam, al-Mahdi), true temporal authority rightly
belonged to the mujtahid who merited emulation by the faithful. Safavid
Shi'ism had not improved monarchy as an institution, but instead
recognized the state as a theocracy. The *‘ulema*, religious leaders,
rebuked the shahs, questioned the religious legitimacy of their power
and claimed that the mujtahids had a superior claim to rule.

After Abbas II died in 1667, decline set in again when Shah Soleyman
(Sulayman, Solomon) (Safi II), who ruled from 1667 to 1694, took power.
He was renamed, superstitiously, to Soleyman because the first year and
half of his reign was so disastrous. Shah Soleyman was not a competent
ruler, and shortly after his accession food prices soared and famine and
disease spread throughout the country. Although pressing problems faced
him, he increasingly retreated into the harem and left his grand vezir
to cope with affairs of state.

Shah Sultan Hossein, who ruled from 1694 to 1722, have been described as
the most incompetent shah of Safavids. He was similar to some others who
had inherited power by accident of birth. Indifferent to affairs of
state, Shah Sultan Hossein effectively brought Safavid Empire to its
sudden and unexpected end. He was of a religious temperament and
especially influenced by the Shi'a religious establishment. At their
insistence, he issued decrees forbidding the consumption of alcohol and
banning Sufism in Esfahan.

In 1694 Shah Sultan Hossein appointed Mohammad Baqir Majlesi, the most
influential member of Shi'a religious establishment, to the new office
of "*Mulla Bashi*" (Head Mulla). Majlesi wrote "Bihar al-Anwar" (The
Seas of Light), an encyclopedic work dedicated to the preservation of
the prophet Mohammad's words and deeds. He devoted himself to the
propagation of a legalistic form of Shi'ism and to the eradication of
Sufism and Sunni Islam in Iran.

Under his guidance specifically Shi'a popular rituals, such as mourning
for the martyred third Shi'a Imam Hossein (d. 680), Ashora, were
encouraged, as were pilgrimages to the tombs of holy Shi'a personages.
Majlesi's policies also included the persecution of non-Muslims in Iran,
including Zoroastrians, Jews, and Christians. Unchecked by the Safavid
regime, Majlesi and the Shi'a clergy emerged with increased strength and
independence from the ruling government in the 17th and 18th centuries.

The Safavid empire had also declined militarily, leaving it more
vulnerable to invasion, which came out of the east. In 1722 Afghan
invaders under Mahmoud, a former Safavid vassal in Afghanistan, captured
Esfahan and murdered Shah Sultan Hossein. The Afghan invasion was
disastrous for Iran, which consequently in 1723 the Ottomans took
advantage of the disintegration of the Safavid realm and invaded from
the west, ravaging western Persia as far as Hamadan, while the Russians
seized territories around the Caspian Sea. In June 1724 the two powers
agreed on a peaceful partitioning of Iran's northwestern provinces.

**Safh صفح:** pardon, forgiveness, excuse

**Sahaba صحابة:** companions of the Holy Prophet Muammed (ص); singular
*sahabi*

**Saheefa or Sahifa صحيفة:** page, tablet, scroll, parchment,
manuscript, written document

**Sahih** **صحيح:** literally: authentic, correct, accurate; it is
generally used to refer to the collection, group of collections, or
book, of verified and authenticated *ahadith* of Holy Prophet (ص)

**Sajda سجدة:** prostration; it is also the title of Chapter 32 of the
Holy Qur’an

**Salat or Salah صلاة:** *Salat* is an Arabic word which mean: a
spiritual relationship and communication between the servant/being and
his Creator. *Salat* is one of the five pillars of Islam. It is
performed five times a day at these times: *fajr* (pre-dawn or
pre-daybreak), *dhuhr* noon, *'asr* (afternoon), maghrib (sunset) and
*'isha'* (late night). *Salat* is to be performed with mental
concentration, verbal communication, vocal recitation, and physical
movement to attain spiritual upliftment, peace of mind, harmony with the
soul and with the Creator and concord. Congregational prayer services
are held on Fridays at noon which they include a sermon (Khutbah)
delivered by a religious leader (Imam) called *khatib*.

To perform the *salat* ritual, a Muslim has to first perform the
ablution (*wudhu'*). He/she should make sure about that cleanliness of
the body, clothing, and place before performing the *salat*. How many
types of prayers are there in Islam?

There are many besides the daily prayers: The Ghufaila Prayers, the Sahu
(forgetfulness or miscalucation while performing obligatory prayers),
the Janaza Prayers for a deceased person whose coffin is being
witnessed, the Ghaayib Prayers for the deceased person whose coffin is
not present, Salat al-Wahsha which is performed for a deceased person in
the same night of his death, Salat al-Layl which is performed from the
time after midnight and before Fajr, Salat al-Aayaat which is performed
at the time of eclipse of the sun or the moon, Salat al-Shukr, a form of
thanks giving prayer, Salat al-Haja, a prayer performed when one wants
to plea to his Maker so he may attain a certain objective, Salat
al-Istikhara when one needs guidance from his Maker regarding a
particular complex issue, a prayer to remove one’s worries and concerns,
Salat al-Tasabeeh in which one praises the Almighty a great deal, Eid
prayers, prayers on certain other occasions such as Laylatul-Qadr, etc…,
to name only a few. Each of these prayers has its own rules and
regulations. Refer to your *mujtahid* for details. But if you have no
*mujtahid* to guide you, for sure you are lost…!

**Salatul-\`Id صلاة العيد:** late morning prayers comprised of two
***rek\`at*** (prostrations) performed on the first day of \`Id al-Fitr
(the feast of fast-breaking) which signals the end of the fast of the
month of Ramadan

**Sall Allahu 'alaihi wa Aalihi wa sallam عليه وعلى اله و سلم صلى
الله:** This is an expression which Muslims articulate whenever the name
of Prophet Muhammad (ص) is mentioned or written. The meaning is: "May
the blessings and the peace of Allah be with him (Muhammad (ص)".

**Saqifah or Saqifa or Saqeefa سقيفه:** a shelter from the sun, a shed
with a roof. The companions of the Prophet (ص) met in such a place in
Medina known as "Saqifat Bani Sa\`idah "**سقيفة بني ساعد ه** to "elect"
the first successor to the Prophet (ص). The attendants actually
represented a fraction of the Muslim community of the time and many
dignitaries boycotted that "elections" and later cast doubts about its
legitimacy, igniting a division among the Muslim the effects of which
can still be felt even in our times and in all times to come. Many books
have been written about this "saqifa" incident, and the controversy will
most likely never dissipate.

On p. 215, Vol. 2 of Tabari's *Tarikh* (Dar al-Amira for Publication and
Distribution, Beirut, Lebanon, 1426 A.H./2005 A.D.), we are told that
the sacred body of the Prophet (ص) remained without being buried for
three full days because some people were arguing with each other at the
*saqifa* of Bani Sa'idah about who should be the successor to the
Prophet (ص). How many Muslims were there when the Prophet (ص) was
buried?

On p. 408, Vol. 6/2 (combined edition published in 1427 A.H./2006 A.D.
by the Ihyaa al-Kutub al-Islamiyya, Qum, Iran) of al-Majlisi's *Bihar
al-Anwar* **بحار الأنوار**, we read precise details about who gave the
Prophet (ص) his burial bath and buried him. The sacred body of the
Prophet (ص) was given the burial bath by none other than his son-in-law,
cousin and the man whom he raised in his lap: Ali ibn Abu Talib (ع).

A handful of the Prophet's closest relatives and true companions buried
him, and these included, in addition to Ali, Aws ibn Khawli, "Abu
Talhah" Zaid ibn Sahl, al-Abbas ibn Abdul-Muttalib and his son al-Fadl
ibn al-Abbas, Abu Ubaidah ibn al-Jarrah and Usamah ibn Zaid ibn
Harithah. As for the rest, they were too busy fussing and arguing,
almost fighting, with each other about who would be the next caliph to
be concerned about burying the Prophet of Allah (ص)…

**Saraya سرايا:** (plural) military campaigns personally ordered by
Prophet Muammed (ص); singular: *sariya*

**Sarmadi سرمدي:** eternal, everlasting, perpetual

**Sawm صوم:** Sawm or Siyam implies a total abstinence from partaking of
food, water or any liquid, smoking, intercourse, etc. from dawn till
sunset for one whole lunar month. Sawm (fasting) takes place during the
ninth month of the lunar calendar called Ramadan. It is one of the five
pillars of Islam. How many types of fast are there in Islam? If you
really want to know the answer, read my book Fast of the Month of
Ramadan: Philosophy and Ahkam where you will find out that there are as
many as forty types of fast in Islam. Muslims take their religion very
seriously.

**Sa'yee سعي:** the going back and forth seven times between the Safa
and the Marwa during the *hajj* or *umra*. It symbolizes Hajar's search
for water for her son Ishmael.

**Sayyid سيد:** leader, head or chief; also: a descendant of the Prophet
(ص)

**Shafeer شفير:** brink, verge, brim, edge

**Shafee\` شفيع:** intercessor, preemptioner, one who intercedes on
behalf of another. May the Almighty accept the Prophet of Islam (ص) as
our Shafee\` and yours, Allahomma Ameen.

**Shahada شهادة:** martyrdom; it also means testimony, declaration of
faith. A person must recite the *shahada* in Arabic to convert to Islam.
The *shahada* in Islam is: *Ashhadu an La Ilaha illa-Allah wa anna
Muhammadan Rasul Allah*, that is, "I testify that there is no god except
Allah and that Muhammad (ص) is the Messenger of Allah." Other meanings
for this word: certificate, testimonial; **Shahadat Ashum شهادة أسهم أو
حصص**: share certificate or scrip; **شهادة أسهم الحامل**: share-warrant
to bearer; **شهادة أسهم امتياز**: certificate of preferred stock;
**شهادة اكتتاب (بأسهم)**: stock certificate; **أمان (سفينه)** **شهادة**:
certificate of safety (of a ship/vessel); **شهادة ايداع** : certificate
of deposit; **تأسيس** **شهادة :** certificate of incorporation; **تسجيل
سفينه** **شهادة** : certificate of registry; **تفريغ** **شهادة**:
unloading certificate; **سوابق** **شهادة** : certificate of police
record (criminal record)

**Shaheed or Shahid شهيد:** a martyr, someone who dies in the way of
Allah

**Shahr شهر:** month

**Shi’a or Shi’i or Shiite** **شيعي:** a follower of the Islamic faith
according to the teachings of the Prophet’s immediate family, the Ahl
al-Bayt (ع). The largest Shiite sect is the Ithna-Asheri one which is
detailed for you above.

**Shaikh or Sheikh شيخ:** The word “shaikh” is a title of an elderly
person or a religious leader. This title is also given to a wise person,
and it means, in this case, a mentor.

**Shaitan or Shaitan شيطان:** Shaitan (Satan) is the source of evil in
the world. The plural name is Shayatin, devils or demons. His other name
is Iblis or Eblis which means "one who has lost everything". The origin
of this word is “shiyaat **شياط**”, burning, and from it the term “burnt
with rage **استشاط غضبا**” is derived. Rage surely burns! Among what it
burns is homes: When a husband is angry with his wife, he goes ahead and
divorces her, but rest assured that his divorce in this case is not
legitimate at all. Read books of *fiqh* and learn the conditions for
one’s divorce to be acceptable in Islam.

**Shakk شك:** doubt, uncertainty, suspicion. In the Holy Qur'an, 49:12,
we are told to avoid being too suspicious because sometimes
suspicion/doubt can be a sin.

**Shari\` شارع:** street, road, thoroughfare; **Musharri\` مشرع**
legislator, lawmaker; **Shar\` شرع** law, doctrine, canon; **Shir\`a
شرعه** law, precept, concept**; Musharri\` مشرع** legislator, lawmaker,
jurist**; Shari\`a شريعه** Islamic legislative system**; Shar\`i شرعي**
legitimate, lawful, legal, rightful, related to the Shari\`a

**Shari’a** **شريعة**: path, method, way, manner, style, way of life,
program; Islamic Shari’a is the legislative system in Islam which is
derived from two sources: the Holy Qur’an and the Sunna of the Prophet
of Islam (ص). This Sunna, which includes both actions and statements, is
reported, narrated, detailed, chronicled and documented by two major
groups of followers of Islam: 1) the Sahaba of the Prophet (ص), and 2)
the immediate family members of the Prophet (ص) who are referred to the
Holy Qur’an as **أهل البيت** Ahl al-Bayt, people of the house of the
Prophet; see Qur’an, 33:33:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ عَنكُمُ الرِّجْسَ أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ
وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Allah only wishes to remove all abomination from you, you members of
the (Prophet’s) Family, and to make you pure and spotless***.

Followers of the first group like to be called “Sunnis” whereas
followers of the other group are referred to as “Shi’ites”, “Shi’is”,
“Shiites” or “Shi’as”. Unfortunately, some Sunni fanatics, instigated
and paid by some politicians for one reason or another, have applied
many derogatory names to the followers of Ahl al-Bayt (ع), the Shiites,
such as “Rafidis” or “Rafidhis” **رافضة** which means rejectors, perhaps
a reference to their rejection of the ascension to power of the first
three “righteous caliphs” who saw with their own eyes and heard with
their own ears how the Prophet (ص), as ordered by the Almighty, chose
Ali (ع) to be his successor rather than this man or that. Anyhow, what
is passed is past, and Islam is like one tree stem having two main
branches each of which has sub-branches, too.

Throughout history, some Muslims, for reasons of their own which may
include serious research in Islamic literature and history, have shifted
their following from one group to another and this will always take
place as is the case with all other religions of the world. An example
of such “conversion” from one Islamic sect to another took place in the
author’s populous tribe, the Jibouris **عشيرة الجبور**.

The author’s ancestors, because of an incident that took place about 130
years ago in north-western Baghdad, specifically the holy city of
al-Kadhimiyya where two Imams, direct descendants of the Prophet (ص),
are buried in a magnificent mausoleum visited daily by thousands of the
faithful from all over the world, changed their sect from Sunni to
Shiite. For this reason, his ancestors were subjected to untold
persecution, discrimination and suffering which all strengthened their
conviction rather than weakening it.

The Autobiography of the author of this book details this incident, and
it is available for you if you click on this link and search for it:
**<http://www.scribd.com/yasinaljibouri>/**. Now, dear reader, who do
you personally think know the Sunna best: the Prophet’s friends or his
family members?!

May the Almighty keep the Muslim *umma* united and foil the efforts of
those who try to divide it, *Allahomma Aameen* **اللهم آمين**. The root
of this word is "shara'a **شرع**". Some other derivations of it are:
*shar'*, *shir'a* and *tashri'*. Shari'a is the revealed and canonical
laws of the Islamic faith. The Holy Qur'an and the sacred Sunna of the
Prophet (ص) are the sources of the Shari'a, Islam's legislative code;
**Shar\`iyya** **شرعيه** legitimacy, legality. As for the misnomer
“Rafidi”, please refer to its place in this Glossary.

**Sharr شر:** evil, mischief; **Shirreer شرير** evildoer,
mischief-maker, baneful, pernicious

**Shatm** **شتم:** revilement, insulting, calling someone bad names,
cursing

**Shiite or Shi\`i شيعي:** a Muslim following the Sunna of the Prophet
(ص) as reported by the Prophet's immediate family, the Ahl al-Bayt (ع).
The number of Shiites is estimated to range between 25% and 35% of the
entire Muslim population of the world, but little is known about their
beliefs for many reasons. Worse is the fact that their beliefs are often
misrepresented, distorted, falsified and unjustifiably attacked by some
of their ignorant Sunni brethren. This has been going on for centuries.

There are many Shiite sects which include, among others: **الشيعه
الجعفريه الاثنا عشريه** the Twelvers, that is, the Shi\`a Ja\`feri
Ithna-Asheris (the Twelvers, followers of the fiqh of Imam Ja\`fer
as-Sadiq (ع) who constitute the majority of Shiites of the world),
**الزيديه** the Zaidis who follow Zaid son of Ali son of al-Husayn son
of Ali son of Abu Talib (ع) who live mostly in Yemen; **الاسماعيليه**
the Isma\`ilis who mostly live in Turkey, **العلويه** the Alawis or
Alawides who live in Syria, and **البهره أو البحاريون** the Buhris or
Biharis who live in India.

**Shiqaq شقاق:** discord, dissension

**Shirk شرك:** polytheism, the belief in the existence of partners with
Allah. Shirk can also encompass any object that a person may regard as
being higher in status than Allah. It is the most serious of all sins
and can never be forgiven.

**Shubha** **شبهة**: (singular) doubt, suspicion, uncertainty; its
plural is: shubuhaat

**Shura** **شورى**: the principle of mutual consultation, Islam's form
of democracy; refer to verse 38, Chapter 42 (Shura or Consultation) of
the Holy Qur’an**: وَأَمْرُهُمْ شُورَى بَيْنَهُمْ وَمِمَّا رَزَقْنَاهُمْ
يُنفِقُونَ** *Those who listen to their Lord and establish regular
prayers, who (conduct) their affairs by mutual consultation, who spend
out of what sustenance We bestow upon them*… (42:38). Some Muslim
governments set up “shura assemblies” to advise top officials and
resolve main contentions.

**Siddiq or Siddeeq صديق**: one who testifies to the truthfulness of a
prophet

**Sifah سفاح:** cohabitation with a woman without a marriage contract,
unlawful according to Islam and other divine religions, fornication or
adultery.

**Sihr صهر:** relative by marriage, an in-law

**Sin al-Bulugh or al-Boloogh سن البلوغ:** This is the age of maturity
and puberty. It is the age at which a Muslim is considered to be an
adult and, hence, becomes accountable for his/her actions and
responsible for the Islamic duties and obligations. There is no fixed
age for that in terms of years, and it is decided by three signs: having
menstruation or monthly period for girls, and being physically mature,
encountering wet dreams growing pubic hair, or reaching the age of
fifteen, whichever comes first for boys,.

**Sin at-Tamyiz سن التمييز:** This is the age of distinguishing. This
age is used in *fiqh* to decide the age before which the mother has the
right to keep the child after divorce. It varies from one person to
another. The age is reached when the child can take care of himself or
herself and no longer needs an adult to help him take care of
himself/herself. In some Islamic schools of thought, it is seven years
for the boy and nine for the girl. The girl is given longer time so that
she can learn more about women's habits.

**Sinn سن:** literally, it means "tooth" or age such as: **الادراك سن**
: age of discretion (or mature realization, of distinguishing between
right and wrong, lawful and lawful, etc.), **البلوغ (الرشد) سن** age of
(physical) maturity, adolescence, **الحداثه سن** age of minors,
**الحضانه سن** age of nurture, of nursing, **الرشد سن** legal age, full
age, **الرضا سن** age of consent.

**Sira or Seera سيره:** collective writings of the companions of the
Prophet (ص) about him, his personality, his life story, ways of handling
different situations…, etc. is called *sira*. Among famous collectors of
*sira* are: at-Tabari, Ibn Ishaq and Ibn Hisham.

**Sirat صراط**: path, highway; same as *sabeel* (*sabil*). As-*Sirat
Al-Mustaqeem* **الصراط المستقيم** : The Straight Path is the one
mentioned in Surat al-Fatiha and in numerous other verses under
different other names, and it is a plea to the Almighty made by the
faithful: **الْمُسْتَقِيمَ** **إِهدِنَا الصِّرَاطَ** Guide us (O Lord!)
to the Straight Path" (Qur'an, 1:6), thus praying Allah Almighty to keep
their feet firm as they pass on it so it may lead them to happiness in
this life and salvation in the life to come.

All souls in the hereafter without any exception have to pass over it,
and it is described as a bridge, a path, a passage that stretches from
Hell to Paradise; only those who successfully cross it will enter
Paradise, the ultimate goal of all believers where they will stay
forever.

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (ﻉ), as recorded on p. 41, Vol. 1, of Tabatabai's
*Al-Mizan fi Tafsir al-Qur'an* **الميزان في تفسير القرآن**, was asked
once about the meaning of this verse; so he said, "It means: Guide us to
upholding the path that leads to Your pleasure, that ends at Your
Paradise, that prohibits us from following our own desires and thus
deviate, or follow our own views and thus perish."

By the way, Tabatabai's full name is: Muhammad Husayn ibn Sayyid
Muhammad ibn Sayyid Husayn ibn Mirza Ali Asgher Tabrizi Tabatabai, the
judge. He was born in 1892 in Tabriz and died in Qum in 1981. His
21-Volume exegesis, *Al-Mizan*, is only one of his numerous works. The
edition utilized for this book was published in 1991 by Al-A'lami
Foundation of Beirut, Lebanon. Hujjatul-Islam Sayyid Saeed Akhtar Rizvi,
recognized scholar and founder of the Bilal Muslim Mission of Tanzania,
may Allah fill his resting place with *noor* **نور**, spent years of his
blessed life translating some volumes of this valuable exegesis into
English.

In his *Tafsir*, al-Ayyashi quotes Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (ﻉ) as saying
that as-Sirat al-Mustaqeem is the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali
(ﻉ). *As-Sirat al-Mustaqeem* is referred to in verse 61 of Surat Ya-Sin
(Ch. 36), in verse 52 of Surat ash-Shura (Ch. 42), in verse 16 of Surat
al-Ma'ida (Ch. 5), in verses 126 and 161 of Surat al-An'am (Ch. 6), in
verses 70 and 174 of Surat an-Nisaa (Ch. 4), in verse 42 of Surat
al-Hijr (Ch. 15), and in other verses where it is described as the
*Sabeel*, another word for path, leading to the Almighty.

Abdul-Rahman ibn Muhammad al-Hassam quotes Ahmed ibn 'Eisa ibn Abu
Maryam quoting Muhammad ibn Ahmed al-'Arjami quoting Ali ibn Hatim
al-Minqari quoting al-Mufaddal ibn Omer as saying,

"I asked Abu Abdullah (Imam as-Sadiq (ﻉ)) about the Sirat, and he said,
'It is the Path to knowing Allah, the most Exalted, the most Great, and
there are two such paths: one in the life of this world, and one in the
life hereafter. The Sirat in this life is the Imam whose obedience is
incumbent; whoever knows him in this life and follows his guidance will
be able to pass on the (other) Sirat which is a path over hell in the
hereafter, and whoever does not know him in this life, his feet will
slip away from the Sirat in the hereafter, causing him to fall into the
fire of hell."'

This is recorded on pp. 13-14 of *Ma'ani al Akhbar* **معاني الأخبار**
and also on p. 66, Vol. 8, of *Bihar al Anwar* **بحار الأنوار**. It is
when you come to this Sirat, and you most certainly will, that you will
find out how well you performed your prayers, fast and other religious
obligations in the life of this world, how you dealt with your Maker,
family, relatives and other members of the society.

As-Sirat al-Mustaqeem is the straight path over hell, a fire more
intense in heat than boiling molten brass, and it has seven bridges over
it: Each is three thousand years in length: one thousand to vertically
ascend, one thousand to horizontally cross, and one thousand to descend.
It is thinner than a human hair, sharper than the sharpest sword and
darker than the darkest night inside a tunnel. Each bridge has seven
branches, and each branch is like a long lance with sharp teeth: each
servant of Allah will be confined on each and every one of them and be
asked about all the injunctions the Almighty had required him to perform
during his lifetime on this planet. In the first of such stops he will
be asked about belief and conviction, *shirk* **شرك** (polytheism) and
hypocrisy.

In the second he will be asked about prayers, what they entail, how to
perform, and whether he performed them properly and on time. In the
third he will be asked about *zakat*, its types, and whether he paid it
or not. And it is in the fourth that he will be asked about the fast...
It is there and then that he will realize whether he upheld this
important obligation or not, whether he offered charity or not, and
whether he regretted and repented his sins during the month of Ramadan
or not. In the fifth he will be asked about the *hajj*, pilgrimage, and
*'umra*, why he did not perform them, or why he failed to perform them
properly, and how they must be performed. In the sixth he will be asked
about *wudu* (ablution) and *ghusul*, how he performed them, which one
is compulsory and which is optional.

Finally, in the seventh, he will be asked about how kind he was to his
parents and kin, and whether he did injustice to any human being. In the
absence of sufficient optional good deeds such as offering charity,
helping a needy Muslim, performing optional prayers or fasts..., etc.,
if one gives the wrong answer to any question in any of these stops, he
will be prone to fall into the pit of hell underneath..., as
Abdel-Jabbar ar-Rubay'i tells us in his book *Al- Tathkira fi ahwal
almawt wal akhira* **التذكرة في أحوال الموت و الآخرة**, having collected
such details from various books of *hadith* and Sunnah. He adds saying,
on p. 130, that the bridges will be shaken by the weight of crossing
people who will climb on top of each other, causing these bridges to
move like a ship tossed by a wind storm in the midst of the sea.

As-Sirat separates Paradise from hell. With reference to those who will
fall into hell, the Almighty says the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَمْ تَرَ إِلَى الَّذِينَ بَدَّلُواْ نِعْمَةَ اللَّهِ كُفْرًا
وَأَحَلُّواْ قَوْمَهُمْ دَارَ الْبَوَار؟ِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"Have you not considered those who have changed Allah's favor into
blasphemy and caused their*** ***people to fall into the abode of
perdition?" (Holy Qur'an, 14:28)***

where the "abode of perdition" connotes Hell;

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَن يَحْلِلْ عَلَيْهِ غَضَبِي فَقَدْ هَوَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"… upon whomsoever My wrath descends shall fall therein" (Holy Qur'an
20:81)***

where the "fall" here means falling into Hell;

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَنِ اتَّبَعَ هُدَايَ فَلا يَضِلُّ وَلا يَشْقَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"Whoever follows My guidance will not lose his way nor fall into
perdition" (Holy Qur'an, 20:123);***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا يُغْنِي عَنْهُ مَالُهُ إِذَا تَرَدَّى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"… Nor will his wealth benefit him when he falls headlong (into the
pit of fire)" (Holy Qur'an, 92:11).***

So, if one is found as having been derelict in performing any of his
obligations, the angels questioning him will try to find out whether he
somehow made up for it with optional good deeds. Once he is cleared, he
will be escorted into Paradise. It is to such stopping and questioning
that the Almighty refers when He addresses His angels to

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقِفُوهُمْ إِنَّهُم مَّسْئُولُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"Stop them, for they must be questioned" (Holy Qur'an, 37:24).***

On p. 133, Vol. 17, of his book titled *Al-Mizan*, *\`allama* Tabatabai
quotes various views regarding what the questions on this Sirat will be.
He says that some scholars are of the opinion that they will be asked
about the Unity of Allah, while others believe it will be about the
*wilayat* **ولاية** of Imam Ali (ﻉ), but he also concedes that such
stopping and questioning will take place on the Sirat over hell.

On p. 107 of as-Saduq's *A1-Amali* **لأماليا**, and also on pp. 64-65,
Vol. 8, of al-Majlisi's *Biharal Anwar* **بحار الأنوار**, al-Waleed
quotes as-Saffar quoting Ibn 'Eisa quoting Muhammad al-Barqi quoting
al-Qasim ibn Muhammad al-Jawhari quoting Ali ibn Abu Hamza quoting Au
Busayr quoting Abu Abdullah Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (ﻉ) as saying, "People
will pass on different levels on the Sirat, and it is thinner than hair
and sharper than the sword. Some will pass as swiftly as lightning,
while others will pass as fast as a horse, while some of them will crawl
on it, some will walk on it, while some others will pass hanging, so the
fire will consume some of their body parts and leave others."

Imam Abu Ja’far al-Baqir (ﻉ) is quoted on p. 65, Vol. 8, of al-Majlisi's
*Bihar al-Anwar* as saying, "When the verse saying 'And hell is brought
that Day' was revealed, the Messenger of Allah (ﺹ) was asked about what
it meant, so he (ﺹ) said, 'The trusted Spirit (Gabriel) has informed me
that when Allah, the One and only God, resurrects all people and gathers
their early generations and the last, hell will be brought by a hundred
thousand angels, very stern and mighty angels, and it will be coming
roaring, inhaling and exhaling. The force of its exhalation is such that
had Allah not delayed them for the reckoning, it would have caused
everyone to perish.

Then a flame will come out of it and encircle all humans, the good and
the bad, so much so that any servant of Allah, be he an angel or a
prophet, will call out: \`Save me, O Lord, save me,' except you, O
Prophet of Allah, for you will call out: Save my nation, O Lord, save my
nation!"' Muqatil, \`Ataa and Ibn Abbas are among the greatest
traditionists in the history of Islam without any contention. They are
the ones who transmitted the *ahadith* **أحاديث** of the Messenger of
Allah (ﺹ) for all posterity.

All three of them, as stated on p. 67, Vol. 8, of *Bihar al Anwar*, have
interpreted the verse saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا تُوبُوا إِلَى اللَّهِ تَوْبَةً
نَّصُوحًا عَسَى رَبُّكُمْ أَن يُكَفِّرَ عَنكُمْ سَيِّئَاتِكُمْ
وَيُدْخِلَكُمْ جَنَّاتٍ تَجْرِي مِن تَحْتِهَا الأَنْهَارُ يَوْمَ لا
يُخْزِي اللَّهُ النَّبِيَّ وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا مَعَهُ نُورُهُمْ
يَسْعَى بَيْنَ أَيْدِيهِمْ وَبِأَيْمَانِهِمْ يَقُولُونَ رَبَّنَا
أَتْمِمْ لَنَا نُورَنَا وَاغْفِرْ لَنَا إِنَّكَ عَلَى كُلِّ شَيْءٍ
قَدِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"**O you who believe! Turn to Allah with sincere repentance: In the
hope that your Lord will remove your ills and admit you into gardens
beneath which rivers flow, the Day that Allah will not permit the
Prophet and the believers with him to be humiliated. Their light
(noor*** *نُورُهُمْ**) will shine before them and on their right hands,
while they say, 'Lord! Perfect our light for us, and grant us
forgiveness, for You have power over all things”**" (Qur'an, 66:8)*

to mean: "Allah will not torment the Prophet (that Day, the Day of
Judgment)," and the phrase "and those who believed with him" to mean
that He will not torment Ali ibn Abu Talib, Fatima, al-Hassan,
al-Husayn, peace be with them, al-Hamza, and Ja’far, Allah be pleased
with them, that "their light runs before them" means "Their light shall
illuminate the Sirat for Ali and Fatima seventy times more so than light
in the life of this world." Their light will then be before them as they
continue to cross. The intensity of their light will be indicative of
their *iman* **بِأَيْمَانِهِمْ**, conviction.

Others will follow. "Members of the Ahl al-Bayt (ﻉ) of Muhammad (ﺹ) will
pass over the Sirat like swift lightning. Then they will be followed by
those who will pass like a speedy wind. Then there will be those who
will pass as fast as a racing horse. Then another group of people will
pass in a walking pace followed by those who will crawl on their hands
and bellies, and finally by those who will crawl on their bellies (with
extreme difficulty). Allah will make it wide for the believers and very
narrow for the sinners." Then these narrators interpret the verse
saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبَّنَا أَتْمِمْ لَنَا نُورَنَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

"Lord! Complete our light for us" to mean "complete it for us so that we
may be able to pass on the Sirat."

Ibn Shahr Ashub, in his *Manaqib Ali ibn Abi Talib* **مناقب علي بن أبي
طالب**, comments, as quoted by al-Majlisi on the same page, saying,
'"The Commander of the Faithful (ﻉ) will pass in a howdah of green
emeralds accompanied by Fatima on a conveyance of red rubies, and she
will be surrounded by seventy thousand *huris*, as fast as lightning."

On p. 182 of his *Amali*, at-Tusi quotes al-Fahham quoting Muhammad ibn
al-Hashim al-Hashimi quoting Abu Hashim ibn al-Qasim quoting Muhammad
ibn Zakariyya ibn Abdullah quoting Abdullah ibn al-Muthanna quoting
Tumamah ibn Abdullah ibn Anas ibn Malik quoting his father quoting his
grandfather quoting the Prophet (ﺹ) saying, "On the Day of Judgement,
the Sirat will be spread over hell. None can pass over it except one who
carries a permit admitting the *wilaya* (mastership) of Ali ibn Abu
Talib (ﻉ)."

Also with reference to the Sirat, Abu Tharr al-Ghifari, may Allah be
pleased with him, is quoted by both al-Majlisi on p. 67, Vol. 8, of his
book *Bihar al Anwar*, and by al-Kulayni on p. 152, Vol. 2, of his
*Al-Kafi*, as saying, "I have heard the Messenger of Allah (ﺹ) say, 'The
edges of our Sirat on the Day of Judgment will be kindness to the kin
and the returning of the trust. When one who is kind to his kin and
faithful to his trust passes (over the Sirat), he will make his way to
Paradise, but when one who is unfaithful to the trust and severs his
ties with his kin passes, none of his good deeds will avail him, and the
Sirat will hurl him into hell."

There are so many references to *noor* **نور**, divine celestial light,
throughout the Holy Qur'an, in the *hadith*, and in *du'a*,
supplication. It is the light of guidance whereby the Almighty guides
whomsoever He pleases both in the life of this fleeting world and in the
hereafter. Such light will be most sorely needed especially in the life
hereafter. The reader is reminded that the intensity of his light, be it
during the period of the *barzakh* **برزخ**, when most graves will be
almost as dark as hell, during the time when people are judged on the
Day of Judgment, or as one passes over the Sirat..., all depends on the
depth and sincerity of his conviction, on his *iman* **ايمان**.

No good deeds, no matter how great, will avail him as will his sincere
and deep conviction regarding the Unity (**توحيد** *tawhid*) and Justice
( **عدل** *\`Adl*) of the Almighty, the truth which He revealed to His
prophets (**نبوة** *Nubuwwah*), and that we will most certainly be
resurrected and judged (*Ma'ad* **معاد**), so that one will be either
rewarded or punished.

There will be no sun in the life hereafter as we know it, nor will there
be electricity; so, one's own light will be his guiding star. Everything
in the life hereafter will have a light of its own; there will be no
reflection, nor can one walk in the beam of another's light, nor can one
be benevolent and give of his light to another; it is non-transferable!
There will be no giving. The time of giving is right here, in this life,
folks; so, it is now your golden opportunity to give your all to your
Maker, to worship Him and obey Him as He ought to be worshipped and
obeyed—or at least try; pay Him His dues, and be aware of your
responsibilities towards His servants, the believing men and women, and
to all mankind, your extended family, regardless of their creeds, for
they are your brothers and sisters in humanity Give others of what Allah
has given you; pray for your believing brethren; be kind to everyone; do
not hurt the feelings of anyone. Think well of others so that they may
think well of you, too. Observe the fast in months other than the month
of Ramadan in order to remind yourself of the hunger from which others,
especially indigent Muslims, suffer, and give by way of charity;
otherwise, keep everything to yourself, hoard, treasure, and be forever
damned. Hell is characterized by its darkness, yet its residents will
still be able to see things, and whatever they will see will not please
them at all. May Allah Subhanahu wa Ta'ala keep us all away from it and
keep it away from us, *Allahomma Ameen* **اللهم آمين** .

Nobody in the entire lengthy history of Arabia has ever been known to be
more courageous and daring, when confronting his foes on the
battlefield, than Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib (ﻉ) who was the right hand of
the Messenger of Allah (ﺹ). Ali was the man who single-handedly uprooted
the main gate of the fort of Khaybar of Medina's Jews of the time, that
is, in the year 628 A.D., a gate so heavy it required forty men to close
or open. Ali (ﻉ) once was suffering acutely from an inflammation of the
eye, and he was in extreme pain, screaming, the hero that he was. The
Messenger of Allah (ﺹ) visited him and saw him scream, so he asked him
whether he was suffering from an acute pain or whether it was due to his
frustration and agony.

The Imam (ﻉ) said, "How intense my pain is! I have never felt such
pain...," whereupon the Prophet (ﺹ) said to him, "When the angel of
death comes to take away the soul of a disbeliever, he brings with him a
rod of fire whereby he takes his soul away. It is then that hell itself
will scream because of the intensity of his pain and suffering." Having
heard him say so, the Imam (ﻉ) stood up then sat and said, "O Messenger
of Allah! Please repeat what you have just said, for it has made me
forget my own pain."

Then the Imam (ﻉ) asked the Messenger of Allah, "Will the soul of any
member of your nation be taken away as you have described?" The Prophet
(ﺹ) answered, "Yes! The soul of an unjust ruler, or of one who consumes
the wealth of an orphan, or of one who falsely testifies [will be thus
taken away]." The disbeliever referred to in this tradition is one who
is unfair to Allah, Glory to Him and Exaltation, regarding one of the
commandments which He has required him to uphold, one who does not
recognize the Prophethood of Muhammad (ﺹ) and his sacred Sunnah **السنة
النبوية الشريفة** or anything required by Islam; such is the
disbeliever.

You can reduce the agony of your death, or that of your loved one, by
offering charity, fasting, or praying *nafl* (optional) prayers. Among
such prayers is one performed in two *rek'ats* **ركعات**; in each
***rek'a***, you should recite Surat al-Fatiha once and al-Ikhlas
thrice. The intention for that prayer is to pray it seeking nearness to
Allah. Once you complete it, you supplicate to the Almighty thus: "O
Allah! Send blessings to Muhammad and the Progeny of Muhammad and send
the rewards for these two *rek'ats* **ركعات** to so-and-so", naming the
dead person, be he/she one of your parents, or both of them, or anyone
else. How about you send it as a gift to all Muslims, alive and dead?

Imagine how many rewards you will then get, if your imagination can
really grasp it! Never underestimate the extent of kindness and mercy of
the Almighty; they are unlimited, infinite, and His doors of mercy are
always open; how Great He is! If you fast either a few days or all of
the months of Rajab and Sha'ban, according to your ability, the Almighty
will reduce the agony of your death and the pain of loneliness in the
grave. If you are truly concerned about these matters, and you most
definitely should be, the month of Ramadan is your golden opportunity to
earn as many blessings as Allah enables you to. It is an opportunity
that may not recur, for nobody knows when his/her turn comes to die. We
pray the Almighty to enable us to cross over His Sirat with hardship
only in the life of this world, and without any hardship in the life
hereafter, to forgive our sins, and to accept our fast and repentance,
*Allahomma Ameen* **اللهم آمين**.

**Sirwal سروال:** long under garment worn by the Arabs

**Siwak سواك:** a piece of tree branch or root used as a toothbrush,
also called *miswak*

**Siyam صيام (or Sawm):** Islamic fast, abstention from eating,
drinking, smoking, intercourse or just speaking; in my book titled *Fast
of the Month of Ramadan: Philosophy and Ahkam*, you can read about the
40 (forty) types of fast in Islam.

**Subhanahu wa ta'ala سبحانه و تعالى:** This is an expression used by
Muslims use whenever the name of Allah is pronounced or written. It
means: "Praise to Allah above having any partners, the most Exalted One
above having a son". Muslims believe that Allah has neither partners nor
offspring. Sometimes Muslims use or articulate other expressions when
the name of Allah is written or pronounced. Some of these expressions
are: "'Azza Wa Jall", that is, He is the Mighty and the Majestic; "Jalla
Jalaluh", His Greatness is Great.

**Suffa صفه:** a raised platform that was used by the Prophet as a
welcoming point for newcomers or destitute peoplel rows of rooms
accommodating poor and indigent Muslims who had no houses of their own.
They were adjacent to and formed part of the Prophet's *masjid*, mosque,
at the time.

**Sufi** **صوفي:** an ascetic, a mystic; it is derived from suf or soof,
wool, because early Sufis used to wear coarse wool clothes; if we
discuss Sufis and Sufism, we will need to write an entire book!

**Suhoor or Suhur** **سحور**: time or meal taken before daybreak in
preparation for fasting during the day

**Suhuf صحف:** pages, manuscripts, tablets

**Sujud or Sujood سجود:** The root of those word is *sajada*,
prostration to Allah, usually done during one's daily prayers. When in
the position of *sujud*, a Muslim praises Allah Almighty and glorifies
Him.

**Sultan سلطان:** ruler who rules in the name of Islam, a Muslim monarch

**Sunan سنن:** plural of *sunna*, a highly commended act of worship or
way whereby a Muslim seeks nearness to Allah

**Sunna or Sunnah سنة:** In general, the word Sunna means: way of life,
habit, practice, customary procedure, action, norm and tradition
followed by tradition. Usually, the word Sunnah refers to what Prophet
Muhammad (ص) had said and done or approved of when said or done by
someone else. It includes the Prophet's sayings, practices, living
habits, etc. The *hadith* reports on the Sunna. The two major legal
sources of jurisprudence in Islam are the Qur'an and the Sunnah.

**Sunni or Sunnite** **سني:** a follower of the Islamic faith as
reported, narrated and recorded by the Prophet’s *sahaba* **صحابة**,
companions, and *tabi’in* **تابعين**, those who learned from the
*sahaba*, may the Almighty be pleased with the good ones among them.
Shi’ite Muslims differ from their Sunni brothers when it comes to these
sahaba: The Sunnis believe that they all were great, like stars in the
heaven shining on earth, and whoever follows any of them, he is rightly
guided.

Sunnis believe that if a scholar from amongst them acts on his
*ijtihad*, and if his *ijtihad* is sound, he will be rewarded twice. But
if he errs, he will be rewarded only once, something with which the
Shiites totally disagree. Shiites differ: They say that not all of those
*sahaba* were good folks, that many of them were interest seekers who
did not hesitate to sacrifice Islam to achieve their objectives. Shi’is
say that if a *mujtahid* errs, he will have to bear the burden not only
of his own error but that of all those who follow him as well.

The Sunni branch of the Islamic faith is comprised mostly of 4 sects: 1)
Hanafi, after “Abu Haneefah” Nu’man ibn Thabit ibn Zuta ibn Maah ibn
Marzuban, who was born in 80 A.H. and died in 150 A.H. (699 – 767 A.D.);
2) Hanbali, after its founder, namely Ahmed ibn Muhammad ibn Hanbal ibn
Hilal ibn As’ad ibn Idrees ibn Abdullah ibn Hayyan ibn Abdullah ibn
Anas; he was born in 164 A.H. and died in 241 A.H. (781 – 856 A.D.); 3)
Shafi’i after its founder, “Abu Abdullah” Muhammad ibn Idris ibn Abbas
ibn Othman ibn Shafi’i ibn Saa’ib ibn Ubayd ibn Abd Yazeed ibn Hashim
ibn Muttalib ibn Abd Munaf, of a Quraishi Muttalibi Hashimi lineage; he
was born in 150 A.H. and died in 204 A.H. (767 – 820 A.D.); and 4)
Maliki after Malik ibn Anas ibn Malik ibn Abi Aamir, “Abu Abdullah,” who
was born in 95 A.H. (some say 93 A.H.) and died in 179 A.H. (714 – 795
A.D.); may the Almighty shower His blessings on each and every one of
these imams, *Allahomma Aameen* **اللهم آمين**.

**Sura or Soorah سوره:** The Qur'an is composed of 114 chapters or
*suras*. The plural of *sura* is ***suwar*** **سور**, chapters.

**S.W.T.**  
 These letters are acronyms for "Subhanahu wa Ta'ala". When the name of
Almighty Allah is pronounced, a Muslim is expected to show his
veneration to Him. The meaning of this statement is that Allah is too
pure to have partners or sons or any family members or relatives.


