ت، ط، ذ, T
==========

**Ta\`atuf تعاطف:** sympathy, favour, support

**Ta\`ayush تعايش:** coexistence

**Ta\`addi تعدي:** assault, assailing, attack, invasion, trespassing,
encroachment

**Ta\`ahhud تعهد:** pledge, commitment, promise, warrant, warranty

**Ta\`ammuq تعمق:** doing (something such as report, study, research,
survey, book, etc.) in depth rather than superficially, the making of a
profound (study or inquiry)

**Ta\`aqqul تعقل:** prudence, good judgment

**Tabi\`i** **تابعي:** (singular:) one who accompanied for a good period
of time and learned from a *sahabi* **صحابي**, a companion of the Holy
Prophet Muhammad (ص); its plural is: tabi\`in **تابعين**

**Tabthir تبذير:** extravagance, profligacy, dissipation, wastefulness

**Tadamun تضامن:** solidarity, unity, sympathy

**Tadarub تضارب:** conflict, discordance, clash, discord

**Tadarru\` تضرع:** supplication, imploration, earnest plea, prayer

**Tadlis or Tadlees تدليس:** deraud or defrauding, deception

**Tadnis تدنيس:** defilement, desecration, profanation

**Tafadi تفادي:** Avoidance, evasion, escape from, shunning or
eschewing, sidestepping, overlooking

**Tafadul تفاضل:** Making a preference, preferring (something or
someone) over others

**Tafarruq تفرق:** dispersal, scattering, division

**Tafa'ul تفاؤل:** optimism, anticipating the best, auguring well,
taking a bright view of something

**Tafawut تفاوت:** variance, disparity, discrepancy, diversity

**Tafawwuq تفوق:** excellence, superiority

**Tafawud تفاوض:** negotiate, confer

**Tafsir تفسير:** interpretation, explanation, elucidation

**Tahaffudi تحفظي:** precautionary, protective (measure, custody, etc.),
preventive, conservative, moderate

**Tahajjud تهجد:** night devotions. *Mutahajjid* is one who keeps
vigilance, spending the night praying; the *tahajjud* prayer is an
optional prayer that is supposed to be performed in the middle of the
night. It is required that a person sleeps a little before getting up
for the *tahajjud* prayers. It can be performed anytime during the
period between the *isha* (evening) and the *fajr* (pre-dawn) time.

**Tahakkum تهكم:** sarcasm, taunting, deriding with irony

**Tahara طهاره:** purification, the act of removing *najasa*,
uncleanness or impurity

**Tahattuk تهتك:** immorality, debauchery, licentiousness

**Tahayyub تهيب:** feeling afraid or scared of/about, apprehension,
timidity

**Tahkim تحكيم:** arbitration

**Ta'ib تائب:** repentant, penitent, regretful, contrite

**Tajrid تجريد:** divestment, divestiture (of title), despoliation,
deprivation or privation

**Tajweed تجويد:** a saying or an act of reciting the Qur'an in
accordance with the established rules of *Nutq*, pronunciation and
intonations, such as *tafkheem*, velarization, chanting and *Iqlab*,
transposition

**Takbir** **تكبير**: the glorifying of Allah by declaring in an audible
voice: **الله أكبر!** "Allaho Akbar!" Allah is Great! By the way, the
Prophet’s flag was green on which this declaration is written in white
cloth.

**Takfir or Takfeer** **تكفير:** labeling someone as "kafir", apostate,
unbeliever, excommunicating from the creed. People who do that are
called "Takfiris" or Takfeeri". The terms is applied mostly to the most
extremist and fanatical offshoot of the Wahhabi movement **الحركه
الوهابيه**, and the Takfiris (**التكفيريون**) loosely apply this term to
those who do not follow their own line, ideology or version of "Islam".
They have so far killed, through acts of terrorism and sabotage, more
Muslims than non-Muslims although they claim to be the protectors of the
Islamic creed… They are found mostly in Saudi Arabia, the Gulf region,
Afghanistan, India, Pakistan and lately Iraq.

Al-Qaeda is these days one of the most famous and active Takfiri
organizations due to the funding it receives from these Wahhabis and
Takfiris. Their ideology is an interpretation of their own of one "Abu
Taymiyyah", namely Ahmed ibn (son of) Abdul-Halim ibn Abdul-Salam ibn
Abdullah al-Khidr, also known as "Taqiyy ad-Din" and as "Abul-\`Abbas".

He was born in 661 A.H./1263 A.D. in Harran, now an area north of Syria,
and died inside a Damascus, Syria, prison in 728 A.H./1328 A.D. Abu
Taymiyyah had his own personal radical and un-orthodox way of
interpreting *hadith* and was at the time reputed as a scholar who
followed the Hanbali school of Sunni Muslim Law.

Since these interpretations differed from those of anyone else,
including his own contemporaries as well as classic jurists (*faqihs*),
he distinguished himself from all other scholars of jurisprudence. Those
who adopt his views are called "Salafis", people who claim to follow in
the footsteps of the "pious predecessors" (**السلف الصالح**). Abu
Taymiyyah is on the record as beign the first person to disbelieve in
the intercession **شفاعه** on the Judgment Day although numerous
references to intercession exist in the Holy Qur’an such as these (first
number corresponds to the Chaper/Sura and the next to the verse): 2:255,
4:85, 7:53, 21:28, 26:100, 74:48, 6:51. 6:70, 10:3, 32:4, 40:18, 7:53,
30:13, 39:43, 6:94, 10:18, 2:48, 2:123, 2:254, 4:85, 19:87, 20:109,
34:23, 39:44, 43:86, 74:48, 36:23 and 53:26.

If all these Qur’anic verses do not convince Ibn Taymiyyah and his
followers that intercession does exist in this life and will exist in
the life to come, nothing else at all will convince him and them. Since
they do not believe in intercession, most likely they will never see
such intercession; neither the Prophet nor anyone else will intercede on
their behalf on the Judgment Day.

For more details, read an extensive 463-page book titled *Ibn Taymiyyah*
by a great scholar and researcher, namely Sa'ib Abdul-Hamid, but do not
let the Salafis or, worse, the Takfiris, catch you reading it! Here in
Iraq, al-Qaeda terrorists, who are brainwashed by the philosophy of this
man and of Abdul-Wahhab, behead Muslims and say that anyone who severs a
certain number of heads (7 or 70) is guaranteed to go to Paradise, so he
is exempted for the rest of his life from having to pray, fast, perform
the pilgrimage or perform any other Islamic rite…! The Prophet of Islam
(ص) continued to pray till the last day of his holy life; does this mean
that he had no guarantee to go to Paradise?! We seek refuge with Allah
from the evil, mischief and schemes of such twisted minds.

**Takhmin تخمين:** surmising, appraisal, assessment, guesswork

**Takia or Takya** **تكية:** place where Sufis perform their rituals and
practices

**Takmili تكميلي:** complementary, supplemental

**Takwin تكؤين:** formation, formulation

**Talakku' تلكؤ:** procrastination, lingering, taking too long to do
something

**Talaq طلاق:** divorce. Divorce in Islam is one of the most complicated
teachings, and scholars of jurisprudence differ among themselves
regarding its rules and regulations a great deal. According to Grand
Ayatollah Sayyid Ali as-Sistani, divorce is of two main types: 1) رجعي,
***raj'i*****,** revocable; and 2) بائن ba'in, irrevocable.

Other types of divorce are: 1) خلعي ***talaq khal'i***: It is one
initiated by the wife. Yes, Islam permits the wife in certain
circumstances to divorce her husband. It is a self-redemption divorce
initiated by the wife**;** and 2) **طلاق المباراة** ***talaq
al-mubarat***: It is a divorce based on mutual dislike for marriage and
the desire to end it. How many conditions are there for a divorce to be
valid according to Islam?

You are dead wrong if you think that by merely pronouncing the statement
“You are divorced **أنت طالق**” that the divorce becomes valid even if
you repeat it not three but a hundred times.

**Talawwuth تلوث:** pollution, contamination

**Talbiyah تلبية:** uttering of **لبيك!** "*Labbayk!*" which means "Here
I come, at your service!"

**Taleeq** **طليق:** an unconfined (free) man of Mecca who remained a
non-believer in Islam till the conquest of Mecca in 630 A.D.

**Talih طالح:** bad, evil, wicked

**Talqeen تلقين:** addressing/instructing a dead person during the early
stages of his long trip to the Hereafter. It is instructing the deceased
person, who then hears the living but cannot respond to them, about the
basics of his creed.

One who does so is the *mulaqqin* **ملقن**. Make sure you choose your
*mulaqqin* before it is too late. For more details, refer to **منزل**
*Manzil* above in the paragraph dealing with the questioning in the
grave by angels Munkir and Nakeer.

**Tamadi تمادي:** transcending limits, indulgence in excesses, giving
free rein (to)

**Tamaluk تمالك (نفس):** (self) restraining, self-control

**Tamarud تمارض:** feigning sickness, pretense of sickness

**Tamarrud تمرد:** rebellion, mutiny, disobedience

**Tamarrus تمرس:** acquiring mastership, becoming skilled, acquiring
proficiency

**Tamawut تماوت:** feigning death, pretending to be dead

**Tanafur تنافر:** conflict, discord, feeling offended with/by, clash,
disagreement, disharmony, revulsion

**Tanafus تنافس:** competition or competing, being in a contest, rivalry

**Tanasul تناسل:** procreation, propagation, reproduction

**Tanasuq تناسق:** consistency, coordination, uniformity

**Tanjim or Tanjeem** **تنجيم:** astrology, star science, star reading

**Tannoor** **تنور:** open oven, tandor. Another meaning is mentioned in
the Holy Qur'an in two places when the Almighty narrates to us the great
flood of Prophet Noah (ع):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…و فار التنور :
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"… and the fountains of the earth gushed forth…" (Qur'an, 11:40 and
23:27),***

according to one translation of the Holy Qur'an.

You can refer to other translations of the Holy Qur'an for both 11:40
and 23:27 if you wish. Is there any similarity between an "open oven" in
which people bake their bread or meat and "fountains of the earth"?! In
his translation of the Holy Qur'an, S.V. Mir Ahmed Ali uses the word
"oven", too. And surely Allah knows best.

**Taqadum تقادم:** process of becoming old, obsolete or antiquated

**Taqashuf تقشف:** austerity measures, extreme economizing, the leading
of a very simple life

**Tamasuk تماسك:** cohesion, adhesion, conglomeration

**Taqiyya تقيه:** an obligatory measure for one whose life is endangered
to exert precaution in order to save his creed or life when either is in
jeopardy; a way for a Muslim to try to survive in the presence of sure
perils.

**Taqleed or Taqlid** **تقليد:** emulation or emulating, following a
*mujtahid* or an authority recognized as the *a\`lim*, scholar or a most
knowledgeable person in Islamic *fiqh*

**Taqribi تقريبي:** approximate, almost, not equal but close

**Taqwa تقوى:** love and awe that a Muslim feels for Allah. A person
having *taqwa* in his heart desires to please Allah, so he stays away
from doing things which displease or incur the Wrath of Allah. He is
careful not to go beyond the boundariess and limits set by Allah.

**Taraweeh** **تراويح:** prayers performed in congregation by Sunnis
during the nights of the month of Ramadan

**Tareeqa** **طريقة:** a Sufi method of conducting rituals, a Sufi code
of ritualistic religious conduct

**Tarikh or Taareekh** **تأريخ:** history writing, chronicling (of
events)

**Tarteel ترتيل:** chanting the Holy Qur'an and following certain
relevant rules of recitation

**Tarwiyah ترويه:** The Day of Tarwiyah is the 8th of Thul-ijjah when
the pilgrims fill their water bags and prepare to go to Mina.

**Tasahul تساهل:** toleration, tolerance, indulgence

**Tasaluh تصالح:** reconciliation, patching up, mending walls, making
peace

**Tasannu\` تصنع:** pretension, make-belief, simulation

**Tashahhud تشهد:** the testimony regarding Allah being the Lord and
Muammad being His Servant and Messenger; it is the uttering of

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أشهد أن لا اله الا الله و أن محمدا عبده و رسوله
  </p>
</blockquote>

"*Ashhadu an la ilaha illa-Allah, wa anna Muhammad abdoho wa rasooloh*"

**Tashreeq تشريق:** the cutting and sun-drying of sacrificed meat

**Tathir تطهير:** purification, disinfection, purgation or expurgation

**Tawakkul توكل:** reliance or dependence on, trust in

**Tawatur تواتر:** consecutive reporting (of *hadith*, incident, etc.),
succession of narrators or narratives, sequence, succession, repetition,
frequency

**Tawaf طواف:** the circling of (going around) the Ka'bah seven times,
usually during *umra* or *hajj*.

**Tawatur تواتر:** consecutive reporting, the tracing of one particular
*hadith* to its respective chronological chain of narrators

**Tawbikh or Tawbeekh** **توبيخ:** reprimanding, reproofing

**Tawhid or Tawheed توحيد:** confirming or testifying to the Oneness of
Allah. It is the basis of Islam, the concept of the absolute Unity of
God, the belief that God is One and indivisible, One\_\_and Only
One\_\_God.

**Taw\`iya توعيه:** raising consciousness or awareness, awakening

**Tawwabeen توابين:** the penitent ones, reportedly 686 in number, those
who repented their reluctance to go to the rescue of Imam Husayn (ع)
when he was confronted with Yazid's huge armies. These penitents
enlisted under the military command of al-Mukhtar ibn Abu Ubayd
at-Thaqafi (*cir.* 622 – 687 A.D.) and went on hot pursuit of those who
massacred Imam Hussain son of Ali ibn Abù Talib, killing them all.

**Tayammum تيمم:** the method of using clean dust to perform ablution
(*wudu*) in the absence of water or for health-related or other
justifiable reasons

**Tayammun تيمن:** optimism, seeing or expecting realization of a good
omen

**Tayh تيه:** willful misleading, perdition or loss, straying, deluding,
loss of the right path or guidance

**Tazammut تزمت:** Zealotry, fanaticism, excessive conservatism

**Thakireen ذاكرين:** those who quite often mention the Name of the
Almighty and Glorify Him

**Thabat ثبات:** firmness, steadfastness, holding grounds (in battle,
etc.), solidity, stability

**Thana' ثناء:** praise, commendation, compliment

**Thaqib ثاقب:** piercing, penetrating

**Thawab ثواب:** reward of blessing

**Thayyib ثيب:** a widow or divorcee

**Thiqal ثقل:** weight, burden, pressure

**Thiqat** **ثقاة**: plural of thiqah **ثقة**, a trustworthy authority;
this term is often used to testify to the truthfulness of some narrators
of *hadith*.

**Thireed تريد:** pieces of bread cut and dipped in stew

**Tih or Teeh** **تيه (ضياع):** dispersion, diaspora, loss, random
wandering without sense of direction

**Tughyan طغيان:** tyranny, despotism, oppression, escessive or abusive
exercise of power or authority

**Turath تراث:** legacy, heritage, patrimony


