


Conclusion
The effects of the brutal murder of al-Husayn have had a profound
influence on Islam. To all Muslims it is the most distasteful and
abhorrent event in Islamic history. To them and particularly to Shia it
represents, even more than that - the acme of self足-denial and sacrifice
by the family of the Prophet for the Islamic community.

From the accounts, it is clear that the one concession that al-Husayn
was never pre足pared to make was to pledge allegiance to Yazid. Earlier
al-Hasan had warned Mu'awiya that he would never make al-Husayn pledge
allegiance to him. Mu'awiya appears to have heeded this advice and
avoided the confrontation that Yazid had pre足cipitated. The death of
al-Husayn also marks the beginning of a division within the Shi'a. That
group that was later to be known as the Imamis emphasized the spiritual
importance of the Imamate and gave up attempts to win political power.
This policy may well have been laid down by al-Husayn's son 'Ali after
his experiences at Karbala'. However the doctrine of the spiritual
importance of the imamate can already be discerned in 'Abd Allah b.
Ja'far b. Abi Talib's letter to al-Husayn warning him not to go to
al-Kufa:

"If you are destroyed now, the light of the land will be put out. You
are the guiding symbol of the rightly-guided, the hope of the
believers."

'Ali b. Al-Husayn was to follow the quiescent policy of religious
leadership. It may have been him who laid great emphasis in the Shi'i
adhan, or call to prayer, of the words: Hayya ala khayr al-amal, "Come
to the best of works"52 .

Although these words are included in the Zaidi and Isma'ili adhan, it
was the lmami-Shi'is in the later years of the first centuries of Islam,
who were to give these words their true signifi足cance by their
deliberate disavowal of political action.

Thus the martyrdom of al-Husayn has had profound effects on the history
of Islam and particularly the history of the Shi'a.


