


Introduction
Some moral philosophers in the West hold that adult children do not have
any more moral obligation to support their elderly parents than does any
other person in the society, no matter how much sacrifice their parents
made for them in the past or what kinds of misery their parents are
presently suffering. This is so, they claim, because children do not ask
to be brought into this world or to be adopted. Thus, the traditional
filial obligation of supporting and taking care of the aged is left as
either the private responsibility of the elderly themselves or as a
societal burden on the public.(1) For example, Norman Daniels argues
that there is a "basic asymmetry between parental and the filial
obligations" (Daniels, 1988, p.29). The parental obligation of caring
for their young children, says Daniels, is a "self-imposed" duty, while
the so-called children's obligation of caring for their aged parents is
"non-self-imposed" and thus cannot be morally required.(2) In her famous
essay, "What Do Grown Children Owe Their Parents," Jane English also
claims that a favor done without it being requested or a voluntary
sacrifice of one for another can only create "a friendly gesture"
(Sommers & Sommers, 1993, pp. 758-765). It incurs neither an "owing" nor
a moral obligation to reciprocate. Accordingly, "a filial obligation
would only arise," says English, "from whatever love (s)he [the adult
child] may still feel for them [her parents]."(3) The moral obligation
stops whenever the friendship relation ends. Because we cannot always
assume a friendship relation exists between a parent and his/her
children, filial obligation is not a genuine moral obligation at all.

In what follows I shall argue against the Daniels/English thesis in
light of the traditional Eastern Confucian view of the nature of filial
obligation. I shall make a distinction between "moral duty" and "moral
responsibility" and argue that adult children's filial obligation of
taking care of and being respectful to their aged parents should not be
understood as a moral responsibility but as a moral duty, which is, by
its nature, not necessarily self-imposed. That is to say, it is not
consensual, contractarian, and voluntarist but existential, communal,
and historical.


