


I. Consent and Moral Obligation
We may find a basic thesis that underline the Daniels/English rejection
of adult children's moral obligation of taking respectful care for their
aged parents. It claims that filial obligation, if it is to be a moral
obligation, should be based on the voluntary consent of all moral agents
involved.(4) Obviously, the thesis expresses a meta-ethical principle
which underlies not only Daniels/English argument but also some major
accounts of the nature of moral obligation in the modern West. I call it
the "principle of intentional consent." "Consent" is required because a
moral action ought to be approved of by all the persons involved in the
action. It is "intentional" because an agreement or an approval ought to
be reached voluntarily and without any kind of outside coercion or
deceit. Very clearly, this principle gets its power from Kant's concept
of a person as potentially an autonomous, rational, and free agent.(5)
That is to say, intentional consent is simply an exercise of one's
autonomy and rationality. Therefore, as a free, rational, and autonomous
moral agent, I am morally responsible only for the consequences of those
actions which I have committed voluntarily, without any coercion and
deceit. Otherwise I will not see myself behaving as a free and
autonomous being. Living in modern society, it seems that few people can
really deny the importance of the principle of intentional consent and
that of the concept of autonomy in our consideration of the nature of
morality. However, is it the absolute and exclusive grounding of
morality? That is to ask, is there any limitation of that principle in
our moral practice, especially when we consider filial morality in
dealing with the relationship between adult children and their aged
parents?

Let me try to answer the question by looking at the following example.
When Fred, a strong man and a good swimmer,(6) went by a swimming pool
on his way home, he found a three year old child Sheila was drowning in
a swimming pool with another young child John crying nearby. Does Fred
have any moral obligation to jump into the pool to save Sheila? Most of
us, I believe, would say "yes" according to our common moral sense. But
what interests us in this example is not whether Fred ought to save
Sheila but why Fred ought to try to save her. Obviously, Fred neither
made a promise nor gave consent to a request from Sheila's parents or
Sheila herself to save Sheila when she is in danger. However, not giving
consent does not sufficiently exempt Fred from his moral obligation to
save Sheila in such a situation. To me, what makes Fred morally
obligated in this case is the existential or factical "being" of Fred,
Sheila, and John rather than Fred's intentional consent that is crucial
in Fred's moral obligation to try to save Sheila.(7) Similar examples in
our contemporary social and moral life can also be found in the cases
such as the moral obligation of the present generation of human beings
to protect the ecological environment and to preserve some of the
natural resources for future generations, a citizen's obligation to
defend her home country, a patient's obligation not to have physical
contact with healthy persons if she knows that she has an infectious
disease, etc. All of these demonstrate that at least some of our
commonly and ordinarily accepted and practiced moral obligations can be
justified without being preconditioned by the mutual consent of the
moral agents

involved in the action. That is to say, they are, pace Daniels,
"asymmetrical" rather than "symmetrical."

In order to make the point clearer, I would like to call an attention to
the nature of our understanding of "ought" or "moral obligation." When
we say "A ought (not) to do X," or "A is obligated (not) to do X," it
seems to me that we often have a confusion between two types of
"ought/obligation."(8) One type of "ought/obligation" is caused solely
by the intentional consent of competent moral agents involved in the
action, and I call this moral*responsibility* .(9) That is to say, a
competent moral agent should be morally responsible for the consequences
caused by her consensual action. Compared with moral
responsibility,*moral duty* is another type of "ought/obligation." It
does not necessarily depend on the competent moral agent's intentional
consent. It is rather determined mainly by what kind of existential
situation a moral agent is in and what kind of social role she plays.
For example, a normal and healthy person is obligated to yield to a
handicapped person because the latter is handicapped. Similarly, a
hostess is obligated to show her hospitality to her guests while a
stranger is not.

Someone may argue that although many of our moral obligations are
determined by different existential situations and social roles we play,
we do often consent to be in those situations and to play those social
roles in the first place. My response to this argument is, first, we do
not always choose our existential situations or social roles. Many times
we are thrown into a situation and many social roles are imposed on us
without our previous consent. Second, although many times a moral agent
does theoretically have an option to play or not to play a specific
social role, such an option may not always be practical and therefore
not real. Third, consenting to do something and being obligated to do
something are not always the same. Therefore, in many cases, I consent
to do something because I ought to do it, rather than it being the case
that I ought to do it because I have consented to do it.

Thus understood, moral responsibility and moral duty are two types of
moral obligation. They are different and the distinction between them
should not be confused. The difference, as I have argued above, consists
in that the former is caused exclusively by the intentional consent of
the moral agent while the latter is not. However, they are not
completely irrelevant to each other. Moral responsibility may be seen as
a special type of moral duty. That is to say, moral responsibility is a
particular moral duty of a moral agent when she behaves as an autonomous
being or when she practices her autonomy in her consensual actions.
However, a human being as a moral agent is not only an individual
autonomous being. A person is also a social and communal being, which
imposes on her duties for caring for others as well as for her
surrounding ecological environment, and a rational being, which makes
her obligated to calculate the consequential implications of her
consensual action before she consents to it. Furthermore she is also a
historical and cultural being, a concrete and situational being, etc.
All of these essential features of a human being have created or
revealed different types of moral duties that human beings as moral
agents have. Therefore, an appropriate moral evaluation or moral
judgement of a person's action should

be based on or determined by weighing these moral duties of the person
in her existential situation against one another.

In light of the distinction between the two kinds of moral obligation,
i.e., moral responsibility and moral duty, it becomes clear that the
filial obligation of adult children to take care of their aged parents
belongs to the category of moral duty, which, by its nature, is
existential rather than consensual. It is so because the family, which
defines the adult children's filial obligation to their aged parents, is
basically a natural community rather than a social contractarian
community. As long as the natural family is still one of the basic forms
of our social and communal life, the parental and filial obligations
between parents and children will exist. Therefore, being a son or a
daughter of one's parents, one is obligated or has a duty to respect
them as parents and to take care of them if they necessary, no matter
whether one chose to be the son or the daughter of one's parents.


