


III. Conclusion: Xiao as a Virtue for Today
As we know, the family was a basic social, economic and cultural unit of
the society in China. It played a fundamental role in regulating and
stabilizing Chinese social and political life in the past, and it
continues to play an important role today. Family is ideally the first
school of virtue, and parents are often the first teachers of their
children. The values we learn from our family life, according to
Confucians, will also make possible a good society. That is to say, we
first learn how to deal with other people in society from watching our
parents deal with each other, with our grandparents, and with us.(16)
Therefore, it is very hard to imagine that a person who is devoid of
caring, or unwilling to care for, her own family members can be a good
citizen who will care for other people in the society. This is why in
the Confucian tradition*"xiao"* (filial piety) was understood as the
"root" of humanity and morality.(17)

It should be noted here that*"xiao"* was often used to justify and
support the totalitarian and oppressive structure of the traditional
patrilinear family and society. It is no doubt a fact that xiao played a
very conservative political role in the past. However, when scholars
point out that there was a historical connection between the kinship of
the patrilinear family and the kingship of the totalitarian state (e.g.,
Schwartz, 1985, pp. 67-75, Roetz , 1993), they often neglect the fact
that the care/love relation within a family is more natural and more
primordial, and that the care/love relation between parents and children
may not necessarily include patrilinear power and oppression. In today's
society, for example, old age is not always associated with totalitarian
political power. In many cases, especially in the case of health care
for the elderly, old people are often disadvantaged and powerless.
Considering this fact, a Confucian would argue that advocating xiao as
taking respectful care of parents and adopting it as a moral duty of
adult children will not only increase the happiness and security of our
aged parents in their later years, but will also make members in our
society care more for each other, especially for those who are
disadvantaged.

Taking care of the aged generation has always been a social problem for
civilized societies. The question is therefore not whether the elderly
should be taken care of, but who should take care of them? There are few
doubts that one has a moral duty to take care of oneself. But if a
person has lost the ability to take care of herself, either due to old
age, or to disease associated with old age, who, if anyone, has a moral
obligation to take care of her? If Daniels and English are right in
saying that adult children do not have any more of a moral obligation to
take care of their aged parents than any stranger on the street, or that
such an obligation only has a voluntary basis, then most likely either
the burden of care would be on the whole society or the elderly who are
disadvantaged would suffer. If letting the elderly suffer is immoral,
then placing the burden of caring for the elderly on the whole society
(through the government) would seem to be the only option.

However, there are at least two further questions here. First, should
the society have that burden? Second, can the society or the government
really provide adequate care for the elderly? If I, as a son, do not
have a moral duty to take care of my parents, why should I, as a
stranger, have a moral

duty to take care of anyone else' parents? Is the moral duty of helping
a stranger based on my voluntary free will or on my existential status
as a human being? If my existential status as a fellow human being
imposes on me such a moral duty, why not my existential status as the
son of my parents? On the other hand, the warning signals continually
coming from the government-run Medicare system, as well as the Social
Security system in the Unite States indicate that the society may not be
able to bear the burden anymore without threatening the bankruptcy of
the whole government. From a Confucian point of view, at least part of
the problem is caused by the trend of deterioration of the family or
individualization of the society in our modern life. The family, as a
natural institution, should play a mediating role between individuals
and society. That is to say, Confucians will deny neither the
existential moral duty of the elderly to care for themselves, nor that
of members in the society to care for the elderly. What a Confucian
wants to suggest is the addition of the familial duty fulfilled by the
adult children. All three kinds of moral duties, i.e., the individual,
the social, and the familial, need to work together in order to strive
towards the Confucian social ideal of*"da tong"* (the Great Harmony)
where

[t]he elders having a happy ending, the youths having enough
businesses to do, the young children having been well nurtured, and all
the old men without wives, old women without husbands, old people
without children, young children without parents having been taken good
care of.(18)


