


Notes
(1) For example, Norman Daniels told us that "In 1983 we spent $217
billion or $7,700 per elderly person" (Daniels, 1988, p.5).

(2) In his"Obedience and Illusion," Michael Slote expresses a similar
idea. According to Slote, it is "difficult to believe that one has a
duty to show gratitude for benefits one has not requested" in O'Neill &
Ruddick (1979), p.[^320]:

(3) See Jane English,"What Do Grown Children Owe Their Parents?" in
Sommers and Sommers (1993), p.[^763]:

(4) For example, Daniels says:"Children did not ask to be brought into
existence" (Daniels, p.29), and calls the traditional filial relation
"not self-imposed." Because of that, "we remain without compelling
foundations for filial obligations, ..." (Daniels, p.34). English,
though criticizing the traditional understanding of the nature of filial
relation as being "reciprocal," defines filial relation as a relation of
friendship. According to her, a filial relation without a friendship,
which assumes mutual consent, does not endow any moral obligation. In
English's words, "The relationship between children and their parents
should be one of friendship characterized by mutuality rather than one
of reciprocal favors" (Sommers and Sommers, p.762), and "After a
friendship ends, the duties of friendship end" (Sommers and Sommers,
p.761).

(5) This idea can be traced back to Aristotle. According to Aristotle, a
moral praise or blame should be based on whether an individual moral
agent behaves "voluntarily or "involuntarily." "Being voluntary,"
Aristotle held, means that (1) an individual is internally motivated
rather than externally compelled to act; (2) the action may not be not a
result of ignorance or deceit. See Aristotle, 1110a5 - 1114b[^15]:

(6) Ironically, a similar example of a good swimmer can be also found in
Daniels. However, Daniels calls it "supererogatory" rather than
"obligatory" (Daniels, p.33).

(7) The words "existential" and "factical" should be distinguished from
those of "intentional" and "factual." I use them in Heidegger's sense,
which is based on his theory of Dasein as
"being-in-the-world-with-others." As for Heidegger's concepts of
"existence" and "facticity," see Heidegger, (1962), pp.78-86;
235-[^241]:

(8) In hisA Theory of Justice , John Rawls makes a careful distinction
between "obligation" and "natural duty." According to Rawls, both
"obligations" and "natural duties" are moral requirements. Their main
distinction consists in the following three aspects: (1) obligations
"arise as a result of our voluntary acts" while natural duties "apply to
us without regard to our voluntary acts"; (2) "the content of
obligations is always defined by an institution or practice the rules of
which specify what it is that one is required to do" while natural
duties "have no necessary connection with institutions or social
practices; their content is not, in general, defined by the rules of
these arrangements"; (3) "obligations are normally owed to definite
individuals, namely, those who are cooperating together to maintain the
arrangement in question" while natural duties "hold between persons
irrespective of their institutional relationships; they obtain between
all as equal moral persons" (Rawls, p.113; p.115). On the one hand, I
agree with Rawls in saying that one moral requirement arises from
voluntary acts while the other does not, although I don't want to use
the word "obligation" exclusively for those moral requirements based on
voluntary acts. In many cases, as we know, "obligation" and "duty" mean
the same in our ordinary use of English. For example, we see this in
sentences such as "Citizens have an obligation to observe the laws of
their country;" or "Mentally gifted people are under an obligation to
develop their capacities." Therefore, I use "moral responsibility" for
those moral requirements cause by voluntary acts, "moral duty" for those
which are not connected with the voluntary acts, and "moral obligation"
for both. On the other hand, I don't agree with Rawls when he says that
the content of duties has "no necessary connection with institutions or
social practice." Maybe he thinks that all social institutions, by their
nature, have a voluntary or contractarian grounds. But we know that not
all institutions or social practices, e.g., the family, are based on
contractarian grounding. They are naturalistic social institutions.
Because of that, at least some of our moral duties arise from the status
we have or roles we play in a naturalistic social institution. It should
also be noticed that Norman Daniels, following Rawls, mentions the
distinction between the "natural duties" and the "moral obligations"
(Daniels, p.29). However, it seems to me that

he then quickly claims without a justification that a parental duty to
children and an adult child's duty to parents belong to the category of
"moral obligation," or in my term, "moral responsibility," rather than
to that of "moral duty."

(9) In hisPunishment and Responsibility , H.L.A. Hart distinguishes four
senses of responsibility, which are (1) Role-Responsibility; (2)
Causal-Responsibility; (3) Liability-Responsibility; and (4)
Capacity-Responsibility. However, Hart's discussion of the moral sense
of all the four types of responsibility and his distinction between
legal responsibility and moral responsibility in his discussion indicate
that the intentional and voluntary consent of individuals should be the
sole moral basis of all the four types of responsibility. See Hart,
(1968), pp.210-[^230]:

(10) As for English translations of the Analects, see Lau, D.C. (1979)
or Waley, A. (1989).

(11) The Chinese Marriage Law, Section 3, Article [^15]: I use the
translation of Li Chenyang.

(12) See Dong Zhong Shu,Chun Qiu Fan Lu , 8/8b; I use Hall and Ames'
translation here. See Hall and Ames (1987), p.[^92]:

(13) My understanding of the dialectical interplay between "yi" and
"yi\*" benefits from Hall and Ames' insightful interpretation. This
interplay, according to Hall and Ames, can be seen in that "whereas yi
denotes appropriateness to one's own person, yi\* refers to
appropriateness to one's context. Yi is the active and contributory
integrating of self with circumstances, where the self originates unique
activity and construes itself on its own term in a naval and creative
way. The character yi, on the other hand, denotes the yielding or giving
up of oneself and 'appropriating' meaning from the context or
circumstances" (See Hall & Ames, 1987, p.98 and pp.348-349, no.51).

(14) For example, Mencius said,"The felling of shame and dislike is the
beginning of righteousness" (Mencius , 3A:5).

(15) Here it is nothing to do with "owing" or "paying debts," as we
found in Jane English (Sommers and Sommers, 1993). According to
Confucians, life should be seen as a flux. My parents may be seen as my
life in the past and my children my life in the future. Just like it
would be ridiculous to say that my hands, in providing food to my
stomach, are "paying debts" to the latter because it helped to keep the
hands alive, it is misleading to talk about "owing debts" between
parents and children. Therefore, the difference between English and a
Confucian on filial obligation does not consist in the "owing/non-owing"
relation, but in that the former understands the filial obligation as a
causal relation while the latter understands it as an existential
relation.

(16) There is an ancient Chinese story which is very popular among
Chinese. Once upon a time, there was a family of a grandfather, a
father, and a son. The father did not take a good care of the Grandpa.
When the Grandpa died, the father was so stingy that he took the
Grandpa's dead body out with a broken basket. When the young boy saw it,
he told his father:" Dad, please don't forget to bring the basket back.
It is still useful." The stingy father was very happy to hear what his
little son said. Then he asked his son what he would use it for. His son
answered:"I will re-use it when you die."

(17) For example, we can read in the Analects 1:2 that "Few of those who
are filial sons and respectful brothers will show disrespect to
superiors, and there has never been a man who is not disrespectful to
superiors and yet creates disorder. A superior man is devoted to the
fundamentals (the root). When the root is firmly established, the dao
will grow. Filial piety and brotherly respect are the root of
humanity(ren) .

(18)Da Tong /Li Yun; also see Mencius , 1B:5


