Part 15
=======

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لا يَسْخَرْ قَومٌ مِنْ قَوْمٍ عَسَى
أَنْ يَكُونُوا خَيْرًا مِنْهُمْ، وَلا نِسَاءٌ مِنْ نِسَاءٍ عَسَى أَنْ
يَكُنَّ خَيْرًا مِنْهُنَّ، وَلا تَلْمِزُوا أَنفُسَكُمْ، وَلا
تَنَابَزُوا بِالأَلْقَابِ، بِئْسَ الاِسْمُ الْفُسُوقُ بَعْدَ
الإِيمَانِ، وَمَنْ لَمْ يَتُبْ فَأُوْلَئِكَ هُمْ الظَّالِمُونَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who believe! Let not (one) people laugh at (another) people
perchance they may be better than they, nor let women (laugh) at (other)
women, perchance they may*** ***be better than they; and do not find
fault with your own people nor call one another by nicknames; evil is a
bad name after faith, and whoever does not turn, these it is that are
the unjust. (49:11)”***

Thabit recalls a Muslim’s mother in bad light
---------------------------------------------

It is written in commentaries of Holy Qur’an about the circumstances in
which the above verse was revealed. According to a narration, a
companion of Prophet, Thabit bin Qais was an attendant of the
congregation and he was hard of hearing. Therefore he always sat near
the Prophet, so that he could hear him properly.

One morning he arrived late for prayers and the Prophet was offering the
second unit of the Morning Prayer. So he joined the congregation and
standing in the last row, completed his second unit alone. The Prophet
used to give admonitions after prayer, reciting Qur’anic verses. Thabit
tried for the place where he used to sit daily (near the Holy Prophet).
In his effort he pushed some people aside. No one told him anything
thinking that being somewhat deaf he was trying to sit near the Holy
Prophet. So they gave him room to move forward. There remained only one
gentleman, who, if he moved slightly, Thabit could get his usual place.

But that man did not oblige and told Thabit, “Sit where you are.” Thabit
helplessly sat there. As the Holy Prophet was speaking, Thabit looked at
the person who did not utter a word until the former stopped his sermon.
Then Thabit looked at the person who did not allow him space and asked,
“Who are you?” The person replied, “I am son of so and so.” He took the
name of his father, as he knew that his mother had a bad name in society
before the advent of Islam. Thabit said, “But you are son of such and
such woman, who was notorious for her bad deeds.” This poor Muslim
became very sad and felt ashamed in front of the Holy Prophet and all
the Muslims. Thabit did an unwise thing referring to his mother. He did
give way; even then, he must not have been mocked and insulted and
Thabit should not have said that he was son of such and such woman.

So, these were the circumstances in which this verse under our study was
revealed.

Who is addressed?
-----------------

God has issued a general command for all time to come till Judgment Day:
First He addressed the believers. The first part of the verse and the
earlier order, which later on refers to suspicion (having bad opinion).
He addresses the believers that they must act upon this order and
fulfill their responsibility. As regards the one who is disbeliever, who
has no faith in Allah and the Hereafter, it is said that do not make a
mockery of anyone on account of his disbelief. Though he has no faith,
all are servants of Only One God. All are made of dust. There is no
cause for mockery. He has no faith to understand these words. He does
not accept what is said about Judgment Day, Hereafter, ranks and reward.
But how do you know that you are better than him? These very words are
mocking for him. There is no benefit in such words. So this address must
be made to you. O those who say: There is no god except Allah, Muhammad
is the messenger of Allah.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَأَنَّ السَّاعَةَ آتِيَةٌ لا رَيْبَ فِيهَا﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Most surely, the hour is coming, there is no doubt therein,”***[^1]

Do you believe in Judgment Day? Have you accepted belief in reward and
punishment? Then:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿لا يَسْخَرْ قَومٌ مِنْ قَوْمٍ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…let not (one) people laugh at (another) people…”***

A group may not mock another, men must not mock men, and women should
not mock women. Of course, there is no inconsistency in this. It is also
unlawful if, for once, a man mocks a woman and vice versa. This verse
mentions men by way of generality. Mostly men mock men, but the command
is general. It makes no difference. In short, a Muslim has no right to
mock a Muslim. Also: Do not find faults in one another nor use bad words
for one another, do not give bad titles to one another. Do not, for
example, say: You are the son of such and such mother. Do you intend to
disgrace a Muslim? You have no right to do so. You cannot perturb
another Muslim.

Akrama, son of Abu Jahl, better than Muslims
--------------------------------------------

Here is the example of Akrama bin Abu Jahl. This gentleman was a pious
and a pure Muslim. Yet some unwise people sometimes used to taunt him
saying that this is the son of Abu Jahl. A Muslim’s honor is his Islam
to which one has turned sincerely. Even if his father was what he was.
Abu Jahl, a pagan, a disbeliever, wretched, vicious, Hell dweller etc.,
but what is important is the condition of Akrama himself. Look at his
honor and respect, his Islam: Do not give him ugly titles.

Thereafter, He gives a logical reason also. Logical, because it is
against human wisdom to mock someone or to give a bad name to somebody.
When someone belittles or humiliates a Muslim, what is the meaning of
such humiliation? To pull down another and to think high of oneself.
When somebody insults and belittles another person does it mean anything
else but that the former imagines himself higher and the latter, lower.
He disgraces another man.

Maybe the mocked one is better than you
---------------------------------------

Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لا يَسْخَرْ قَومٌ مِنْ قَوْمٍ عَسَى
أَنْ يَكُونُوا خَيْرًا مِنْهُمْ، وَلا نِسَاءٌ مِنْ نِسَاءٍ عَسَى أَنْ
يَكُنَّ خَيْرًا مِنْهُنَّ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who believe! Let not (one) people laugh at (another) people
perchance they may be better than they, nor let women (laugh) at (other)
women, perchance they may be better than they… (49:11)”***

O ignorant one! On what criterion did you measure yourself higher and
pulled down another one? Is it due to the apparent reason that, for
example, you have wealth and he does not have; your dress is new and his
old, you are handsome and he is ugly? If so, then this is not a
criterion to measure good and evil. Real good and bad must be measured
by one’s distance from God. In God’s sight, rich and poor, handsome and
ugly are alike. The ignorant one who looks at only the outer things is
not wise. They do not know what is behind the apparent dress and
appearance.

The Messenger of God is reported to have said that several chairless
persons who sit on ground and a number of persons who do not have new
and shining dress are honorable in the sight of God. If they seek
anything from God, God grants it to them; that is, their prayers are
accepted. What do you know? Do not look at others with contempt as it is
possible that some of them are really good servants of God.  
 One may appear of no value apparently, but it is quite possible that
from within God likes him or her. Apparent deeds also are no criterion.
You are looking at only outward things and deeds and imagine that you
are pious, clean and righteous. You consider yourself a religious
scholar and look down at others, as they do not have knowledge; that he
is not careful enough and so you look at him hatefully. If he says
something, you retort: Go and obtain knowledge. Do you know what all
this is?

O Servant of God! The one whom you looked with contempt may be better
than what you imagined. You may have apparent righteousness. You perform
ablution but how is it that you do not keep yourself away from
impermissible things! O pious gentleman! You, in your own opinion are
knowledgeable and he, ignorant of religious affairs. But he avoids the
illegal things more than you! Now, who is more honorable, you or he? You
dip your hands in water ten times for cleaning and he does only once,
but when unlawful income comes, you fall on it like a cat falling on a
rat. But he never indulges in impermissible things. Now, who is better,
you or he?

According to some narrations, if a man lies once, its foul smell rise
upto high heavens and angels curse the liar. Such a man puts on nice
clothes and applies scent and perfume. But he also has utterly foul
smell, the smell of sins and miserliness. His forehead does have a mark
of prostration but of what use is that piety when he also is a miser. He
indeed belongs to hell even if he makes innumerable ablutions. Another
man who makes ablution by dipping his hands in water only once is
certainly better than this fellow if he is not a miser.

If one considers himself better than others, one is certainly an
ignorant man. It is possible that he avoids impurities, which you do not
avoid. You do not avoid impurities, the bad smell of which is much more
than common impurities. You may think that the other person is careless
and hence belongs to hell. But from inside, that person may have much
more love for Ahle Bait whereby he gets Paradise earlier than you. But
you, the unlucky one, you have much attraction for wealth. Your love for
money such, that finally it drives you to hell. How does one know that
the other person has a warm heart, he has a kind heart, he is just and
equitable? Only God knows how many persons he helped during his life?
How one knows what kind of a man he will be at the end of his life?

Forgiven for giving water to a dog
----------------------------------

It is mentioned[^2] that a woman of ill fame once reached a pit of water
during her journey. She saw that a thirsty dog came to the water, which
was deep (beyond its reach) and turned back and again came and turned
back. Its tongue was hanging, as it was very thirsty in the hot
atmosphere of the sandy land. This woman of loose character however
became restless on seeing the poor and helpless condition of the thirsty
dog and thought of doing something to help this creature of God. She
observed that there was some water in the pit but it was very far down.
What to do? From where to get a rope to fetch the water? She cut off her
hair to make a sort of cup, tied it with her hands, fetched some water
in this way and put it before the thirsty dog. She did not move away
till the dog was gratified.

The most merciful God pardoned that lady for this kind act towards one
of His creatures. As her character was loose, you imagined she belonged
to hell. Perhaps, the one whom you imagine as belonging to hell may
become aware and repent. It is also possible, that God forbid, you and I
become proud and move away from the path of God’s service. How do we
know? His Hereafter may be good and our bad! No one knows this.

There are many instances of such change. If I want, I may relate many
examples. Let me tell you only a story from the book *Hayatul Haiwan* by
Damiri. In how much danger man is.

Christian youths become rightly guided through Qur’an
-----------------------------------------------------

There were two persons formerly Christians but later on they became
Muslim. They lived in a city called Taleetah, perhaps in Morocco. I
asked them the cause of their conversion. I asked them how you, former
Christians, are now in deep search of Islamic truths. They replied: A
few years ago, we were imprisoned in a jail. An Iraqi Muslim was also
with us in our cell. Everyday he used to read Qur’an. As we did not know
Arabic language, by and by we learned some words from that gentleman and
began to understand a little from what he recited. One day he recited
the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَاسْأَلُوا اللَّهَ مِنْ فَضْلِهِ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and ask Allah of His grace…***[^3]

Then he also recited the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ادْعُونِي أَسْتَجِبْ لَكُمْ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Call upon Me, I will answer you…”***[^4]  
 And he said that it was God’s Word. God also says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَإِذَا سَأَلَكَ عِبَادِي عَنِّي فَإِنِّي قَرِيبٌ أُجِيبُ دَعْوَةَ
الدَّاعِي إِذَا دَعَانِ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when My servants ask you concerning Me, then surely I am very
near; I answer the prayer of the suppliant when he calls on Me…”***[^5]

If you want anything, say: O Allah, yourself. You don’t have to come to
the Mosque. He does not order to come and to give hand in the hand of a
scholar, but He says: “Anyone from My servants who wants Me, I am near
him.” God is not far. He even does not want you to complain. He only
asks to seek from Him whatever you want. You can even remember Him from
your heart. He knows what is there in your heart. He says it is better
if you recite supplication, as it is more effective.

When I heard these two or three verses of the Holy Qur’an, I told my
companion, “See what the Prophet of Islam says; being Christians, we do
not have such belief. The Christian faith has ceremonies, protocols, and
formalities. They say that man cannot approach God unless he comes to
the priests and the priests seek forgiveness for his sins. So the
helpless person is compelled to come to the church priests, who is the
representative of their religion and makes a confession of his sin and
gives him money of getting pardoned (whereas this priest himself has no
approach to God).”

They also have lengthy machinery for this purpose in all Christian
cities. One of the companions said, “Once I had gone to a Church in
Paris to observe things. It is a very big church.” He said the segments
of pardoning were worth seeing. First were people who had sinned. They
sat with humility in that section of the church having a pen and paper
in their hands. They wrote about the sin committed by them and took that
piece of paper to another section from where they got instructions about
the amount of money to be paid for the forgiveness of his sin. Then he
pays the amount and gets a receipt for it and then proceeds to the last
place where he is informed that his sin has been pardoned!

Those two Christian gentlemen said that when they heard the above two or
three verses of Qur’an wherein Almighty God conveys through His Prophet,
that God is very near; that He needs no mediation; that He is not far;
that ask for whatever you want from God, Who answers your request, we
became very much astonished. Does Muhammad really tell the truth? Can
everybody reach God? We were wondering about this matter in jail when we
became very thirsty. There was no water and our thirst was very hard.
There was no one to come to our help. We wished to die rather than
remain in that condition. Then I recalled this verse and said: O God! If
this verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَاسْأَلُوا اللَّهَ مِنْ فَضْلِهِ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and ask Allah of His grace…”***[^6]

Is Your Word, and if Muhammad has told the truth:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ادْعُونِي أَسْتَجِبْ لَكُمْ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Call upon Me, I will answer you…”***[^7]

Then O Almighty! Help us as we are dying of severe thirst. Suddenly,
before our eyes, from the wall in front of us, water began to flow. We
drank it and quenched our thirst with full gratification. Then and
there, we decided to become Muslims. So, after our release from jail, we
embraced Islam and put total faith in the Holy Qur’an.

Guidance for some and misguidance for others
--------------------------------------------

The so-called Muslim who used to recite the Holy Qur’an and who had
taught some Arabic grammar, saw that these two Christians, who were
thirsty got water from an unexpected place in the wall. So he put the
Qur’an aside and thought that the Christian faith was true; that truth
was with Christianity and hence this miracle. The unwise fellow could
not realize that it was due to the Qur’an. He thought that, as they were
Christians, their prayer was answered. He fell down in front of them
saying: I want to embrace your religion. They asked, “Why?”

The man replied, “I saw, with my own eyes that water flew for you from
this wall. So it seems your religion is true.” They (the two former
Christians) replied, “We were helpless and we clung to the Holy verse of
Qur’an.” That fellow said, “I do not accept your word. Do you want
deprive me and to prevent me from becoming a Christian?” In short, that
fellow converted to Christianity and put the Holy Qur’an aside. It was
all because of a faulty imagination and an imaginary illusion.

End of a learned Haji
---------------------

These two gentlemen again said: O God! By the truthfulness of Qur’an and
by the honor of Muhammad guide us on the true path. That night, in a
dream they were told: Go to Syria and contact scholars of Islam.
Subsequently they became very nice people. In one moment two Christians
become true Muslims but a Muslim becomes a disbeliever. Man is unaware
of his end.

Fortunate is one who looks at his end. (Persian saying)  
 One of my friends once told me: I myself have seen a man who used to
stand in the first row in Mosque for prayer, in those hard days, he had
also performed Hajj. He also had religious knowledge and used to answer
relevant problems to people. The same Haji gentleman, after some years
was seen engaged in house construction work. I was also there. Laborers
and masons were busy doing building work in a corner of his garden. Then
we saw the Haji was passing water standing facing Qibla. See what is
this? I could not restrain myself from asking. I asked him, “O Haji!
What are you doing?” He replied, “O sir! We actually did not understand.
For several years we prayed in mosque and went to Hajj where Arabs
usurped our money.” In short, he spoke up his disbelief himself. This
man was once praying in the first row. He had performed Hajj. No one
knows what and how his end will be. How he can lose Faith!

Pray, so that we die in a good condition
----------------------------------------

I have repeatedly heard that whenever students and scholar used to visit
the late great scholar Mirza Hujjatul Islam Shirazi and also to visit
graves, the said gentleman was recommending and requesting everyone:
Please pray so that Allah may make my end a good end. How do you know
what is going to happen the next moment, or after two days or after two
years? In your own view you are a very good person and you look at
others with contempt. You are not afraid that maybe in a slip your heart
becomes stony and dark. Then you may, by and by, stop attending the
mosque and give up supplications and the recitations of Qur’an etc.

We should always seek God’s refuge against a bad end. O the one who
mocks others! How do you know, he may be better than you. You may not
recognize him. How do you know, he may be a friend of God. Woe unto the
one who mocks a friend of God. None except God knows a friend of God.
There also is no criterion to know who is nearer to God? No one knows.
Only God does.

Three things hidden in three things
-----------------------------------

Allah has kept three things hidden in three things: First, he has kept
his friends hidden from the eyes of the creation so that no one may not
mock others and look at them with contempt for fear of the possibility
of the other being God’s friend. For the preservation of one’s honor He
has kept His friend hidden from the eyes of people. Second, God has
concealed His anger in sins. There are some sins, which draw God’s
anger. It is mentioned in *al-Kafi.* There comes a voice: O one who
committed this sin! Now you will not be forgiven. The late Majlisi says
explaining this tradition: It means that after committing this sin you
will not able to repent. It is not that one repents but is not forgiven.
What is meant is that, that person is not inclined to repent. Now what
is that sin? Neither the Imam tells it nor anyone else knows it. It is
kept hidden. Just know only that among sins there are some which, if one
commits them it is certain that one will have a bad end and that his
Hereafter is destroyed. God’s mercy is not to reach him.

But what sin is that? I do not know. Nor the Imam has pointed it out.
Why? So that people may fear all sins and may not go near any sin
fearing that it could be the sin which attracts God’s wrath and anger
and then man may not be able to find a way to salvation.

Thirdly, among worships also there are some worship acts, which if
performed, will give one salvation for sure. What is that act of God’s
obedience? It is also not clearly mentioned. We do not know anything.
Nor should we know, as it is a hidden matter.

In short, a friend of God (Wali of Allah) is hidden. Nobody is able to
find him out. Why? So that man may look at everyone and imagine that
perhaps he is a friend of God. Of course, one has no right to imagine
that one (he himself) is the friend of God. God forbid, we may be
friends of Satan instead! But we must imagine about others that God
might like them and they might love God; that they might be obeying God
in the right way. So they are better.

O Women! You have no right to look with contempt at other women. You
should not mock other women. How do you know? It is quite likely that
some of them, who have sinned, may get guidance to repent. They might be
having good deeds in their scroll of deeds, which draw Allah’s mercy.
How do we know her actual condition? You see that a lady has no veil
that she moves in streets and markets without her head wear. Do prevent
her, but never mock her. Never consider yourself higher than her. It is
possible that her condition may change with God’s guidance and she may
become righteous after repenting and may become much better than a
number of old women who are ashamed of showing their gray hair.

On the other hand, it is likely that this lady who is not wearing
Islamic modest dress (Hijab) may make amends after repentance and
conceal her breast, head, legs and feet of God’s sake and may become
more honorable in the sight of God than that aged woman who mocked
others. The old lady may rank behind the young woman in the most supreme
court of Almighty Allah.

Those whose grief will be more
------------------------------

There are three groups of people whose grief in the grand gathering
field (Mahshar), tomorrow on the Judgment Day will be more than that of
the entire gathering. Firstly, those scholars and orators who advise
people to do good and refrain from evil, but who do not act according to
what they say. You can see that such and such Haji lady admonished
another woman to wear veil or Hijab. That lady did accept her advice and
acted accordingly, wearing a veil. But the adviser lady proved so
unlucky that she did not conceal herself from a stranger male. Tomorrow,
on the Judgment Day, she burns in fire, but the lady who accepted her
advice is in a high bliss. Most fear some burning is for the scholars
whose sermons made many people benefit and provided salvation to them
but they (the admonishers) went to hell, as they did not act themselves
in the way desired by God Almighty.

Secondly, in a more severe grief is a rich man who, till he was in this
world, did not pay dues from his wealth but only kept it in front of his
eyes and finally all of it went to his heirs. Then the latter spent it
as liked by God and helped the needy. Tomorrow, on Judgment Day, the
former will look at his heirs and see that they are in Paradise. But
with the help of whose wealth? With the riches of their unfortunate
father! The father burns in hell. He is most grievous and terribly
unhappy.

The unwise man only bore the burden and the wise benefited fully.
(Persian saying)  
 He fanned fire for himself with this wealth. How fortunate was his heir
who acted wisely and got full benefit from his wealth.

The third group: The master and his servant, the lady and her mistress,
the employer and his employee. O Master and servants, you ladies and
your maidservants, employers and employees, workers, students! Know
that, tomorrow in the Hereafter, the lower cadre will be in Paradise and
the higher ups in hell. The master who looked with contempt in this
world at his servant will see that the servant is on a high rank and he
himself is in the lowest pits. How much he himself burns! How much
sorrowful and in grief! So these are the three kinds of groups you are
told about. Their grief is terrible. So never look down at your servant,
peon, worker or slave.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿عَسَى أَنْ يَكُونُوا خَيْرًا مِنْهُمْ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Perchance they may be better. (49:11)”***

The lowly became high
---------------------

I shall relate another narration. Waram, teacher of Sayyid bin Tawus
has, in his compilation *Majmae Waram* written that a Messenger of God,
in olden days asked God to show him His friend and, as per another
quotation, he asked Almighty Allah to inform him as to who will be his
(the Prophet’s) companion in the Hereafter. A revelation reached the
Prophet indicating that such and such shoemaker would be his companion
in the other life; that he was God’s friend. This messenger went to the
person indicated in the revelation, sat by his shop to observe what
special virtues he had which made him a friend of God. Then he talked
with him and asked some questions only to find that neither he has much
knowledge nor any intelligence.

Also, he was not a great worshipper either. In short, he could not find
any extraordinary virtue in him. At last, the Prophet asked, “My friend!
I want to know what virtue is there in you?” The man replied, “Sir, I do
not possess anything. I have no knowledge and no specialty in my deed. I
am what you see.” The Prophet again asked, “No, it cannot be so. You
must be having something very extraordinary in your character. Please
tell me truly.” Finally that man replied, “I have neither any knowledge
nor perfection. My condition is that whenever I meet anyone, I imagine
that he has much higher rank in the sight of God.” The Prophet replied,
“This is the virtue which made you high-ranking in the Hereafter.”

Such is the humility, lowliness, and courtesy for God. Man considers
himself low, weak and servile in front of Almighty Allah. Since he
considers God as the greatest, he imagines himself to be nothing. Then,
seeing anyone, he says, “Perhaps he is better than me; that he may have
a standing in the sight of God.” One who is a friend of God considers
himself worthless.

Once, angel Jibraeel came to Prophet Ibrahim and gave him good tidings
that he was a friend of God. Ibrahim expressed wonder saying, “Me and
God’s friend?” The angel replied, “Yes, you are God’s friend.” Ibrahim
asked again, “I do not have any special deed at my credit. How is it
that God made me His friend?” The angel said, “O Ibrahim! You have two
virtues, which God likes very much and hence He made you His friend
(Khalil). (These two virtues make one lovable). First, you do not ask
anything from anyone except God. You seek help only from Him. You never
put your need before His creation. Secondly, you never turned away any
beggar from your door. You never turned away a needy person empty-handed
from your door.”

O Lord! It is now known that You do not like the one who turns away the
needy empty handed. We also have extended our begging hands before You.
Please do not deprive us.  
 Imam Zainul Abideen, in Dua Abu Hamzah, which you recite in these holy
nights, prays: O Lord! You have ordered us not to turn away a needy from
our door. Now, we are the needy beggars who have come to Your Door of
Mercy. Your Honor will certainly not make us return empty handed. Our
need is that kindly, do not leave any of our sins unforgiven by Your
Mercy.

[^1]: Surah Momin 40:59

[^2]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 4

[^3]: Surah Nisa 4:32

[^4]: Surah Momin 40:60

[^5]: Surah Baqarah 2:186

[^6]: Surah Nisa 4:32

[^7]: Surah Momin 40:60


