Part 17
=======

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اجْتَنِبُوا كَثِيرًا مِنْ الظَّنِّ،
إِنَّ بَعْضَ الظَّنِّ إِثْمٌ، وَلا تَجَسَّسُوا، وَلا يَغْتَبْ
بَعْضُكُمْ بَعْضًا، أَيُحِبُّ أَحَدُكُمْ أَنْ يَأْكُلَ لَحْمَ أَخِيهِ
مَيْتًا؟ فَكَرِهْتُمُوهُ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who believe! Avoid most of suspicion, for surely suspicion in
some cases is a sin, and do not spy nor let some of you backbite others.
Does one of you like to eat the flesh of his dead brother? But you abhor
it… (49:12)”***

Satan’s regret for misguiding a believer
----------------------------------------

The Holy Qur’an, the Command of the Lord of the Worlds, is great in the
eyes of every monotheist believer. It is the ordinance issued by the
King of Kings. It is the duty of every man to understand this Command,
to study it, interpret it properly and to act according to what is
mentioned in it. Take care that it is obeyed correctly, lest it be
otherwise. Allah orders: It is your duty to refrain from many
conjectures. Why? Because, according to one explanation, some
conjectures are sins. So never indulge in them. Since this command is
addressed to all of us, it is our duty to know the meaning of suspicion
(Soo-e-Zann) and to fully understand what it involves. Though we had
spoken about these two three verses yesterday, I feel enough was not
discussed about this important matter. So, today I will speak at length
about the meaning of suspicion or bad opinion and then divide it into
two: One, bad opinion about the Creator and, two: Thinking badly about
the creation.

Conjecture, between certainty and doubt
---------------------------------------

Conjecture stands between certainty and doubt, a state of hesitation. It
is in the midst of total certainty and total refusal or rejection. In
Arabic, it is called ‘Zann’ and in Persian ‘Gumaan’. For example, you
see a person at a distance and you cannot make out whether he is a man
or a woman. In these days it so happens a number of times you look at
these youths but do not understand whether they are male or female, boys
or girls! Woe unto these men of today. What calamity has come to
mankind? It is prohibited for men to look like (make up oneself like)
women and for women to appear like men.

Woe unto the society that has gone down so much. So this doubt is called
uncertainty. You have a doubt about one’s being a male or a female. When
that fellow comes near, you observe that he wears long hair, a gold ring
on the finger and also there is a necklace round the neck. You give
preference to the opinion that it is a girl, but you are not quite sure
because there also is a possibility that it’s a male.

However from outward appearance you are inclined to think that it is a
female. This is called conjecture. It means, after seeing that this
person has outward signs of a girl, you imagine that it is a girl. But
you also have some doubt. Perhaps, these days, there also has come about
a change whereby boys make up their appearance like girls. It could also
be a eunuch who makes up like females. You have an opposite opinion but
you feel more that the person is a female.

Thereafter, the person comes very near to you and sits by your side. You
talk with that person and ask, “May I know your good name?” The reply is
Miss Zahrmaaryaan. When you hear this you become sure that she is a
female. You come out of doubt and suspicion and become sure that she is
a girl.

This was a simple example of ‘opinion’ (Zann), that is, to give
preference to one side of doubt. But the meaning of Husn-e-Zann (good
opinion) and Soo-e-Zann (bad opinion) is what whenever a man looks at
someone’s deeds, the looking has two sides; one is the good aspect and
the other bad. If you think nicely about it, it is called Husn-e-Zann.
If you form a bad conjecture, it is Soo-e-Zann. For example: A man
approaches you from a distance and speaks a word, which was not clear.
You could not follow what he said. There are two doubts: Either he
abused you or praised you. This is good and bad (imagination). If you
think that he praised you, as there was no reason (he did not have any
ailment) for him to abuse me, then this is called Husn-e-Zann (good
opinion). But if you say that since we were not at good terms in the
past, he must have abused me. You imagined that he abused you. This is
called Soo-e-Zann (having a bad opinion).

Another example: Suppose a man came out of a den of vice. Here also are
two possible doubts. One is that he went there to obstruct corruption
and to give advice to concerned people. Likewise there also is a
possibility to imagine that he went there to take part in evil deeds. If
you say: By the permission of Allah, he might have gone there to make
reforms, then it is called Husn-e-Zann. But if you give preference to
the doubt that he might have gone there to participate in bad deeds, it
is Soo-e-Zann.

The prohibited Soo-e-Zann is of two kinds. First, having bad opinion
about the deeds of God. If you, God forbid, think that a deed of God is
not good then it is Soo-e-Zann towards the Lord of the Worlds. To think
that the world (what happens in the world, as allowed by God), that is,
the affair of God has no regularity or wisdom, then this is like
imagining that God’s deeds are, May God forgive, aimless or meaningless!

Unwise worshipper and his deeds of less value
---------------------------------------------

Once two angels saw a worshipper the weight of whose worship was less,
that is, though he was worshipping much, its value was less. They came
to try him and said, “O Worshipper gentleman! How are you? How is the
condition of things here?” He replied, “Everything is all right but
there is one thing amiss. God makes so much grass to grow here. I wish
God had a donkey so that all this grass would not be wasted.” The two
angels looked at one another and went up to heaven. It became known that
the worshipper had no intelligence as he had a bad opinion about the
management of the universe.

He must have a good opinion about the working of this world. He should
never object to it. He must consider himself too low to raise any
objection concerning the best management of the universe. If he feels
anything worth criticism, it is due to a fault in his own way of looking
at things. He must realize that he is too insignificant to interfere in
the secrets of the management of the world and in the world of
existence. He should understand that whatever he is able to understand
is also because of the Grace of God. He had made this wonderful universe
in such excellent manner that if all the wisest people of the world come
together to make the world better, they would never be able to do so.

Not a blade of grass grows without any wisdom behind it. No vein in a
living creature is aimless. Look at this human body having so many parts
and organs. The sum total of its major parts number more than a thousand
and the number of its secondary parts exceed millions. Ever since the
first day in which man started to study human body till today, when he
gained a lot of knowledge in any age, no scholar or physical scientist
has ever said that any part of the body is extra, that it has no use or
benefit.

The surplus intestine or a danger signal!
-----------------------------------------

In ancient medical science it was called “Qulinj” and now they call it
“Appendicitis.” Sometimes it causes stomachache. It is a small intestine
having a length of about three finger joints. It is also a blind gut,
that it does not allow food to pass through and rejects it. Sometimes it
retains it and then it gives much pain. They say there is no way out
except to have it operated upon. Formerly they called it a surplus
intestine (of no use). But now, when medical science has advanced, they
have succeeded in understanding the wisdom behind the construction of
the human body by Omniscient Allah.

They have now changed its name saying it is not correct to call it
surplus intestine. It is not surplus, but is an important part of the
intestine. What is it? They have now named it Appendix. If this part
were not there it would not be possible to know the problem in
intestines. It is possible that the patient may die if this danger
remains undetected. To make the default known this part (appendix)
produces pus, gives pain and warns the patient to go to a doctor who
cuts of this part and the patient gets relief. So, do not say that it is
surplus. Finally they all are convinced that it is necessarily an import
part, which should be there.

Everything is very well in its place
------------------------------------

So if all the intelligent persons of the entire world come together to
think about the construction of human body, they will never be in a
position to say that it would have been better had it been in a somewhat
different form. In this construction, everything is good and in proper
place. It is the same in the huge body of the whole universe made by
Almighty and All-knowing God.  
 Look at anything. Everything is proper and well in its place. In the
world of outer space above our heads, millions of huge spheres are
circling and moving continuously in this unending outer space. Two of
them never collide. What would happen if two of them collide with this
planet of ours, the world, with the tremendous speed of 24 kms per
second!

The spacious atmosphere of the outer world, protects life
---------------------------------------------------------

According to one of the modern discoveries of science, nearly twenty
million celestial rock pieces break away from planets and come
continuously rushing towards our earth at a tremendous speed of a
hundred thousand kms per hour. If they collide with our earth at this
speed what will happen to this world? No atom bomb can equal the power
of these rushing rocks. If this imagined collision occurs, say for an
hour, will any house remain standing on our earth? Will any man or
animal remain alive? All and everything will be destroyed. The planet
earth itself will be disintegrated totally. What an organization of the
Almighty!

The Lord of the Universe is the Omniscient Manager and Director of this
universe, this atmosphere and outer space. The atmosphere, which God has
created around our huge globe of earth, has a wonderful effect on the
life on our planet of earth. One of its effects is the adjustment of the
heat of the sun. The radiation of sun, which gathers in this part of the
atmosphere, does not come directly to the planet of earth. If it reaches
the earth directly and if it is not taken care of in the space and if it
is not adjusted properly do you know what would happen to our earth? All
rivers would overflow. The temperature of the earth would reach a
hundred degrees above zero. Even blood in your body would boil up. Milk
in the breast of mothers would boil. After such heat there will remain
no drop of water on the earth and all and everything would vaporize.

Moreover, if the said sector of the atmosphere were not to be there,
what would happen at night? The temperature would drop down to 160
degrees below zero. Everything and everybody would freeze. If days were
to be so hot and nights so cold, will any life be possible on earth?

So the said strata of the atmosphere around our earth is made by the
Almighty to take absorb sun’s heat and adjust the temperature in such a
way that neither nights become so cold nor days so hot. Moreover, the
intense heat in space dilutes and dissolves the rocks raining from the
sky.

I intend to draw attention towards the organization of the affairs of
the universe. Now let us proceed. To how many things will man pay
attention?

Death, a great bounty of God
----------------------------

Take for example the subject of death. It is one of the divine bounties
having several wisdoms. Generally man does not like it. Man dislikes
death. But, for instance, suppose that death is kept away from all of us
for a hundred years from now. You will see in what condition men would
be. What would the aged men and women, being badly disabled, do? Their
children and grand children will not find any time beyond attending to
the old people’s needs, their maintenance, their food, their clothing,
their cleanliness and their residences. How then will the younger ones
earn their livelihood and when will they take rest? Consequently, they
too will become like the aged ones and fall in bed. Life would be upset
totally. At that time, all the young and the old will pray to God: O
Lord! Kindly do what You consider appropriate. Though we dislike death,
we are pleased with what You arrange, in the death destined by You.

Having bad opinion about God’s decree and decision, finding faults with
the wise administration of the universe is unlawful. Whatever God has
done or ordered is proper and good. Rest assured that whatever you have
understood is a sample for what you could not comprehend. You may dwell
deeply in it or not, rest assured that God is the All-knowing Creator.
He is Wise. “Does the One Who created, not know?” He knows all the
aspects of good and bad. You have not the slightest right to raise any
objection.

Remove the spectacles of ill-view
---------------------------------

Here is an example to make this matter more comprehensible. Suppose one
has a new pair of shoes. Very nice shoes but too tight fitting. He wears
these shoes and walks around on a nice asphalted road, viewing green
trees and beautiful flowers all around. Air is nice and there is not
much heat. After a while, the pressure on his feet gives him pain. His
feet get hurt. Then he begins to scream; what a bad road is this. It has
made me ill. It has blistered my feet. It has wounded me. I am unable to
walk any more.

Now he should be told: Take off these troubling shoes so that you may be
able to enjoy the beauty of a free walk on this comfortable road. The
road is not bad. It is very nice and convenient for so many people. The
fault is within you.

O the one who looks at the deeds of God but with a lot of ignorance and
foolishness! Until and unless you pull off from your feet the narrow
tight shoes, you will never be able to enjoy the comfort of walking on a
good road nor will you ever be able to understand and appreciate the
wisdom behind what God Omniscient has done in this universe. One of His
wise decrees is death. It makes life possible for mankind. Here is
another example showing the wisdom behind death.

Death, a preliminary to reception by God
----------------------------------------

If the powerful King invites some people to come to a city full of
beautiful gardens and palaces of highest quality where a number of
preparations are made for the entertainment of the invitees. But for
time being, he has also fixed a place or compound where the invitees may
wait till they are called in as many wonderful and delightful things are
under preparation inside.

Now is it not very ridiculous if the waiting people, sitting in the
outer compound begin to contend with one another on trifling matters.
You ate in a nicer vessel. You sat on a nicer chair etc. The fact is
that it is matter of a day or two. It is not worthwhile to fight over
such things during that period.

Death is the end of lifespan in this temporary world. It prepares man to
receive the Grand Entertainment readied by Almighty God for man in the
other lasting world. Till that time, you are in this cage or confinement
for a while. Here you are unable to appreciate and imagine the great
bounties readied by God for you in the everlasting life after death in
Paradise. This world of matter cannot provide those great bounties of
heavens.

This matter is very much worthy of attention. A number of guests, as
mentioned in the example, in this compound are not prepared to enter the
grand hall of Divine entertainment having wonderful gardens, rivers and
palaces. They say: We are better off here. We do not like to move from
here. Why? Because, they are not aware of the place, which is better and
higher than what they can imagine.

But those who have became “believers in the unseen”, the eye of their
understanding is open. They have put trust in what God and His Messenger
have said. They have put faith in the Divine Word that no one is in a
position to comprehend fully the conditions in the world after death.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿فَلا تَعْلَمُ نَفْسٌ مَا أُخْفِيَ لَهُمْ مِنْ قُرَّةِ أَعْيُنٍ
جَزَاءً بِمَا كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So, no soul knows what is hidden for them of that which will refresh
the eyes; a reward for what they did.”***[^1]  
 It is also not possible till they are in this world. Now, is the death,
which we do not like, bad? Does it not have wisdom behind it? It is the
door for entering the delights and joys.

You have unduly imagined that this (world) is the place for rest and
comfort. It is temporary. You are kept here purposely so that, by
performing good deeds, you become entitled to the most comfortable
permanent house, which is being prepared for you in Paradise. When that
palace is ready, you will be told: Welcome. Even if you say: I do not
want to come, they will carry you and finally you will have to go. This
is not a place to live forever.  
 Even if man is like the greatest goblet, the stone of death will break
it into pieces like a little begging cup.

Death is a decoration for man
-----------------------------

It is Husain who says: Just as a necklace is a decoration for a young
girl, so is death a necessary ornament for every human being.[^2] When
the body of a deceased person is being washed, according to narrations,
he is asked: Would you like to return to the world with this body? The
dead one replies: Well! I have just been delivered and liberated.[^3]

Today it is enough in the matter of bad opinion about God and its
prohibition. Tomorrow, God willing, we shall talk about the prohibition
of having a bad opinion about the creation. Know that it is the duty of
a Faithful believer to obey the Commands of God. One must have a good
opinion about God and what God decrees and administers, about the
universe created by God. Woe unto the one who thinks adversely about
God’s creation, about whatever God has created or decreed. He forms an
adverse opinion about God’s deeds.

Woe unto such a blind fellow. Woe unto you if you see injustice,
oppression or unfairness in what God does – May He forgive us if we ever
thought so. This is a very dangerous thinking. It is incumbent on you to
know that whatever God has done, it is full of wisdom. A young man dies.
How do we know? It is possible that if he had lived longer, calamities
could have fallen on him whereby he might have left this world in a
state of disbelief and thus he would have been totally destroyed. So it
was better for this youth to pass away from here at this age. Are you
more merciful and kind than God! The One Who created him knows more and
He is certainly more full of love for him than you are and He knows best
what is in everybody’s interest.

Ali is happy and pleased with death
-----------------------------------

Man must know that death is not a monstrosity wherein he may see
injustice and oppression. If you want to become a man of religious
recognition (having knowledge of God and His deeds), if you are a Shia
of Ali, then you should know what Amirul Momineen has said, “By God! My
liking for death is more than a baby’s liking for its mother’s breast.”
You see, when a child becomes restless, when it is uneasy, mother’s
breast is put at its mouth and it gets instant relief. So Ali says,
“Whenever I became restless and uneasy I remember my death and thereby I
get relief and comfort. I get peace. I remember my original place of
residence.”

Help the legatee of Muhammad or give death
------------------------------------------

Tonight is the 19th night of the holy month of Ramadhan. Shaykh Waram,
teacher of Sayyid Ibn Tawus, writes in his book *Tanwirul Khawatir* and
quotes this tradition. It is from a companion of Prophet, Ismail bin
Abdullah who says: After the assassination of Uthman and resulting chaos
and confusion among Muslims, I took to a corner to protect myself from
this turmoil. I took to the bank of river Euphrates and refrained from
having any contact with people. I was there during the 19th night of the
holy month of Ramadhan. It was dark but I could see a man praying to God
near the water. I could hear two or three words of his prayer, which
moved my heart. He was praying: O My Lord! You are the Creator of the
skies and the earth. You have sent Your Messenger Muhammad. I beseech
You for the sake of Muhammad. Please help the legatee of Muhammad or
take his life.

Then he returned from the riverfront. I followed him and requested him
on oath to show me the truth. He said: If you want to see the truth,
look behind. Look at the legatee of Muhammad. Submit your religious
affair before him. (Perhaps this gentleman was Khizr). I came back to
Kufa and when I reached the city gates it was still dark and no one was
visible. After a while, I saw a man coming out of the city. He offered
four units prayer. Then I heard him praying: O My Lord! After the
departure of Your Messenger, I acted according to the tradition of Your
Messenger among these people, but these people are annoyed with me. They
no more like Ali. What to do?

They dislike what Ali does. Truth is not with them. They are fed up with
me and I am fed up with them. (These people are passion worshippers,
world-lovers. What have they to do with Ali who is spirit from head to
foot? He is total truth. They do not like Ali’s actions. His cousin, the
Messenger of God, likes his deeds). Then he prayed: O My Lord! My
cousin, the Messenger of Allah, has promised me and said: O Ali!
Whenever you become restless and uneasy, pray for death and God will
grant it. My Lord! Now, I have become quite restless and uneasy. I need
nothing but the viciousness of Ibn Muljim. I want to reach my aim. I
want to be killed in Your Path.

This was in earnest. There is a narration that whenever Ali returned
from a battlefield he looked sorrowful. On enquiring about the reason,
he replied, “I had gone with a hope to be martyred in God’s Way, but I
have returned alive. I am afraid I will not have my wish fulfilled.
Since being killed on the path of Allah is a very great fortune, Ali
always desired it earnestly until the Prophet gave him glad tidings that
finally his beard would be colored by the blood of his head and that he
would certainly be killed in Allah’s path.

In brief, Ismail narrates: I saw that my master (Ali) concluded his
prayer and went back to the town. I also followed him, to ascertain who
was this gentleman and for what was all this weeping and desire for
death. I followed him and saw that he entered the house of Amirul
Momineen. I now understood that he was Ali bin Abi Talib. Then I went to
the mosque to stay there till next morning, to meet him personally. Then
came the call for prayer. Ali engaged himself in prayer. Within a short
time, they cried, “They killed Ali.”

[^1]: Surah Sajdah 32:17

[^2]: Nafasul Mahmoom

[^3]: Biharul Anwar


