Part 18
=======

Having a bad opinion about God is disbelief and polytheism
----------------------------------------------------------

Having an adverse opinion about God and His creation amounts to
disbelief. The Holy Qur’an has mentioned at several places that
unbelievers and polytheists have a bad opinion about God.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿… الظَّانِّينَ بِاللَّهِ ظَنَّ السَّوْءِ، عَلَيْهِمْ دَائِرَةُ
السَّوْءِ، وَغَضِبَ اللَّهُ عَلَيْهِمْ وَلَعَنَهُمْ وَأَعَدَّ لَهُمْ
جَهَنَّمَ، وَسَاءَتْ مَصِيرًا.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The entertainers of evil thoughts about Allah. On them is the evil
turn, and Allah is wroth with them and has cursed them and prepared hell
for them, and evil is the*** ***resort.”***[^1]

They think that this universe is aimless and in vain.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿أَفَحَسِبْتُمْ أَنَّمَا خَلَقْنَاكُمْ عَبَثًا وَأَنَّكُمْ إِلَيْنَا
لا تُرْجَعُونَ؟﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“What! Did you then think that We had created you in vain and that
you shall not be returned to Us?”***[^2]

We have come (are born) in vain and we will die (go) aimlessly and will
become dust. Man came out of dust and man will turn to dust. There is no
purpose behind all this, which God has created. What a bad opinion about
the Lord of the universe that the creation of Adam (man) is futile
whereas the Almighty and the Most Wise God has created this universe
with a great aim. The purpose is that His attributes may be known and
His Lordship may become manifest so that all could see and experience
His Might and Beneficence.

Creation of man for friendship with God
---------------------------------------

Imam Zainul Abideen in the first Dua (supplication) of Sahifa requests:
My God! You have created this man in the path of Your friendship. So
that this man may see and taste His mercies, bounties and favors in this
world and may turn towards him.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَإِنْ مِنْ شَيْءٍ إِلاَّ عِنْدَنَا خَزَائِنُهُ وَمَا نُنَزِّلُهُ
إِلاَّ بِقَدَرٍ مَعْلُومٍ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And there is not a thing but with Us are the treasures of it, and We
do not send it down but in a known measure.”***[^3]

Whatever happiness is there in this world, like delights, pleasures and
beauties are but a minute sample of the original happiness and bounties,
which are treasured for the Faithful in the grave and in the other
world. Whatever nicety and beauty you see in this world is like a drop
in the ocean as compared to what is in Paradise.

Elegance of Yusuf and the Houries of Paradise
---------------------------------------------

This world is too narrow to make the eternal beauty manifest.

An example of slight beauty is found in the case of Yusuf. Women of
Egypt could not withstand it and cut their fingers instead of the fruits
in their hands (when they looked at Yusuf).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿فَلَمَّا سَمِعَتْ بِمَكْرِهِنَّ أَرْسَلَتْ إِلَيْهِنَّ وَأَعْتَدَتْ
لَهُنَّ مُتَّكَأً، وَآتَتْ كُلَّ وَاحِدَةٍ مِنْهُنَّ سِكِّينًا،
وَقَالَتْ: اخْرُجْ عَلَيْهِنَّ. فَلَمَّا رَأَيْنَهُ أَكْبَرْنَهُ
وَقَطَّعْنَ أَيْدِيَهُنَّ، وَقُلْنَ: حَاشَ لِلَّهِ! مَا هَذَا بَشَراً؛
إِنْ هَذَا إِلاَّ مَلَكٌ كَرِيمٌ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So; when she heard of their sly talk, she sent for them and prepared
for them a repast, and gave each of them a knife, and said (to Yusuf):
Come forth to them. So; when they saw him, they deemed him great, and
cut their hands (in amazement), and said: Remote is Allah (from
imperfection); this is not a mortal; this is but a noble angel.”***[^4]

The event is that when their eyes fell on the handsomeness of Yusuf they
lost control over their emotions and cut their fingers while they were
to cut apples. Therefore, the Messenger of God said: If a houri from the
Houries of Paradise comes to this world all men will die being unable to
observe the heavenly beauty of the Houries.

What then will they do on seeing the real and original beauty of
Muhammad and the Progeny of Muhammad? After death the power of the souls
of the Faithful becomes hundred fold. So long as they are in the world
of matter with this physical body their power or strength is very less.
When they are distanced from this worldly body, especially when they
have acquired bodily diligence also, they reach the original beauty. In
short, each and every sign which God has created in this world is a
specimen to attract man to the origin so that the wise one looks
meaningfully at all these bounties and says: May I be sacrificed for God
Whose favors and bounties are so vast. How true is the poet when he
says:

O God! This material world which also is very narrow and insufficient
(for the purpose of showing Your beauty) makes us see so much of Your
unending beauty then how will be the other world of Hereafter? We become
extremely astonished on observing your beauty created by You in this
world. What will be the extent of Your Beauty in that world?

The fragrance of flowers in this world and the heavenly smells
--------------------------------------------------------------

The fragrance of jasmine and rose flowers reaches us from a distance of
ten steps. If you move about, say fifty steps from them you no more
smell their fragrance. Then how will be the flowers the smell of which
reaches you from a distance of two thousand years’ journey? I want that
you should turn your attention towards its origin. Whatever you see here
is minute as this world is not spacious enough to make the manifestation
of the original fragrance fully. What will happen at the moment of
death?

It has been said that the fragrance of messengers is a fragrance from
Paradise, the smell of angels, the smell of the heavenly red rose and
the smell of heavenly Houries, the fragrance of the jasmine flower of
Heaven. The fragrance of my daughter Fatima Zahra too has the fragrance
of the heavenly red roses and jasmines.[^5] It is the smell of the
Muhammad flower. (The final Prophet has the virtues, which all the past
prophets had). So, if the friends and Shias of Muhammad and the Progeny
of Muhammad, even if they are at a distance of four thousands of years
journey, they will, after all, be able to benefit by that fragrance.

Divine mercy is found everywhere
--------------------------------

The very first verse of Qur’an is “In the name of Allah the Beneficent,
the Merciful (Bismillahir rahmanir raheem). What does ‘Rahman’ mean? The
Owner of Rahmat or Mercy for all. He built the universe on the
foundation of Mercy. The base of creation is for the manifestation of
Mercy and bestowals.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِلاَّ مَنْ رَحِمَ رَبُّكَ، وَلِذَلِكَ خَلَقَهُمْ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Except those on whom your Lord has mercy; and for this did He create
them…”***[^6]

What does Mercy mean? It means He has granted to every creation what it
needs. His creation is the layout of kindness (Lutf), favor (Ehsaan),
honoring (Ikraam) for the manifestation of the excellent attributes of
God, viz forbearance (Hilm), pardon (Afw), magnanimity (Karam),
knowledge (Ilm), wisdom (Hikmat), Might (Qudrat) etc. The believer who
has recognized God with His virtues full of mercy must always be pleased
with His mechanism of working so that he may also be happy to reach its
origin. Through his worship and obedience he should make himself nearer
to God and attain Divine bounties in the Hereafter and so that he may be
able to get a drop from the Real Divine Kingdom:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿فِي مَقْعَدِ صِدْقٍ عِنْدَ مَلِيكٍ مُقْتَدِرٍ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“In the seat of honor with a most Powerful King.”***[^7]

Fire is necessary for the stubborn
----------------------------------

God created man for Paradise, but among people there arise some who
cannot go to Paradise. Who are they?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿لا يَصْلاهَا إِلاّ الأَشْقَى﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“None shall enter it but the most unhappy,”***[^8]

They will taste the chastisements of hell.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿خُذُوهُ فَغُلُّوهُ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Lay hold on him, then put a chain on him,”***[^9]

The length of the chains is seventy ‘ziraa’ (one ziraa equals 104
centimeters), which will tighten his neck and hands in hell.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿يُعْرَفُ الْمُجْرِمُونَ بِسِيمَاهُمْ فَيُؤْخَذُ بِالنَّوَاصِي
وَالأَقْدَامِ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The guilty shall be recognized by their marks, so they shall be
seized by the forelocks and the feet.”***[^10]

The angels will drag the sinners by their hair and legs and they would
be tied together and hurled into hell… What do you think? For whom are
these tortures? Almighty God Who is the Kindest of the Kind is always
inclined to pardon the Faithful, but these bullies, vicious foes,
obstinate enemies and those who mock God and the Hereafter and feel no
fear in committing any dishonesty, who trample upon the Truth while
knowing that it is the Truth surely deserve the severest punishments.
The hell described in Qur’an is quite appropriate for such wretched
fellows. Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَقُضِيَ بَيْنَهُمْ بِالْحَقِّ وَهُمْ لا يُظْلَمُونَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and judgment shall be given between them with justice, and they
shall not be dealt with unjustly.”***[^11]

When the people of Paradise will be given place in Paradise and the
fellows of hell hurled in hell there will arise a voice “All praise is
for God Who placed everyone in their proper place.” One who is righteous
should go to Paradise, that is in the House of Safety and one who is
definitely evil must enter hell. Praise is for God in both the
decisions. No one should think that, may God protect us, hell is
prepared out of anger and revengefulness. They never wanted to go to
Paradise who stood against God, Hereafter and Truth.

They always said “I” and only “I.” You recite in Dua Kumail: You always
put the enemies in hell. That is they are always in hell and with no way
to escape. Where shall they be taken? They cannot see Paradise. How can
an enemy enter Paradise, which, in fact, is the property of Ali bin Abi
Talib! Can an enemy of Ali ever enter Paradise, which belongs to Ali?
Even if others want to take him to Paradise, he himself will not step
into it, as he is inimical. He is prepared to face any calamity run away
from the Mercy of God.

Ali blinded his enemy
---------------------

In view of the auspiciousness of today, let me tell you a story about
the grace of Ali. Shaykh Mufeed says: One day, the bookseller Ja’far was
auctioning his books. I also went there with the intention of purchasing
some of his books. When I was about to take up some books he told me,
“Just sit here. I have seen a thing which is useful for your religion,”
viz. Shiaism. “It is a miraculous matter which I intend to relate to you
as it is useful for strengthening your belief.” Shaykh Mufeed says: I
sat down. Then that gentleman told me, “I used to go, accompanied by a
friend of mine, to a Shaykh named Abu Abdullah Muhaddith, to learn
traditions and narrations. By and by, we came to know that he was one of
the staunch enemies of Ali.

He was, occasionally, insinuating and insulting Ali. We two advised and
admonished him to mend his ways but he replied that he was what he was.
Then when he insulted Fatima we decided not to go to him any more.
Finally, one night, I saw in my dream that there has come the King of
Wilayat, the Moon of guidance, Ali, the Lion of God. He is in the house
of the Abu Abdullah Muhaddith. The Amirul Momineen was angry at the
Shaykh and was asking him: What have I done to you? Do you not fear that
God may make you blind? Then he (Ali) pointed his hand to that fellow’s
right eye. I saw in my dream that his eye got blinded.”

When I woke up the next day, I thought of asking a friend of mine to go
to the Shaykh and inform him about what I had seen in my dream and warn
him about the wrath of Amirul Momineen. When I stepped out of my house,
I saw my friend coming towards my house. I asked him, “Where are you
going?” He said, “Last night I had a dream and I wanted to tell you what
I saw.” I asked him, “What did you see?” (He had also the same dream).
He said, “I saw Ali pointing his finger to the right eye of the Shaykh
and that eye was blinded. I have come to you with an intention to go to
the Shaykh and admonish him to stop insulting Amirul Momineen.”

I told my friend, “I also had the same dream.” The two of us went to the
house of the Shaykh and knocked at his door. His wife came behind the
door and said, “There will be no lesson today.” We asked, “Why no
lesson? We have some work with him and we want to see him.” She replied,
“The Shaykh is not well today. He is weeping as he has some trouble.”
But we insisted and told her that we must see him anyhow. His wife
replied, “The Shaykh is very much indisposed today. Putting his hand on
his eye, he is complaining that Ali has blinded him.” Then we told her,
“Please open the door, as we have come here for the same reason.” She
opened the door and we two went inside to find that this unlucky fellow
was weeping and complaining about his eye.

As we approached him, he said, “Finally Ali has blinded me.” We said,
“Both of us had seen it in our dreams last night. We saw Ali pointing to
your right eye making you blind. Now stop your adverse talk about him,
perhaps God will heal your eye and it may become healthy again by the
grace of Ali.” But that fellow replied, “Even if Ali blinds the other
eye also, I will not end my enmity towards him.” (What villainy)!
Finally we arose and left his house. Then again we saw in our dream that
our Master, Ali blinded his left eye also. However that fellow’s enmity
only increased.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَلا يَزِيدُ الظَّالِمِينَ إِلاَّ خَسَاراً﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and it adds only to the perdition of the unjust.”***[^12]

Finally he left this world as a disbeliever and apostate.  
 Such are the dwellers of hell. Such kinds of people are always present
in this world that their nature makes them abide in hell forever.  
 Permanent dwelling in hell is for those hard-hearted people who are
never prepared to humble before the Truth, despite knowing that it is
Truth. I will tell you another miraculous story regarding Ali.

Insulting Ali makes one worthy to be killed
-------------------------------------------

It is mentioned in the book *Kharaij* of Rawandi that Ahmed bin Hamzah
Mosuli said: I started for a journey to Mecca. I went to my neighbor to
say him goodbye and to ask him whether there was anything I could do for
him. He replied, “Yes, I have an important work.” I said, “Tell me, so
that I may do accordingly.” He said, “When you go to Medina and enter
the Mosque of the Prophet, stand in front of the Prophet’s grave and
tell him my word. Ask him on my behalf, ‘O Muhammad! Was there a
shortage of men that you gave your daughter to Ali in marriage? How did
you take such a man as your son-in-law?’ Then he also uttered some other
words of insult.

How strange are the hard-hearted people who, after a number of years,
show renewed enmity saying why the Holy Prophet gave his daughter in
marriage to Ali?

Ahmed bin Hamzah says: I did not say anything to him, as I knew that it
was of no use. When I went to Medina, I felt ashamed how I could utter
such bad words. During the night I dreamt that Ali was telling me: I
will shortly bring out the blasphemy of that unlucky fellow. In Medina,
I once more saw Ali in my dream. The Lion of God, Ali said, “Come on.” I
said, “I am ready.” Then I went to Mosul with Ali. In the dream, Ali
entered the house of that unlucky neighbor of mine. I was also with him.
We went inside and I saw that fellow sleeping in his room and with the
door was closed. Ali took out a knife, cut that inauspicious fellow’s
neck and cleaned the blood-smeared knife on a corner of that fellow’s
quilt.

Then he raised his holy hand and placed that knife in the roof. When I
woke up, I told this dream to my companions in journey with
astonishment. We noted the date of that night. When we returned to Mosul
we wanted to know whether what we had seen in the dream had actually
happened. They told us that all in our neighborhood were in jail. When I
asked about that cursed fellow I was told that he has was found murdered
on such and such night. It was exactly the night in which I had that
dream. After the murder was reported, the authorities came to
investigate and arrest the killer but in vain. So the police arrested
all the neighbors to find the killer but he was not yet caught.

Ahmed bin Hamzah says: I saw that a number of innocent people were in
prison while I knew that the killer of that cursed fellow was Ali, but
who can arrest Ali? So they made allegations against some innocent
people and finally, in order to relieve them, I, along with my Hajj
companions went to the court and related all that had happened. As
evidence I told them, “I can show you where the knife used for killing
is hidden.” Officers came for investigation and found the bloodstained
quilt and also the knife in question. Finally the neighbors were freed
with an announcement that the killer had been traced. As I have said
Ali, the Master of the Faithful is a man who is God’s favor for the good
people and the wrath of God for the evil ones. He is one who gives the
good people a place in Paradise and sends the evil ones to hell.

Therefore, it must be understood that only some people are such who have
brought the wrath of God upon themselves as mentioned earlier. Otherwise
people having humility surely get God’s mercy.

Of God! Your mercy is open river to all
---------------------------------------

There is a narration in the third volume of *Biharul Anwar,* which
pleases the hearts of the Faithful. It says that tomorrow on Judgment
Day, there will be so much manifestation of all the encompassing Mercy
of God that even Satan will bow his head and long for it.  
 The intercessors are making intercessions and many people get salvation
due to such intercessions and finally, the Holiest One says: Now is the
time for My Forgiveness and pardon. Then He shows such Mercy and
Kindness that even Satan thinks he would be forgiven.

Satan gives oath of Ali to Almighty God
---------------------------------------

It is indeed strange that the knowledge of Satan is very vast. Have you
not heard that a believer once saw Satan in the middle of the sea
raising his head out and praying: My Lord! Please do not chastise me for
the sake of Ali bin Abi Talib. He says: I stood there. Finally it is
mentioned in the fourth volume of *Biharul Anwar* that this was brought
to the notice of Imam Ja’far Sadiq. He recounted and said, “O Master! I
also asked him (Satan): What have you to do with Ali? How strange that
Satan Ali’s attachment?” He (Satan) replied, “Six thousand years prior
to the creation of Adam, I was in the midst of angels in the higher
world. I know about the entire universe from the first day. The only one
who is dear and near to God is the Lion of God, Ali bin Abi Talib. I
know that everyone beseeches God Almighty in his name and God forgives
him. So I also beseech God in the name of Ali bin Abi Talib.”

The important point is that what Satan said was from his tongue and not
from his heart. So Satan could not get any benefit from Ali. Otherwise,
had he humility that he ought to have, he would have made obeisance to
Adam now at last he speaks a true word. The remaining part of this
tradition is also interesting and worth listening.[^13]

He says: After I heard this sentence from Satan I asked him, “O Iblis!
You had been a teacher of the angels. As you say, your knowledge is to
such and such extent. Give me some advice. Give me some admonition based
on your knowledge.” (It is good. Man must seek knowledge even if
available from Satan). Satan replied, “Well. I tell you a word about
your world and a word about your Hereafter.” Verily if Satan had ever
spoken two true words they were only these. You, gentleman also must get
benefit from it. Just observe, how true the cursed one has said.

Two advices from Satan for this world and for the hereafter
-----------------------------------------------------------

If you intend to pass your worldly life happily be content. Then your
worldly life will pass pleasingly. Do not entertain greed. Do not look
at those who are higher than you. Be calm, cool and quiet. Do not give
importance to whatever confronts you. It means if you do not remain
content on what God has given to you then you will not feel happy in
this world. Do not think that these persons who earn millions are happy.
They can never taste the delight, which a contented man tastes. The
contented man eats dry bread but with delight as he has contentment, but
the unlucky man who has a lot of facilities does not get any delight
therefrom. He is not at peace because he has ever growing greed. In
short, O Gentlemen! Listen to this admonition.

For your Hereafter, for the moment of your death, for the time of your
being lowered in the grave, for the Purgatory (Barzakh), for the field
of gathering (Mahshar), for Sirat Bridge and for the Balance (Mizan),
for all these moments, treasure the love for Ali bin Abi Talib. The
radiance of Ali will be your help and your friend. Carry this relation
with you (for your journey and stay after death). Your support should be
Ali. You will get peace, safety and security.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَلَمْ يَلْبِسُوا إِيمَانَهُمْ بِظُلْمٍ أُوْلَئِكَ
لَهُمْ الأَمْنُ وَهُمْ مُهْتَدُونَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Those who believe and do not mix up their faith with iniquity, those
are they who shall have the security and they are those who go
aright.”***[^14]

O God! Kindly drive away from our hearts everything except love and
affinity for Muhammad and the Progeny of Muhammad. Remove the lust for
world from our interior.[^15] The inevitable result of Faith is to have
a good opinion about the creation and the Creator, love for God
Almighty. In Dua Jaushan Kabir your repeatedly invoke the beautiful
names of Allah. Ponder deeply on these Names. It is indeed delightful to
think over them as you can see: He sees but shows forbearance. Knowing,
yet forbearing, is the attribute of Almighty God. He sees how many sins
His servants commit, how much ungrateful they are. As if they are not
doing (wrong). How much forbearance shows the Lord; as if His servants
are not at all sinful!

Ungratefulness causes drought
-----------------------------

Today ungratefulness is on the increase. They throw away a lot of bread
and cooked rice as leftovers. They also throw away half eaten fruits.
This is very bad and dangerous also. Especially in the case of bread, be
more respectful. God forbid, ungratefulness towards God’s gifts may
attract famine. This is reported in a number of narrations. If you have
excess bread, keep it. If anyone comes to your door, give it or feed it
to the animals. It should never come under feet.

It is narrated that once Imam Sadiq came home and saw that a watermelon
was thrown on the road half eaten. The holy Imam was displeased. He took
it up himself and gave it to his slave. After some time the Imam
returned home and asked the slave to give back that half eaten
watermelon. The slave replied, “O My Master! I ate it up.” The Imam
said, “You are now free for the sake of God. You respected God’s gift
and became a man of Paradise. I do not like that one who has become a
friend of God and a man of Paradise should remain a slave. You are,
because of this good deed of yours, a free man.”

I am talking about ungratefulness. All of us enjoy God’s bounties the
whole day and we are drowned in God’s gifts; yet we do not know the One
Who grants us all these favors constantly. What else is then
ungratefulness? That too against the Almighty God? Say with justice, O
intelligent man! Should we befriend God or not? What is the benevolent
attitude of God towards us all? Imam Zainul Abideen says: You attracted
man towards Your Friendship.[^16] The Holy Qur’an also says that the
Faithful are those who love God very much.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا أَشَدُّ حُبًّا لِلَّهِ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and those who believe are stronger in love for Allah…”***[^17]

How much do the people love their parents? Believers love God more than
that because they know that it is God Who has made their parents love
them.

It is God Who poured love in the mother’s heart. Therefore say: May I be
sacrificed for God Who filled my mother’s heart with love, mercy and
kindness for me. She cleans me of dirt and cares for me in difficulties.
Our lives are passing away. Have we inculcated love of God and His
Messenger in our hearts? Have we formed the habit of having a good
opinion about what God does or not? Have we become the lovers of
Paradise?

According to a narration an inch in Paradise is better than the whole
world and whatever is therein. God has mentioned all this in the Holy
Qur’an. Should you not like it? O young people! How much God has praised
“Hurul Eieen” (Houries of Paradise) in the Qur’an! Has the time not come
yet for you to be lovers of Hurul Eieen? Do not be dazzled by all that
you see in the women of this world because if you understand the
attributes of Hurul Eieen you will not even look at the former. Should
you not long for them? Under the skin of the women of this world there
is blood, pus and dirt.

Hurul Eieen makes one remember God
----------------------------------

Do not say that we are not passionate. We want God. In one’s imagination
Hurul Eieen is like the women of this world. Hurul Eieen is the mention
of God, remembrance of God. She is a different kind of woman. This world
is such that it makes man neglectful and negligent. Hurul Eieen is
remembrance and admonition. God has created a Houri most beautiful and
attractive among all fairies. There are four inscriptions on her face.
“In the name of Allah the Beneficent, the Merciful” (Bismillahir
rahmanir raheem) is written on her lips with radiance. On her forehead
is the Holy name of Muhammad. On her chin is ? “O Ali” and on her right
and left cheek “Al Hasan” and “Al Husain” respectively.

The Holy Prophet was given an option to seek either life or death. No
one was ever allowed to opt for life or death except the Holy Prophet
Muhammad. Israel, the angel of death came to him and sought permission
saying, “If you are inclined, I may collect your soul and if you please
you may continue to live in this world.” The Holy Prophet replied, “I am
coming.”[^18] Imam Reza is reported to have said, “On the night of 19th
Ramadhan, God Almighty gave option to my grandfather, Ali either to
select this world or martyrdom.” Ali himself opted for martyrdom saying,
“O My Lord! I have lived enough in this world.” Ali himself was the
lover of the Higher World.

Man wants what his heart likes and loves. Since I and you and all of us
are unaware of the Higher World, all our liking and love is for this
earthly world. Therefore we do not like death to come to us. We become
astonished when we hear Ali saying ‘I long for death’.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ إِنْ زَعَمْتُمْ أَنَّكُمْ أَوْلِيَاءُ لِلَّهِ مِنْ دُونِ النَّاسِ
فَتَمَنَّوْا الْمَوْتَ إِنْ كُنتُمْ صَادِقِينَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…if you think that you are the favorites of Allah to the exclusion
of other people, then invoke death if you are truthful.”***[^19]

The songs in this cage are not pleasing to me. I am leaving for the
garden of Paradise, as I am a bird of that lovely garden. (Persian
Couplet)

Imam Reza has said regarding Imam Husain, as mentioned in the book,
*Durratun Najaffiyah,* “My grandfather Husain was also given a choice at
midday on Ashura day between apparent victory over the enemy and being
killed. He himself chose to be killed.” He adds, “Had Husain so wished
the armies of the enemy would have certainly been wiped out in Kerbala.”
Who are they to cause even the slightest harm to Husain? Had Husain not
allowed, who was there strong enough to affect Husain and which sword
was there which could fall on the holy head of Husain? But our master
Husain himself said: We are pleased with the pleasure of Allah. We,
Ahle  
 Bait are always happy with the plans of God.[^20]

[^1]: Surah Fath 48:6

[^2]: Surah Mominoon 23:115

[^3]: Surah Hijr 15:21

[^4]: Surah Yusuf 12:31

[^5]: Riyaaheenas Shareeah, Vol. 2, p. 208

[^6]: Surah Hud 11:119

[^7]: Surah Qamar 54:55

[^8]: Surah Lail 92:15

[^9]: Surah Haqqah 69:30

[^10]: Surah Rahman 55:41

[^11]: Surah Zumar 39:69

[^12]: Surah Isra 17:82

[^13]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 14

[^14]: Surah Anam 6:82

[^15]: Refer Dua Abu Hamzah Thumali

[^16]: First Dua of Sahifa Sajjadiya

[^17]: Surah Baqarah 2:164

[^18]: Biharul Anwar Vol. 4

[^19]: Surah Jumah 62:6

[^20]: Nafasul Mahmoom


