Part 19
=======

The real gift is irretrievable
------------------------------

This material world is based on extinction. The gifts given by the
Highest of the high Almighty God should conform to His Greatness. His
gifts are permanent. He does not take back what He grants. This world of
matter is not spacious enough for this purpose. Here, what is given is
also taken back. These eyes, hands and feet given to you are indeed
great bounties during the safe period of youth or young age. But if you
live on and reach the age of fifty or sixty, things begin to be taken
back from you one after another. You lose your teeth one by one.

Likewise, there is a gradual decrease in the your faculties of seeing
and hearing. The strength of your hands and legs become less and less
and it makes you weaker and weaker. Even if you die before reaching old
age, they put you in the grave where earthly worms eat away the whole of
your body beginning with your eyes and then come downwards. Permanent
and everlasting grant of bounties is not possible in this world of
matter. Whoever is given new clothes also gets deprived of it. They are
given children, which also have to be taken back. Every kind of
happiness available here is but temporary. Such temporary gifts are not
becoming to Divine grants. God’s everlasting gifts are available in
Paradise.

Three bounties higher than every bounty
---------------------------------------

It is narrated that there are three bounties in Paradise that the people
of Paradise will taste. Their taste is better than Paradise itself. O
People of Paradise! The first tiding is that you are in high places.
These high ranks will never be taken back from you. Once you enter
Paradise there is no getting out of it. Another bounty is that you get
connected with the original fountainhead of favors, that is, with
Muhammad and the Progeny of Muhammad. Which delight is sweeter than the
company, neighborhood and relation with Muhammad and the Progeny of
Muhammad?  
 The third topmost bounty is that the people of Paradise are told that
God has become pleased with them.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿رَضِيَ اللَّهُ عَنْهُمْ وَرَضُوا عَنْهُ ذَلِكَ الْفَوْزُ الْعَظِيمُ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah is well pleased with them and they are well pleased with
Allah; this is the mighty achievement.”***[^1]

The taste and happiness that is higher than all other favors. In Dua Abu
Hamzah you recite “Muwahib Haniyyah.” “Muwahib” is the plural of
“Mawhibat” which means grant or gift and “Hani” means tasty and
pleasing, which makes a heart happy. The happiness of this world is
temporary. It is possible that it makes you feel happy for a while but
then separation therefrom becomes a headache. Thus it is practically of
no value. For example, you are given a park, a garden, bungalow, motor
etc. that you like very much. Though you feel happy with it, it is
temporary.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿لِكَيْ لا تَأْسَوْا عَلَى مَا فَاتَكُمْ وَلا تَفْرَحُوا بِمَا
آتَاكُمْ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So that you may not grieve for what has escaped you, nor be exultant
at what He has given you…”***[^2]

After some years they carry you out of these parks and bungalows, put
you in a coffin. How hard would that feeling will be? You will go on
saying: Alas! I should not have been given these passing things. These
are the pleasures, which result in sorrows.  
 That world is better which a wise man considers hard because the
worldly sweet turns sour at the time of death. (Persian couplet)  
 The worldly bounties and gifts are bound to decrease and finally become
extinct.

Remembrance of death removes futile pleasures
---------------------------------------------

A farsighted man is lucky.  
 If you keep in mind the end, you will never feel vain pleasure. Your
imagination that all these people are happy is due to carelessness. They
care the least for the Hereafter. You see one buying the most costly
carpets and enjoying thereon. But what is to happen at last? He must lie
on bare earth in the grave. If one keeps this fact in mind, his
intoxication caused by worldly material possessions will go away.

Tell me why one should build high-rise residence for himself when his
final bed will be a handful of dust in grave? (Persian couplet)  
 But, as I have said earlier, man does not get out of negligence or
carelessness so that he may pay attention to hard facts.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿اقْتَرَبَ لِلنَّاسِ حِسَابُهُمْ وَهُمْ فِي غَفْلَةٍ مُعْرِضُونَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Their reckoning has drawn near to men, and in heedlessness are they
turning aside.”***[^3]

O God! You make us realize the truth. Kindly drive the love for this
material world from our hearts. Let me tell you in simple words and
common style about the evidence of Life after death that everyone can
understand. All the bounties that one can get in this material world do
not befit the high position of God. Gifts from God are everlasting and
to be tasted in the everlasting Hereafter, not in this passing world.
This material world is too narrow and incapable of it. God’s great
grants cannot be experienced here. God is everlasting so His grants too
must be everlasting for which this world is too narrow and insufficient.
Therefore, surely there is another world of Hereafter wherein Divine
everlasting gifts can be tasted and experienced for eternity.

Deniers of prophethood have a bad opinion about God
---------------------------------------------------

Among various kinds of bad opinions one, which indeed is unjust and
oppressive, is about God Almighty. A man who has such prohibited bad
opinion is one who is proud and ignorant and denies the messenger and
the Divine Book. Such people say: What is a messenger, an Imam and
Qur’an? For the prosperity of man, the intelligence given by God is
sufficient. Of course this word is originally from ancient philosophers.
It became an excuse for others who say that, for finding out the road to
prosperity human intellect is sufficient. No messenger is needed.

Various replies are given to refute this faulty assertion. But the best
refutation is that which is found in one of the verses of the Holy
Qur’an.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَمَا قَدَرُوا اللَّهَ حَقَّ قَدْرِهِ إِذْ قَالُوا مَا أَنزَلَ
اللَّهُ عَلَى بَشَرٍ مِنْ شَيْءٍ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And they do not assign to Allah the attributes due to Him when they
say: Allah has not revealed anything to a mortal.”***[^4]

You, who have denied the Messenger, have made an allegation of injustice
and oppression on God Almighty. According to your ignorance and faulty
view God has left man in the darkness of confusion. Had there been no
Messenger, Imam and the Book, man would have remained in a state of
confusion and uneasiness both in this world and in the Hereafter.

Human intelligence is unable to comprehend Good and Evil
--------------------------------------------------------

You say that man has enough wisdom and intelligence to actually
understand what is beneficial and what is harmful. First, everyone’s
intelligence is not the same or equal. Things, which appear good to a
low level brain, may look bad to a high level intellect. Even the higher
intellect is unable to distinguish and propose an overall good for the
life in this world. Even if all the intelligent people of the world come
together, they become even less powerful. How can they find the truth
behind whatever happens? That is why, after making laws and rules for
social conduct, they have to amend them from time to time. If they
correct one aspect, another aspect turns defective. Lawmaking is the
right of Only One God Who oversees everything in the universe and knows
what is beneficial and what is harmful to man in every age. Man is too
weak to distinguish the harmful from the beneficial both for himself and
for others; both in the current age and in all ages. Human intellect is
too weak to do this job.

No circumspection in law-making
-------------------------------

Perhaps they may say that there will be no harm if they resort to
circumspection while formulating laws. The reply is that distinguishing
of such circumspection and understanding of various contingencies is
indeed a very hard and impossible task. Even in insignificant personal
matters some intelligent people have gone wrong. As such circumspection
creates more trouble. It is mentioned in the book of Islamic Practical
Laws that even those who have good religious knowledge need to rely on
Taqleed (follow a Mujtahid/qualified jurisprudent). He needs to rely on
that Mujtahid for making any circumspection. Even the Mujtahids
sometimes say that precaution in such and such matter is like this or
that. So circumspection in formulating laws for human life is wrong.

As for the Hereafter and life after death, human intelligence has not
the slightest ability to know what is in store there; that where he will
go after death, where he would be given a place, which deeds will give
happiness and joy and which would bring loss. No one can know this
except Only One God Who is the Creator and Owner of both this world and
that world. He makes man know about this through revelation to His
Messengers. The Messengers convey this knowledge to the people.
Otherwise even if all the intelligent people in the world join together
they will never be able to know what happens after death, what is useful
and what is harmful because they are on the earth and in the world of
matter. Just as a child which is still in the womb cannot know what the
outer world is, O the one who is still in the womb of this material
world! Until you come out of it you will not understand. Until you are
not separated from flesh you will not know.

Dreams cannot be accepted as proofs
-----------------------------------

Even dream or visions cannot be taken as true for sure. Sometimes it is
a mountain and sometimes a molehill. For instance, one sees in his dream
that his father has worn a nice new dress. He becomes happy and says:
Praise be to Allah, he is very happy there. This is no measure as it is
possible that your imagination dressed your father in new apparel.
Suppose it was a true vision, it is possible that when you saw him he
may be in pleasure and happiness. After that it can be otherwise. After
death, man’s condition changes as his condition was changing in the
world. It is not same all the time. In the world, at one time, he was in
the Mosque and in another hour where? May I call it the house of Satan?
Yes, in a cinema house. Is it not the devil’s house? At one time he
recites Qur’an and in another utters shameful indecencies. It is not the
same at all times.

I tell you in general that after one dies, no one can know perfectly as
to in what condition the departed soul is. You will know only when you
go there. So far as you are here you have no means to know what is going
on there in the other permanent world. Most of the visions and summoning
of souls etc are incorrect. A molehill can appear as a mountain and vice
versa. Perfect knowledge is impossible. Everything depends on Divine
revelation. God and His Messenger and the Imam say that this deed is
good and this bad for life after death and that such and such thing is
harmful for you after you die.

Only the eye of the Prophet and the Imam can see
------------------------------------------------

Once a woman living in Basra developed a serve stomachache. Doctors told
her to drink old wine. She did not drink and went to Medina to ask the
knower of truths, Imam Ja’far Sadiq. She told the Imam, “Doctors have
advised me to drink old wine to cure my stomachache. I understand that
you are the Hujjat (the Divine proof and argument) between God and me.
If you allow me I will drink and tell God tomorrow on the Day of
Judgment that Ja’far permitted me so I drank. If you disallow me I will
not drink.”

The summary of this narration is that the Imam said, “Never! If I allow
you to do so, I fear for you the time when you are breathing your last.
It means that if you drink wine it will produce a bad effect at the time
of your death, even if you drink it as a remedy.[^5] After all it is a
very big gloom. Either Satan comes out from man himself or, as per
another narration, the person feels extreme thirst. The Imam, who sees,
says that he knows and that others do not know about the other world.
None except the Messenger and the Imam know the hidden world after
death, the grave life and the conditions on Judgment Day.

Does God obstruct the path of His servants? Curse of God on those who
disbelieved in the Holy Qur’an. If there is no messenger and no Qur’an
what will a confused man do in total darkness? One who has denied the
Prophet and the Holy Book, Qur’an has, in fact, denied the wisdom and
justice of God. If God has left man in darkness and confusion, He has
been unjust, which is unbelievable. He must show the true path to His
servants, which He has.

There also is another kind of bad opinion about God’s creation. It is
seen and heard during a fight between truth and falsehood that always or
mostly, truth appears to have been defeated and falsehood victorious.
Look at the history of Islam from its early days till today, there has
been so much oppression and also that no vengeance has been taken from
the oppressor. The oppressed are being tortured and killed and the
oppressor suffers no harm. This may cause some to entertain a bad
opinion about the creation, as it did happen. Anyone who reads the story
of Muawiyah and Imam Ali says: O God! How did all this happen?

God took away Ali, while Muawiyah and Amr Aas remained alive
------------------------------------------------------------

Abdur Rahman Ibn Muljim, Hajjaj bin Abdullah and Amr bin Bakr Tamimi
were courageous as well as clever. They wanted to take a bloody revenge
from Ali, Muawiyah and Amr bin Aas respectively. They swore together
that they will kill their respective enemies simultaneously. They said
if Ali is killed, Muawiyah will also be killed and so also the latter’s
teacher, the Satan, Amr Aas. Then there will remain no trouble. So they
took an oath together that at the end of the 19th night of the holy
month of Ramadhan, at the time of the Azan (call for prayer) of the dawn
prayer, Ali should be killed in the Mosque of Kufa, Muawiyah in the
Mosque of Syria and Amr bin Aas in the mosque of Egypt (as he was the
governor of Egypt).

They bade goodbye to one another. Ibn Muljim left for Kufa and, as you
all know, he also saw Qutama and took his concurrence, got his sword
poisoned for a thousand dirhams and did his job.

But Hajjaj alias Barak went to Syria, readied himself at the time of
morning Azan at the same time and on the same day, poisoned his sword
also like Ibn Muljim for Muawiyah as was done by Ibn Muljim at the time
of the prayer. Suddenly he killed the Imam who led the congregational
prayers. Muawiyah was behind that Imam. When Muawiyah bowed to go into
prostration, Hajjaj raised his sword to cut off the head of Muawiyah but
it (the sword) hit Muawiyah’s buttocks slicing a portion of his flesh.
People took him to a surgeon who said there are two kinds of remedies:
One is branding and another a special concoction. Muawiyah said, “I
cannot bear branding.” The doctor said, “If you are not branded you will
become sterile.” Muawiyah replied, “Yazid and Khalid are sufficient for
me.” At last he survived.

It is said that Barak was also brought to Muawiyah. When the latter
wanted to kill Barak, the latter said, “Good tidings for you.” Muawiyah
asked, “What?” The reply of Barak was, “We wanted tonight to kill both
you and Ali. You have survived but I give you good tidings that Ali will
also be killed this night. So keep me safe tonight. If Ali is killed you
will be happy to hear that your enemy is killed and then, if you please,
you may pardon me. If Ali is not killed I give you a promise to go and
to kill him myself.” Here we find two versions. According to one, he was
spared till the news of Ali’s martyrdom came. Thereafter he was not
killed but let off after cutting off his hands and feet. Some say he was
killed.

Now, as for Amr Aas, that devil of the day and the fox of his time, Amr
bin Bakr was appointed to kill him. He also had poisoned his sword since
the night of 9th Ramadhan for the purpose of killing Amr bin Aas. Next
morning, he was awaiting the arrival of Amr Aas in the Jama Masjid of
Egypt. But the latter, that night suffered from colic and could not
attend the mosque and said that, in his place, the unlucky judge Qazi
Kharijah bin Habeebah would lead the morning prayers. The poor fellow
was not aware of the plan. As soon as he raised his head from
prostration, Amr bin Bark killed him mistaking him for Amr bin Aas. The
Qazi died on that day or the day after. Amr bin Aas killed Amr bin Bakr.
The story thus ended.

Now man thinks over all this. He sees that these two oppressors survived
but the sword of Ibn Muljim did its job. Our master, who is the master
of justice, went away from this world! This is according to divine will.
It was different in the case of the other two. Now listen to the reply.
You imagine that the one who oppressed people in this world should be
punished soon in this world. But the fact is that this world is too
small a place wherein Divine revenge can be taken.

Divine retaliation is to take place in the other world. The world of
retribution and recompense is another world. This world is the place for
scattering seeds. Harvest is after death. If you like to sow a sweet
watermelon, do so. If you want to sow the bitter colocynth, you may sow
it also. This world is a sowing ground for the Hereafter. The fruits of
deeds, good or bad, will have to be tasted after death. You think that
the one who has acted with justice in this world should live longer,
become stronger. No, it is not so. The proceedings in this world are
subject to a chain of cause and effect related with this world only.
This is not the place where the deeds of people are recompensed.  
 Here it is better if I recite for you a verse from the Qur’an.

If He retaliates none will remain alive
---------------------------------------

If God Almighty catches hold of people for their deeds in this world, no
one will be left walking or moving on this earth anymore.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَلَوْ يُؤَاخِذُ اللَّهُ النَّاسَ بِظُلْمِهِمْ مَا تَرَكَ عَلَيْهَا
مِنْ دَابَّةٍ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And if Allah had destroyed men for their iniquity, He would not
leave on the earth a single creature…***”[^6]

If God decides to take revenge from sinners and oppressors in this very
world then no one will remain alive here. Who is there who has not done
any injustice or oppression? Is there any day in which we have not done
anything wrong? Do you imagine that only he is oppressor who has cut off
someone’s neck? How many unjust things are being done by the one who
sits behind a desk? Does one’s tongue not injure many people in an
oppressive manner? Wrong and injustice is being done everywhere from
behind the weigh-balance, by a worker, by a mason. Wherever you look
there is injustice and unfair dealing.

One does wrong in any way. Let aside all other things. Is there anyone
who has not done injustice to his wife during his married life? It is
oppression indeed. Not only beating but also harassing and troubling her
are also wrong and unjust things. Likewise, a woman also acts unjustly
with her husband by not observing his genuine rights. Both the husband
and the wife have their rights, which must be observed by both. Similar
is the case between father and his children etc. I mean common
injustice. It is not possible to take revenge from the oppressors and
the unjust in this world. Almighty

Allah says: If We catch the oppressors in this world then no one will be
left alive. But God gives respite and allows people to repent and mend
their ways. The place to take revenge or to punish the guilty is in the
other world after death. You want and you expect that God’s Will should
return the strike of Ibn Muljim to his own head instead of Ali’s and
that the hit on Muawiyah should kill him. But it is not so. This world
is not a place for recompense. This is not the place for Ali’s justice.

It is life to be killed on the Path of Truth
--------------------------------------------

Being killed is of two kinds – being killed in the path of desire and
lust, which is destruction (loss in both worlds). Unlucky is one who
gets killed in the path of lust and passion, as it is real destruction,
but being killed in the path of God, truth and righteousness is life,
not destruction.

How true is what the author of *Hadaaiq* has said: Those who say that if
Ali bin Abi Talib knew that he was to be killed within hours in the
night of 19th of the holy month of Ramadhan why he came out of his
house? Because Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَلا تُلْقُوا بِأَيْدِيكُمْ إِلَى التَّهْلُكَةِ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and cast not yourselves to perdition with your own hands…”***[^7]

Do not proceed towards destruction by yourselves. Here destruction is
not death. Here destruction means sinning. Real destruction is that man
does a thing, which angers God and attracts chastisement from Him, but
if death occurs in the path of God it is the biggest salvation and
greatest fortune. That is why, for his entire life, Ali had a very
strong desire to be killed in the path of God.

Man cannot get any honor which his greater than being martyred for the
cause of the Lord of the Worlds. It was the longing of Ali to be killed
for the sake of the religion of God. As I have said earlier, whenever
Ali returned from battlefield safely, he used to weep. When the
Messenger of God asked, “O Ali! You have returned victorious. Why are
you weeping?” Ali replied, “O Messenger of God! Every time I go to
battlefield I return safely whereas it is my strong desire to get killed
in God’s path.” The Messenger of God also gave him good tidings saying,
“O Ali! At last your bread will become red by the blood of your head in
the path of God Almighty.”[^8]

Ali longed for martyrdom
------------------------

Ali was aware of this prophecy and the Messenger had told him in his
dream, “O Ali! For the last ten days of the month of Ramadhan, you are
our guest.” It was a night in the middle of the said last days of
Ramadhan, in the house of Umme Kulthum and in one in the house of
Zainab. What was it with which Ali broke his fast? According to one
narration, he took only three morsels.[^9] Umme Kulthum asked, “My Sir!
You were on fast for the whole day and hence hungry. What is there in
these three morsels?”

Ali replied, “My departure is near. I am to leave this world in the last
ten days of this holy month. I wish that while going, my stomach should
be empty.” He wished to become thus fortunate. Last night, I told you
that Ali was given an option either to remain alive or to be killed. He
himself preferred martyrdom. It was no use to forestall Ibn Muljim. He
could have been downed by merely a signal. But Ali is willing to submit
to the Will of God Almighty.

Ali was, after all, to die one day anyhow. He could and was to go away
from this world because of one reason or the other. But what means is
better than the poisoned sword, in the path of God, that too during
prayer and in the mosque. Who gets such fortune? That too in the best of
circumstances, with total attention to God, with hearty acceptance of
God’s will. All the good people of the world always have such a lofty
desire that when they die they should die remembering God. At the time
of death man is generally unmindful.

He has futile thoughts. Who is there who gives away his life having full
remembrance of God? It is the lofty fortune of Ali. That is why he said,
“By the Lord of Ka’ba, I have succeeded.” I got what I wanted. So, do
not say: Why Muawiyah did not die while Ali got killed. This being
killed is the very desire of Ali himself. You imagine that death is a
monstrosity, which ends all delights. Yes, it was a monstrosity for
Muawiyah. For him it was distancing from pleasures, but for Ali it was
quite the opposite. For Ali, it was joining God and being freed.

Happiness and hardship are relative
-----------------------------------

It is mentioned in a narration that once Imam Hasan Mujtaba went to a
public bath, wore nice clothes, rode a horse. He also had a slave with
him. This son of the Amirul Momineen was moving in an admirable manner.
On his way, he met a Jew who was very poor and extremely unhappy. As his
eye fell on Hasan he stopped and said, “I have to say something to you.”
Imam Hasan also stopped and asked, “What have you to say?” That man
said, “Has your grandfather not said, ‘This world is a prison for a
believer.[^10]

When a believer dies, the gate of the prison opens and the believer
comes out of that jail. For a disbeliever, it is opposite. This world is
a Paradise for a denier. When he dies, he is driven out of Paradise?’”
That man said, “If this tradition is true, what I am observing is its
opposite. Look at your life and my life. Am I in a jail or you?” The
summary of what Imam Hasan said is that: What my grandfather said is
about the life after death (What wisdom, what a truth, what a solid
reply!).

In whatever happiness a believer may be here, its relation is with the
pleasures after death. Still this world is a prison for him. Even if he
wears the costliest dress it is nothing compared to what he will get
after death as promised to him by God Almighty. The most delicious food
a believer may get in this world cannot be compared to the delightful
food he is promised in Paradise and the most delicious drink of this
world is nothing compared to the water of the pool of Kauthar. All the
sweet things in this world are sour if compared with the bounties of
that world after death. The nicest bungalow or place of this world is
like a prison if compared with the palace he will get in Paradise.

But for the disbeliever: Even if he lives the hardest and the most
troublesome life in this world, by God, it is Paradise compared to even
the first hardship in the grave. Even if a denier is subjected to the
hardest torture in this world’s prison, this torturous prison is a
Paradise compared to the chastisement, which he is to get in the
grave.[^11]

Think of the relationship between here and there. Whatever trouble and
hardship a disbeliever may experience here in this world is nothing in
relation to the divine punishments, which will be meted out to him in
grave and hell. The Holy Prophet has said, “He is under pressure like a
nail in wall.” What a fearsome pressure in a dark and narrow grave! The
holy Imam was asked, “Will not those who hang taste the squeeze of
grave?” (In the past people were kept hanging even for years). The holy
Imam said, “The Lord of the ground is also the Lord of the air.”
Conditions make no difference. If a man has attracted divine pressure
and darkness, wherever his body may be he is under squeeze and torturous
pressure. Such darkness, that if he brings out his hand, he will not be
able to see it.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِذَا أَخْرَجَ يَدَهُ لَمْ يَكَدْ يَرَاهَا﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“When he holds out his hand, he is almost unable to see it…”***[^12]

Woe to the prison in Barzakh (life before Judgment Day after death). So
if a disbeliever is in a prison in this world, this worldly prison is
Paradise compared to his grave.

The Worldly Furnace is a Sanatorium of Hell
-------------------------------------------

It also is reported that the Holy Prophet said, “If a disbeliever is
taken out of hellfire and put in the furnace of this world’s fire he
will feel extreme relief.” What a fierce fire is there in hell! In
comparison with it the fires in this world are like rest houses. This is
quite and totally true because the Holy Qur’an speaks about: “The
hottest fire” (Naarun haamiyah).

If compared with hell, fire in this world is cold. Even in this world,
fires have different degrees. There is the heat of oxygen, burning of
acid, even higher is the lightning. Now what is the fire of
‘Saaqiah’?[^13] I do not know. It can scatter mountains. Have you not
seen during your journeys lightning falling from the sky and burning
down green trees? I tell you about even greater heat. If it falls in the
sea it will fry the fish at its bottom. O God! What a heat, which even
an ocean, cannot cool!

A drop of tear cools down oceans of fire
----------------------------------------

Hell is also a fire that cannot be cooled by seven seas, but I am aware
of a drop of water, which can cool it down. It is in our control.
Appreciate it. We possess a drop of water, which can extinguish
mountains of fire. It is the water of our eyes. If a faithful believer
makes himself or herself really faithful, if he really becomes fearful
of God’s anger and chastisement, if this fear melts his heart and wets
his eyes, this drop cools down the fiercest fires of hell.[^14] There
are many narrations on this topic.

For example: Weeping in the best remedy for every illness. A weeping eye
is the spring of Divine Grace. Running water creates greenery
everywhere. Rolling tears are indeed God’s Mercy everywhere.

Especially these passing nights have the night of power (Lailatul Qadr)
in them. The holy Imam is reported to have said[^15]: Remain awake in
the 21st and the 23rd night of the holy month of Ramadhan for improving
your Hereafter. Come and remember God continuously. Your heart will
become alive. Not only your eyes, but your heart must also remain awake.
Refrain from God’s disobedience and disrespect. Explaining the verse:
“God has created men for being kind”, Imam Sadiq says: So that they may
make excuse and pray to Him so that He may be Kind to them.[^16] The
machinery of this creation (universe) is for the purpose that man with
this tongue may make excuse and seek forgiveness, with his burning heart
and weeping eye. It will cause the Divine ocean of Mercy to overflow if
one appreciate this.

O Lord! You make our prayers like that. It is not possible for us to
become like that. First recite Dua Abu Hamzah: How can I save myself
unless You help me. How can I get the good when the good is only with
You. O Lord! It is only You Who can make our prayers like that. Kindly
grant that condition to us all. Make us repent sincerely

[^1]: Surah Maidah 5:119

[^2]: Surah Hadid 57:23

[^3]: Surah Anbiya 21:1

[^4]: Surah Anam 6:91

[^5]: For further details see the book Greater Sins

[^6]: Surah Nahl 16:61

[^7]: Surah Baqarah 2:195

[^8]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 9

[^9]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 9, pg. 655

[^10]: Kashful Ghummah

[^11]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 3

[^12]: Surah Nur 24:40

[^13]: A kind of hellfire

[^14]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 3

[^15]: Mafatihul Jinan, Aamal of Qadr Night

[^16]: Tafsir Burhan, vol.1


