Part 22
=======

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اجْتَنِبُوا كَثِيرًا مِنْ الظَّنِّ،
إِنَّ بَعْضَ الظَّنِّ إِثْمٌ، وَلا تَجَسَّسُوا، وَلا يَغْتَبْ
بَعْضُكُمْ بَعْضًا، أَيُحِبُّ أَحَدُكُمْ أَنْ يَأْكُلَ لَحْمَ أَخِيهِ
مَيْتًا؟ فَكَرِهْتُمُوهُ، وَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ، إِنَّ اللَّهَ تَوَّابٌ
رَحِيمٌ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who believe! Avoid most of suspicion, for surely suspicion in
some cases is a sin, and do not spy nor let some of you backbite others.
Does one of you like to eat the flesh of his dead brother? But you abhor
it; and be careful of (your duty to) Allah, surely Allah is
Oft-returning (to mercy), Merciful. (49:12)”***

Ignorance is no excuse
----------------------

Now only a few days of this dear month are left for us to benefit from.
The last verses of this Chapter give some legal rulings. These commands
are for action and therefore knowing them and acting according to them
is obligatory. These verses are a constitution, not mere admonition
(which may only be discussed). It is not recommendatory; they are
Almighty Allah’s commands, which must be understood by all and obeyed
sincerely.

If somebody is unaware of it, it is no excuse. If on the Day of Judgment
tomorrow, someone says that he did not know about it he will be asked:
“Why did not you learn?” nobody can say: I was ignorant. Ignorance is no
excuse. It is mentioned in *Usul al-Kafi* that Imam Sadiq has said, “I
am inclined to have a whip in my hand and to hit it on the heads of my
Shias so that they become knowledgeable.”[^1]

The words are “Gain deep knowledge of religion.” Therefore, a Shia of
the Progeny of Muhammad is one who knows the solution of religious
problems, who knows what is permissible and what is unlawful. What is
for trial, about what one is responsible and answerable. All these
things must be known to him. This makes one a jurisprudent, the one who
knows the roots and braches of religion. I want to narrate these
commands. Give due importance to them. It is obligatory to know them and
to understand them properly and then to obey them or act according to
them. Now be prepared and attentive so that I may proceed with the last
verses of this holy chapter.

Do not take it in the wrong sense
---------------------------------

It is mentioned that “Soo-e-Zann” (having adverse opinion) is that, for
instance, one sees in a believer and hears something from him and
imagines that it is not good; that it is bad or said with a bad
intention. Suppose he hears a word from him but is not sure whether he
abused or praised him. Yet he says, “No, he surely abused me.” Thus he
takes it for corruption (trouble). He could have also said that it
appeared to me like that but may be he did not abuse me; perhaps he has
praised me.

In case a man has no certainty and there is scope for the matter being
otherwise he has no right to take it for granted that what he saw or
heard was badly intended. Even if you clearly hear a bad word you should
imagine that perhaps he was not attentive enough, perhaps the poor
person had become helpless. Maybe he did not recognize me. So much so
that the Imam says, “Belie your hearing and your sight.”[^2]

Even if you saw with your eyes and heard with your own ears but that
person says: No, I did not say so. Then say: I heard it wrong, man makes
mistake, but do not say: In my opinion you said so. Likewise man also
makes mistake in seeing or observing things. You cannot say: I saw it
with my own eyes. It is possible that what you saw was confusing and you
had misunderstood.

Circle of fire and running of trees
-----------------------------------

For example, if a ball of fire is rotated fast it creates an illusion
and it seems there is a circle of fire. The fact is that there is
nothing like a circle. Since the illuminating things revolve speedily,
one image sent by the eye does not reach the mind before another image
comes up. This creates an illusion.

Or, perhaps, you are traveling in a car or a train. If you look out, you
see that the ground runs speedily and you imagine that your car or train
is stationary. This is an illusion. So even if you have seen something
yourself say: Perhaps I made a mistake in seeing. Do not imagine adverse
possibility. Perhaps you have to repent afterwards when you know that
the matter was otherwise and not as imagined.

He did not respond because he was deaf
--------------------------------------

About thirty years ago there was an old gentleman known to me. I said to
him, “Salam.” But he did not respond. I did so for quite a few times but
the old man did not reply. I became uneasy and told myself, “When he is
not responding to my Salam why should I go on saluting him?” That
gentleman expired after some time. Then it was known in a meeting that
he had become deaf a few years before his departure. But since I did not
know about it and as he did not respond to my salute, I imagined that he
did that deliberately.

So, in such cases, say: Perhaps, I saluted in a very low voice or
perhaps his hearing is weak. Do no say directly that he did not respond
to me. If man ponders over this matter seriously he will realize that
ignoring such Qur’anic commands brings troubles in society due to
baseless allegations. How bad if the one whom you blamed was a friend of
God. An allegation against a friend of God! Who knows what will happen
to such persons. Many calamities come on account of having an adverse
opinion and then reacting to it without any hesitation.

Having a bad opinion about a friend of God is dangerous
-------------------------------------------------------

It is noted that in the holy Mashad city a religious minded trader
intended to proceed for his obligatory pilgrimage of Hajj. In the past,
Hajj journeys used to be quite long. So he wanted an honest man whom he
can entrust his household and business affairs, including his family.
There was a businessman, famous for his piety and righteousness.
Everyone whom he asked that who was honest and pious in the town
recommended him.

So the trader said to that famous Haji, “O Haji! I intend to go for
Hajj. Can you help me?” The Haji replied, “Of course.” So the intending
Haji handed over the keys of his business premises to the said Haji and
also told him, “I entrust my family also to you. Please take a daily
round, supply them their requirements and if they have any problem
kindly solve them.” The Haji accepted. After a few days, this Haji
arrived at the door of his friend who had gone for Hajj. Accidentally on
that day the door of that house was open. His eyes fell on a woman whose
head, face and bosom were uncovered.

This scene made him restless. God forbid, Satan plays his role at such
moments. In short, this poor Haji fell madly in love with this woman and
was now in a very difficult situation. On one hand his heart was
inclined towards the wife of another man and on the other his prestige
was in danger. Besides a danger to his Hereafter and God’s anger, his
life-long respect was about to go away with the wind. How ill-famed he
would become if he inclined to the wife of someone else. He may not be
able to continue his trade and business in Mashad. It is written that
the poor fellow then sought refuge of Imam Reza so that his wild longing
for that woman be removed from his heart.

He said, “O God! What a difficulty is this? O God! What should I do? O
God! Relieve me from this satanic trouble.” Then he was told in a dream,
“You should go to such and such town: (In my opinion, it was, perhaps,
Ray). There in such and such area lives a Shaykh. His name and sign is
this and this. Go to him. He will cure the illness of your heart.”

So the Haji went to that city and inquired about the whereabouts of that
Shaykh. People spoke ill of that Shaykh and mentioned his numerous evil
traits. In short, they told the trader, “O Haji! You are a respectable
person coming from Mashad to see this Shaykh who is not even a Muslim?
He is an Armenian and a disbeliever. His lives in the street of
Armenians and drinks wine. A bottle of wine is always found in before
him. He is also a homosexual and a young boy is always found beside
him.” This poor Haji had come all along from Mashad with a hope that
this Shaykh would cure his spiritual ailment.

Anyhow, he found out his house and saw that there was the Shaykh having
a turban on head and a bottle in front of him with glasses and also a
young boy sitting near him. He asked that Shaykh, “O Sir, first of all
let me know what is your religion?” The Shaykh, a servant of God, said,
“By God, we are Muslim; There is no god except Allah, Muhammad is the
messenger of Allah.” He again asked, “Well, if you are a Muslim. I have
a problem and was advised to approach you but on arrival here I face a
more serious problem. First of all, please solve that difficulty.” “All
right,” said the Shaykh , “tell me.” The Haji from Mashad said, “If you
are a Muslim scholar why do you stay in the area of Armenians? O Master!
Why this bottle of wine in front of you? Sir! Why a young boy besides
you?”

The Shaykh replied, “O Haji! By Allah, I have not come to the area of
Armenians. This house, which you see is the property of my forefathers.
Formerly this was a Muslim area. Then the Armenians started coming here
and bought houses around our house. I did not sell my house. Does this
make me an Armenian?” He said, “How shameless are the people. How they
talk? What a bad opinion they form about a Muslim! Now about this
bottle. Please taste from it a little so that you may know what it is.”
He poured some of it in a cup. It was orange juice. Then he said, “This
young boy is the son of my brother who has expired. I am taking care of
him keeping him with me.”

The Haji then said, “O Master! When your deeds are so nice, just do one
thing. Make your outward appearance like your inner self so that people
may not talk nonsense about you. Leave this area and change your
condition so that people may not have a bad opinion about you and malign
you.” The Shaykh replied, “We do not want that our outward appearance
should be so good that people consider us honest and entrust their women
to us and go for pilgrimage and then we may develop bad intentions about
the women of others and be compelled to travel such a long distance.”  
 These utterances set the Haji aflame. Without being specific he was
made to understand that outward honesty and beauty is dangerous. His
heart was changed that very moment. He prepared himself for seeking
forgiveness, repenting and returned with a purified heart.

Reality of backbiting and vain excuses
--------------------------------------

Another command: Some of you must not backbite others– What does
backbiting mean? You speak of someone’s defect behind him. You say
something, which does not make him happy, not that you make a false
allegation against him. There are people who say, when they speak ill of
someone, that this is not backbiting, I am talking about his real habit
or condition. If you tell the untruth then it is allegation. Curse of
God on you. If you make allegation it is a multiple vice. Or he says: I
do not say, people talk like this. All are doing wrong like you. Truly,
it is a tasteless sin (sin without pleasure) but it has an extraordinary
wretchedness. So much so that the Holy Prophet has said, “Backbiting is
worse than adultery.”

Perhaps you will be astonished, as adultery is accompanied by sexual
pleasure but what taste is there in backbiting! Yet it is said: It is
worse. They asked the Holy Prophet: How backbiting was worse even than
adultery? He replied, “One indulges in adultery. Thereafter, if he
really feels ashamed of it and makes true repentance and sincerely seeks
forgiveness, God forgives him. But if one has backbited someone after
such backbiting even if he does any amount of repentance and says, O
God! Forgive me. O God! Pardon me,’ it is of no use until that person
who was backbitten forgives him.”[^3]

That is why backbiting is worse than adultery as it is bilateral whereas
adultery concerns only God. Backbiting involves both God and the poor
person who is backbitten. Unless that person forgives, the backbiter
will not be forgiven by God. If the backbiter wants to repent, he must
first approach the one whom he has backbitten and obtain his
forgiveness.

Regarding the expiation of backbiting it is mentioned that if one has
backbitten a Muslim or quoted a defect of a believer which has come to
the notice of that Muslim or believer and then if the backbiter wants to
repent, the only remedy is to win the heart of that backbitten person.
If the backbiting is not heard by the backbitten person, then the sinner
should not go and tell him about it as it is likely to grieve him more
and it may result in fresh displeasure. So in such a case the sinner
should keep the matter only between him and God. He should tell those to
whom he had spoken ill about that he had made a mistake and that what he
had said was not true and he would speak well of him. The repentance of
backbiting is praising. So one should now speak good about that man who
was backbitten and also seek forgiveness from God. This shows how big is
the sin of backbiting. This matter is further emphasized in the
following verse, which says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يُحِبُّونَ أَنْ تَشِيعَ الْفَاحِشَةُ فِي الَّذِينَ
آمَنُوا لَهُمْ عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ فِي الدُّنْيَا وَالآخِرَةِ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely (as for) those who love that scandal should circulate
respecting those who believe, they shall have a grievous chastisement in
this world and the hereafter;”***[^4]

Just as it is obligatory for the speaker to speak about these commands
it also is obligatory for others to hear them and to understand them –
Woe unto one who likes to spread the bad news of a shameful deed,
exposing it to others in the society. The first one tells it to the
second and the second tells it in a gathering and within a short time it
becomes talk of the town. Then he says that so and so says so. Now who
told it to ten old ladies? The talk of these ten old ladies also returns
to one ignorant old lady who made this mistake.

Then they say that the whole town speaks about it. Hellfire is for the
one who spreads a shameless deed by exposing it. Even if you saw it with
your own eyes it is your duty to hide it. You have no right to tell
about it to anyone. Curse of God on you if you say what you saw. Imam
Sadiq has said: One who spreads and talks about what he saw or heard
about a believer is one of those who, as mentioned by God in the Holy
Qur’an, will taste a painful chastisement as he liked to expose evil
deeds.[^5]

Ousted from God’s shelter
-------------------------

It is mentioned in *Usul al-Kafi* that Imam Sadiq says: If one says what
he saw by his eyes or heard by his ears of what makes one honorless, God
drives him out of His shelter even if such man fasted in Ramadhan. The
word used is Wilayat (of God). Wilayat is in the meaning of
guardianship, love, kindness; that is, God drives him out of His help
and hands him over to the devil who also does not accept him. It means
such man is so mean and wicked that Satan too does not look at him. Such
is a man who says what he saw and what he heard to make one
honorless.[^6]  
 The Holy Qur’an also says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّ السَّمْعَ وَالْبَصَرَ وَالْفُؤَادَ كُلُّ أُوْلَئِكَ كَانَ
عَنْهُ مَسْئُولاً﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…surely, the hearing and the sight and the heart, all of these,
shall be questioned about that.”***[^7]

O the ones says anything, O ones who creates adverse opinion, all this
will be questioned. Another holy verse says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَيْلٌ لِكُلِّ هُمَزَةٍ لُمَزَةٍ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“‘Wael’ (woe) to every slanderer, defamer,”***[^8]

The Arabic word ‘Wael’ means a well in hell. For whom is it? – It is for
a backbiter who runs after the honor of everyone like a fly buzzing
around the body, from head to feet but it sits only at the spot, which
is injured, where there is a wound and it feeds on it. Though the body
has hundreds of beauties it over looks all of them but sits only at the
defective part. It overlooks and ignores good things and sticks to the
defect even if sometimes it is not defective as will be seen in the
following tale:

A beautiful mole appears ugly but…
----------------------------------

Like Greece, wisdom was also found in India in olden days. It is said
that in one of the Indian cities, there were two statues erected at its
main gate. One of them was very good-looking, full of niceties. One of
its beauties was a black mole on its right cheek. In front of this nice
statue they had also erected a very ugly statue, which looked frightened
and two long horns were arose from its head. This ugly statue extended
its finger pointing to the black mole on the face of the other beautiful
statue saying: How ugly you are. Just look at this black mole. Then they
had written these words: This is the condition of man – he does not look
at two ugly horns on his head.

He does not see the beauties of others. He looks only at a little black
mole though this mole also, at its place is a mark of beauty. You
dislike it and see ugliness in it! How sweet are the words of Shaykh:  
 Stop finding faults of others. Look at your own defect and criticize
it. (Persian couplet)

Look at your horns. When you see defects in others, also look at your
own defects. Be equitable. If you can see one or two drawbacks in
others, truly speaking, you can find hundreds of defects in your own
self. But who looks at one’s own drawbacks? One always thinks nice about
oneself (Love of something makes one blind and deaf). For example,
Criticizing others he says: that man is ungrateful, he does not observe
rights of others, he does not act as one should act with his friends.
But, have you observed the rights of God, have you been thankful to Him?

They do not observe the rights of God
-------------------------------------

A trader, who was a follower of Allamah Majlisi, came to him and said,
“O Sir! I have fallen in a difficult situation. Some jugglers are sent
to me from Isfahan and they say, ‘We want to visit your house tonight.’
I am also unable to run away (escape) as these jugglers have connections
with the government and are likely to harm me and I am compelled to
provide means of play and pastime for them when they arrive. Now what
should I do?” Majlisi (may God raise his ranks) replied, “Never mind. I
myself will come to that gathering first. Everything will be all right.”
Then Majlisi offered his evening and night prayer before going to the
house of that trader.

The chief juggler arrived with his students but when they saw Majlisi
they were displeased as obviously it would not be easy or possible for
them so sing and dance in his presence. Majlisi told the chief juggler.
What kind of things are you doing? They replied angrily, “Our behavior
is better than yours.” Majlisi asked, “How is it so?” They replied, “We
are grateful and know who has helped us. If we have eaten the salt of
somebody (are helped by someone) we remain grateful to him till we
breathe our last. We do not become dishonest. We are thankful people. We
have magnanimity.” Majlisi remained silent for a while, then after a
little pause asked them, “Well if you are a grateful lot tell me how
much gratefulness you have shown towards your God? Have you not eaten
His salt? How much thankful have you been to Him? Have you broken the
salt-pan? How many sins have you committed against His Will? Somebody
gave you something and you appreciated it. Is this, in your opinion,
thankfulness? Realize the kindness of God. Begin from a piece of bread
and then go further in appreciating God’s beneficence. You have
benefited from Him not on one or two days but for the last sixty years.
Now you say I am a thankful man! What have you done with regard to the
Creator of salt and bread, the Lord of the Universe? Have you thanked
Him? Have you served and worshipped Him? Have you not disobeyed Him by
sinning?” Hearing these true words, the jugglers rose up one by one and
went out. Majlisi also departed.

Next morning after the call for prayer Majlisi heard a knock at his
door. He saw that the chief juggler had come to him, but in what
condition? How fortunate is the chief juggler who repents and makes
repentance. And woe unto the Haji Sahib who becomes proud. Good end
depends on repentance whereby one does not consider himself pious. In
brief, the juggler came, sought pardon and said, “O Sir! My entire life
passed in negligence. Last night I realized that all of us are totally
ungrateful. Now, I have come to repent.” The late Majlisi also behaved
very nicely with him, took him in his house and showed him the path of
repentance saying, make a firm decision not to sin again. Make a promise
with God that you will not miss prayer and fasts and that you will not
be unmindful of your Lord’s commands and duties imposed on you by Him.
If you want to thank Him appropriately then never disregard His
Commands, give up whatever He orders you not to do.

O the ones who sin with these God-given eyes by looking at prohibited
things! You have, by so doing, been ungrateful to God for this great
bounty. O the one who has used the God-given ears for hearing
impermissible sounds! You are thankless to God. O the one who beats an
innocent child with this God-given hand! You are ungrateful.
Thankfulness is in using the God-given things for which God has created
them. God gave you hands so that you may serve God’s creation with them
and always perform good deeds. But you did evil things with these hands.

How fortunate is one who, in this holy month of Ramadhan, repents for
each and every ungratefulness and makes sincere repentance. The door of
Divine Mercy is always open. He forgives the repentant. He does not take
back the bounty of tongue, which could make you dumb. Suppose a man is
thirsty and is unable to move and is also unable to tell that he is
thirsty. What to do? How difficult is this situation! Woe unto one, when
the bounty of this tongue will be withdrawn. One may also not be able to
say or convey anything by signals. Woe unto you if you become thankless
by misusing this tongue by backbiting others and attacking someone’s
honor. All this is thanklessness and ungratefulness. It is so if you
uttered indecent things and sang shameless songs.

Now, come, let us repent over the past. O Lord! You have, so kindly,
opened the door of Your Mercy. Zainul Abideen prays: O Lord! If You had
not given us anything except the Door of repentance, it would have been
enough for us.[^9] This door of repentance is an extraordinary bounty.
Man can benefit limitlessly from this door. But woe unto us if we do not
take its benefit. How spacious is this door when it is said: Whatever
you have done, come and turn towards your Lord and improve yourself,
repent, do not get disappointed. Do not say: My tongue cannot count my
sins. If your sins are many, God’s forgiveness is greater than them,
more and higher. Come once with a heavy and repenting heart and see how
God forgives you.

Paradise is prohibited for a backbiter
--------------------------------------

It is written that Paradise has been proclaimed inadmissible to some
groups: drunkards, usurers and backbiters.[^10] O God! I seek Your
refuge from being in any of these groups. Corpse eater is not allowed to
enter Paradise. The place of a corpse eater is in dirty places. Dogs
gather around a corpse. Some of them also sit at a distance. Those who
backbite believers are all carrion-eaters. There are a number of
testimonies to this statement. It is indeed very dangerous. If you are
in a meeting and if anyone wants to talk evil of any believer (who is
absent) get up at once and run away from that gathering. Try your best
to stop them from backbiting. If you prevent them God will close doors
of evils for you.[^11] If you did not try to prevent them and if you
helped him, God will chastise you 70 times more than him. The sin of
such hearer (of backbiting) is seventy times severer than the speaker.
This will be explained in detail tomorrow.

Injuries of Husain on Ashura Day
--------------------------------

Now let us hold the skirt of Husain for forgiveness and mercy. Sometimes
the tongue utters a word. It inflames fire. One says a word, which burns
the heart of people. Some words were spoken against Husain on the day of
Ashura, which were more painful than the wounds of swords and spears for
the heart of Husain. A disbeliever who inflicted such injury said, “O
Husain! Did you not say, ‘My father will distribute water of Kauthar?’
Now ask him to quench your thirst.” Another oppressor inflicted another
wound saying; at the time of burning Husain tents: You made haste to
enter fire.

[^1]: Usul al-Kafi, chapter ‘Obligation of knowledge’ pg. 31

[^2]: Safinatul Bihar, vol. 2; pg. 11

[^3]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 6, pg. 187

[^4]: Surah Nur 24:19

[^5]: Usul al-Kafi, pg. 357

[^6]: Kafi, pg. 358

[^7]: Surah Isra 17:36

[^8]: Surah Humazah 104:1

[^9]: Sahifa Sajjadiya

[^10]: Safinatul Bihar 1:124

[^11]: Layaliyal Akhbar, pg. 597


