Part 23
=======

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَلا تَجَسَّسُوا، وَلا يَغْتَبْ بَعْضُكُمْ بَعْضًا، أَيُحِبُّ
أَحَدُكُمْ أَنْ يَأْكُلَ لَحْمَ أَخِيهِ مَيْتًا؟ فَكَرِهْتُمُوهُ،
وَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ، إِنَّ اللَّهَ تَوَّابٌ رَحِيمٌ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And do not spy nor let some of you backbite others. Does one of you
like to eat the flesh of his dead brother? But you abhor it; and be
careful of (your duty to) Allah, surely Allah is Oft-returning (to
mercy), Merciful. (49:12)”***

Four evidences which show that backbiting is prohibited
-------------------------------------------------------

There are four evidences, which prove that backbiting is prohibited: The
Book, the Sunnah, consensus and reason.  
 All the schools of thought and sects in Islam fully agree that
backbiting is prohibited. Human wisdom, intelligence and logic also say
so. Everything, which becomes a cause of disintegration and disunity, is
illegal. Yesterday we came across some verses of the Holy Qur’an showing
that backbiting is unlawful. For example:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿أَيُحِبُّ أَحَدُكُمْ أَنْ يَأْكُلَ لَحْمَ أَخِيهِ مَيْتًا؟
فَكَرِهْتُمُوهُ، وَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ، إِنَّ اللَّهَ تَوَّابٌ رَحِيمٌ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Does one of you like to eat the flesh of his dead brother? But you
abhor it; and be careful of (your duty to) Allah, surely Allah is
Oft-returning (to mercy), Merciful. (49:12)”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّ السَّمْعَ وَالْبَصَرَ وَالْفُؤَادَ كُلُّ أُوْلَئِكَ كَانَ
عَنْهُ مَسْئُولاً﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely, the hearing and the sight and the heart, all of these, shall
be questioned about that.”***[^1]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَيْلٌ لِكُلِّ هُمَزَةٍ لُمَزَةٍ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Woe to every slanderer, defamer,”***[^2]

Fifty narrations regarding backbiting
-------------------------------------

Some scholar scholars have collected fifty narrations from books. Here I
tell you about two or three of them so the seriousness of this sin may
be known.

Backbiting eats up religion like leprosy
----------------------------------------

According to *Usul al-Kafi,* the Holy Prophet said: Backbiting is like
‘Kallah’[^3] (Majlisi says, most probably it means leprosy, a skin
disease which grows beneath the skin and eats up the flesh so much that
even bones show up.) In Persian, it is said that leprosy is a disease,
which eats up flesh. Sometimes it eats up the nose and then nothing like
a nose is seen any more. This is a very dangerous and contagious
disease. It is not detected in the beginning but after some months when
it is detected, nothing remains of an affected organ.

It is said that backbiting too is similar. It eats up the religion of a
Muslim. It means that one who takes up the habit of backbiting his
religion also begins to be eaten up simultaneously and continuously and
gets eroded till the day when it is known that there is no religion in
his heart, that it has become faithless and when he dies, he dies a
faithless fellow.

Towards good through good opinion about God
-------------------------------------------

Yet another narration in *al-Kafi* quotes Amirul Momineen that the
Prophet said: (This narration is both a good tiding as well as a
warning) By God, (This swearing shows that the matter is very
important), Who has no partner, and there is no sovereign except He, no
person can attain the good of both this world and the Hereafter but by
three things. First is to have a good opinion about God.

It means he should hope that if His order is obeyed He will give its
reward, also one must hope that if he gives up sinning His Lord will
reward him. If man cuts off his relation (His mindfulness) with God he
has no other hope of doing any good deed and he will not engage in
worship and prayer. If one has no hope that God gives reward of praying,
fasting and spending in His path, why will he engage in these good
deeds? In short, anyone who reaches anywhere it is dependent upon his
good opinion and hope from God. If you see that one spends his wealth
for helping the needy know that his hope from God is great and his
opinion about God is stronger. If one is found lazy in such good deeds,
know that his hope from God is less.

Character building by practice during youth time
------------------------------------------------

The second thing, which is the means of every good is good behavior or
manners. It cannot be purchased. It is also not attained merely by
prayers. It requires struggle and practice. Practice can make man
perfect in character building also. It is not like a dyer’s tank wherein
if a cloth is dipped it gets colored at once. Reforming character is a
very difficult task. Here is the gist of a narration from Imam Sadiq. If
it is said that a mountain has moved from its place, it is believable
but if someone says that one’s habits have changed it is hard to
believe. If one builds up a good character by the age of forty it is
good. Otherwise, it is very difficult to change after this age.

It is possible only if God helps him and he makes painful efforts. Till
he is young it does not require much effort. He can improve his manners
easily. It is possible that his ways may improve after some years of
struggle. O Youths! Appreciate the value of your youth. Reform you
character when you are young. The good of this as well the other world
is in a sound and healthy character. It is mentioned that in the balance
of measuring deeds nothing is weightier than a nice character.[^4] At
present we see it rarely.

What is a healthy character?
----------------------------

Here we explain the meaning of good character in brief: Sound character
means that a man attains an ability from his interior whereby he can
behave nicely with all people. He can treat everyone in a good way. He
may deal with others honestly. A good behavior with his wife and
children, with his neighbors and with everyone with whom he has to do
any thing. He does not make anyone sorrowful. He does not harm or hurt
anyone either by his words or actions. One example of good behavior is
humility. He meets others with a smiling face and an open heart. To
remain grim-faced and angry is a bad characteristic and so it is to be
harsh and bitter in talking or to interrupt others when they speak.

It is healthy character, which enables one to behave nicely with
everyone easily; even with his enemy so that he may forgive him despite
having the power to punish or take revenge.  
 Good behavior in dealings is that he may not be tough and hard. To be
extremely mild while buying and to be extremely tough in selling is also
an example of bad character.

In the matter of matrimony, if a man seeks the hand of your daughter, do
not be hard. See whether he has a religious mind and character or not.
Does he offer daily prayer and observe fasts during Ramadhan. He should
not have bad manners. If one gives ones daughter in marriage to a
drunkard it is like hurling her into vices. There is a narration in this
regard.[^5]  
 To befriend and to entertain guests is also good behavior. To respect
the elders and to be kind and affectionate to youngsters is also a good
trait. Almighty Allah says in Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَلا تُصَعِّرْ خَدَّكَ لِلنَّاسِ وَلا تَمْشِ فِي الأَرْضِ مَرَحًا،
إِنَّ اللَّهَ لا يُحِبُّ كُلَّ مُخْتَالٍ فَخُورٍ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And do not turn your face away from people in contempt, nor go about
in the land exulting overmuch; surely Allah does not love any
self-conceited boaster;”***[^6]

Refraining from backbiting, cause of every good
-----------------------------------------------

The third thing, which is the means for getting every good is: Restrain
yourself from backbiting people. No one has got the good of this world
and Hereafter except through three means: First good opinion about God,
second good character and third holding oneself from backbiting. It is
said: As one (especially women) has to put pressure on one’s hearts
saying that if you control yourself you will be wiser and get high ranks
and your faith will become stronger and your soul more powerful and your
heart happier.

But a child and a childish person is unable to control himself as he, at
once, speaks up about what he saw and heard. If you also be like that,
are you different from a child? Your intelligence has not grown up at
all.

Now, the rest of the tradition: By God Who has no partner, chastisement
will not touch a believer after he or she believed and repented but
because of three things: One, having a bad opinion about God (which has
been explained earlier). The second is a bad character and the third
backbiting.[^7]

Bad behavior brings punishment to Saad in grave
-----------------------------------------------

Second, bad behavior or character. Just hear the story of Saad’s bad
behavior. All deeds of Saad bin Maaz were good. He even becomes one
whose prayer is answered. He was hit by an arrow in the Battle of the
Ditch. There he had prayed: O Lord! Let me not die until I see Islam and
Muslims win over the Jews of Banu Quraiza. As he uttered these, blood,
which was gushing from his wound stopped. No drop dripped till the time
Islam and Muslims won over Bani Quraiza and the Jews of Bani Quraiza
were driven out. Thereafter, the wound opened up again and bled till he
breathed his last and became a martyr in the path of God. I want you to
learn about him.[^8]

The Prophet took two turns around his bier barefoot and said, “My hand
was in the hand of Jibraeel. Seventy thousand angels participated in the
burial of Saad bin Maaz.” The Messenger of God laid Saad to rest in the
grave. His mother exclaimed, “Congratulations! Be pleased with the
Paradise awarded to you.” The Prophet asked, “How do you say that?”
According to another tradition, the Holy Prophet shivered. On being
asked he replied, “Saad is under squeeze now in his grave.”[^9]

People asked the holy Imam the reason of such pressure when Saad was a
very nice gentleman from the viewpoint of faith, observance of duties
and being away from the impermissible things. He replied: Improper
behavior with his wife and children.[^10] He had no other defect except
that he was harsh towards his wife and children. Otherwise, he was just,
hardworking, a leader, a jurist. But, at last, one has to account for
every kind of behavior.

He says: By God, after repentance and seeking forgiveness, Imam and God
do not punish anyone except for bad opinion and secondly, bad behavior
be it with one’s wife and children or with outsiders or with both which
is worse still. The third thing, which invites divine anger is
backbiting. Guard your tongue. It is very dangerous.

Backbiting overturns good and bad deeds
---------------------------------------

I briefly narrate the third thing: The subject of several traditions is
that tomorrow, on the Day of Judgment, a faithful will be given his
scroll of deeds in his hands. One will observe that though he had done
several good deeds, they do not figure in the sheet. O Lord! We fed
people went for visiting tombs (Ziyarat), recited Qur’an and did several
other good deeds. Some of them are not noted here!

He will be told: God never forgets anything. The deeds, which you
mentioned, are now there in the sheet of the one whom you backbited. On
the other hand, a believer will see the mention of several readings of
Holy Qur’an in Ramadhan whereas he had not recited anything. He will be
informed: In Ramadhan, a fellow had backbitten you. The reward of his
good deed is transferred to your scroll of deeds. Understand this matter
properly. It is absolutely correct. Narrations regarding this are found
in many books of Shias and Sunnis. You make efforts, you toil a lot and
then, with one word, give it away to another person by backbiting him.
How sad! Is there any loss greater than this? Woe unto you if the other
party is your enemy. When you backbite your enemy, you give him whatever
you have earned. Tomorrow, on the Day of Judgment, you see that your
good deeds are listed in the scroll of your enemy. This is your
friendship with him!

Gifts in exchange of backbiting and cursing
-------------------------------------------

Especially people of knowledge are all the more caught in the habit of
backbiting as jealousy in them is more than other classes. The only
exceptions are those who have purified themselves. The same jealousy is
one of the causes of backbiting and false allegations. Briefly speaking,
it is written in the events of one of the great scholars that this
gentleman had become very jealous of one whom he was backbiting daily.
No day passed in which he did not backbite that person. And that person
used to send him (the backbiter) a new gift, like various fruits, daily.
The receiver of these gifts also was also not totally devoid of justice.
He realized that he was wrong in backbiting him. So, by and by, he
stopped backbiting him. The other person thereafter stopped sending
gifts to him.

The former asked: “How was is that when I was talking bad of you were
you were sending me gifts but since I stopped doing the prohibited deed
you stopped your gifts?” That person replied, “Formerly you were serving
me daily by giving away your good deeds to me so I was compensating you.
Now that you have stopped giving me your rewards, I have also stopped
sending you gifts.”[^11]

There are many narrations indicating that tomorrow, on the Day of
Judgment, the reward of the good deeds of a backbiter will be snatched
from him and transferred to the scroll of deeds of the backbitten
one.[^12] Therefore, it is necessary to clear the account in this world.
The backbiter should, if the backbitten one is alive, go to the latter
and apologize so that he may forgive him (in case the backbitten one had
heard bad words). If it was not heard by him, praise his virtues. If the
one who was backbitten is dead, the backbiter should pray for his
forgiveness and give charity on his behalf. Otherwise, the result will
be very difficult. There is a lot to be talked about this. But it is
enough for the time being. Now I may say something about the exception.

Admonition by an adviser is not backbiting
------------------------------------------

This is about a situation wherein one’s advice is sought who wishes well
of the former and tells what is true so that one may not fall in
trouble. For example, one asks another: Is there any problem if I take
this girl in marriage? Now, if he or she knows about the defects of that
girl and describes them, it amounts to backbiting. It harms and defames
her. If he does not say anything, the one who sought his advice is
likely to fall into trouble. In this case, it is a must for you to do
something whereby neither the seeker of advice is put to loss nor the
other party is defamed and disgraced. Say: I do not know what is good
for you. If they ask: Why? Then say: Please excuse me. If you say, “It
is not advisable” or “I do not see good” it is over. You have neither
backbitten anyone nor put anyone to trouble.

Yes, scholars have said that if the seeker of advice is not satisfied
with your short reply and you feel that if you do not explain that
person will fall into trouble, reply in such a manner that the other
party is not disgraced and defamed. If you know ten defects, mention
only one, not all. Briefly speaking, try your best to avoid backbiting.

No Backbiting in open sins
--------------------------

As regards other situations in which backbiting is allowed is: If there
is a fellow whose sins are open[^13] and who has thrown away the veil of
shame and modesty and who is not at all afraid of sinning, describing
his sins is not backbiting as it is not “showing what God hid”. You have
not told any secret or hidden thing. You have said what is open to all
and before the eyes of all. That fellow has himself torn down the
curtain of shame. Relating his open crimes is not backbiting. Of course,
it is sinful to disgrace one who goes secretly to a wine shop and
drinks. Another fellow arrives in a cinema house with a dancer in public
view. You have no right to talk of the first fellow’s drinking, as it
was in secrecy.

But as for the dancer, it is also better not to talk, but no harm if you
have to mention it sometimes.

Seeking justice is not backbiting
---------------------------------

Another exception: It is in the situation of oppression and injustice.
Someone is oppressed. His property is snatched. He has no alternative
but to claim his due and approach anyone who can help in compensating
his loss. If he says that such and such person did such and such
injustice, it is not wrong. But care must be taken that your cry for
justice should not be for exposing that fellow’s hidden sins. You can
say about the injustice done to you, not about the defects known to you
other than with which you are concerned. One of the things which makes
one fall in backbiting is enmity.

Man wants to show himself as clean and makes the other party tainted.
For example, one who wants to sell his commodity says: I am not like
such and such gentleman who sells mixed scents oils. We do not want to
be like such and such person who sells mixed tea. We have promised to
our God to be clean and honest. This makes one fall into the sin of
backbiting. Sometimes it also so happens that one wants to remove an
allegation from himself and disgrace another. You do not lie. You want
to prove your cleanness. But you open the closed fist of another one.
You open up his secret sin. For example: They ask you: Why did you do
this? Your reply: That man has also done this. His deed was hidden. In
such a case, one wants to belittle the evil of his own misdeed and, for
it, he opens the secret of others. Here one backbites another with an
intention of showing himself innocent. He also makes a false allegation
and tells untruth.

Ahmed the orphan and Ibn Tolon’s slave girl
-------------------------------------------

Summary of the story: Ahmed bin Tolon was a king of Egypt. One day, he
saw a child by the roadside. Someone had abandoned it. But the baby’s
face had signs of nobility. Tolon was impressed by it. So he ordered the
child be brought home. They brought it to Ibn Tolon’s harem. A nurse was
provided for the baby for taking care of it. It grew up. They also named
him Ahmed. With growth in his age his intelligence also rose and so also
his relation with Tolon. When Tolon felt that he was about to die he
recommended to his son, Abdul Jaish, about this boy Ahmed. He told him
that this youth (Ahmed) was an orphan. “I reared him up. I have seen no
defect in him. He will be of use to you, so treat him nicely.

Then Tolon expired and his son followed his late father’s will and loved
the youth (Ahmed) nicely and gave him responsible posts without
obtaining security or guarantees. They saw only honesty and truth in
him. One day, Abul Jaish wanted a Tasbih (rosary) of pearls from his
pocket, but he remembered that he had placed it near his bed last night.
So he asked Ahmed, who had now become a grown up youth, to go to the
harem and bring his rosary. Ahmed said: All right, I obey. Then he went
to the harem of the king. When he opened the door he saw that a male
servant of the palace was lying dishonestly with the king’s slave girl.
The dishonest servant ran away. The slave girl fell at the feet of Ahmed
and begged him to do what the runaway fellow had done with her but not
to disclose the matter and disgrace her.

But Ahmed was not at all prepared to be dishonest. So he rejected the
evil offer firmly. The overlooking of this youth is very important, in
such conditions. He did not extend his hand towards the slave girl. He
took up the king’s rosary and came out. He did not tell anything about
what he had seen. How strong is the character of this youth. He saw such
an evil incident but did not expose it to disgrace anyone. He did not
disgrace that servant or the slave girl. This is a highly great
character. Now see, how Almighty God rewards him for this noble
behavior.

A more beautiful slave girl had arrived for Abul Jaish. The king became
less inclined to the former slave girl who was dishonest. The latter
thought that Ahmed the orphan had complained against her misdeed to the
king. The king had always loved her so she told herself: Let me go to
the king and make an allegation against Ahmed before anything happens.
So she went to the king and said: I want to tell you a secret. This
Ahmed, with whom you are so friendly, do not rely on him. He had grabbed
me and wanted to rape me. I have not been dishonest to the king and I
never wanted to do so, but he did not release me and finally he
committed dishonesty with the king. As she said this, Abul Jaish
believed it to be true.

I have said earlier: Almighty God says: Do not believe in every word you
hear but make inquiries. Abul Jaish believed in what the slave girl said
and decided to kill Ahmed, who was a pious and righteous youth. The king
told his adviser, “When I send you a tray along with a letter, asking
you to fill that tray with musk. Cut off the head of whoever brings it
(the tray), and send that head in the same tray to me.” When this
righteous youth, Ahmed the orphan came to the king, the king told him,
“I want to send a gift.” He wrote a letter and gave Ahmed a tray asking
him, “Take this tray to the adviser and bring to me whatever he gives.”
Ahmed said, “Most willingly, Sir.” Then he brought out that tray and the
letter. When he was about to leave the palace God Almighty prepared a
plan in his favor. Some outsiders close to the king were busy in an
entertainment game.

They requested Ahmed to join them. Ahmed replied, “I am on an errand.
The king has ordered me to take this letter and this tray to the
adviser.” They said, “Please entrust it to someone else and have some
pastime with us.” Then his eye fell on the slave who was found sometime
back in the bed of the king with his slave girl. Ahmed told him, “I give
you an order. Will you carry it out?” That slave who was afraid of
Ahmed, replied, “Yes, I will at once carry it out.” Ahmed told him,
“Take this letter and this tray and hand both over to the adviser and
bring here whatever he gives, so that I may hand it over to the king.”
That dishonest slave took up both the things and went to the adviser.

Ahmed joined the entertainment. When the slave reached the adviser, the
latter, at once, cut off his head, put that head in that tray and called
another servant telling him to carry it to the king. On his way, Ahmed
the orphan saw that servant. He stopped him and said, “I must carry this
to the king.” But he did not open it to see what was in it. He came to
the king. When the king saw Ahmed, he astonishingly asked Ahmed to
uncover the tray to see what was therein. He saw that there was the head
of someone else. His amazement multiplied and he asked Ahmed, “Tell me
truly what did you do?” Ahmed said, “By God! The truth is that I sat for
entertainment for a while and gave this tray to this man whose head is
in the tray now. I never knew that they wanted to cut his head like
this.” The king fell in deep thought.

Then he asked Ahmed, “There must be something strange behind all this.
Tell me had you any encounter with this dead youth in the past?” Ahmed
replied, “Yes, the truth is that on that day when you had sent me to
fetch your rosary from your harem, I had seen this youth lying in bed
with your slave girl, but I did not report about them so that the two
unlucky fellows may not be disgraced. Except this I did not have
anything with this man.” The king cursed the dead youth and that
dishonest slave girl saying: This righteous youth (Ahmed) did a favor to
her by not disgracing her but in return, she comes to me and slams a
false allegation against this innocent Ahmed![^14] It is just like the
story of Yusuf and Zulaikha.

Yusuf and Zulaikha, a lesson of the time
----------------------------------------

Zulaikha ran after Yusuf who had fled from her. She caught hold of his
shirt, which got torn from behind. Yusuf ran away. In the meantime the
Aziz of Egypt arrived there. When Zulaikha saw her husband, she, in
order to ward off allegations from herself and to escape trouble, hurled
an allegation against Yusuf and blamed him.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿قَالَتْ: مَا جَزَاءُ مَنْ أَرَادَ بِأَهْلِكَ سُوءًا إِلاَّّ أَنْ
يُسْجَنَ أَوْ عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ؟﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“She said: What is the punishment of him who intends evil to your
wife except imprisonment or a painful chastisement?”***[^15]

Looking at her husband. She said, “Yusuf intended to be dishonest with
me. I wanted to catch and punish him so I ran after him.” Thus she
turned the matter upside down and said that Yusuf had a bad intention
about her and she ran after him. Now what could Yusuf do? God always
helps an oppressed person, especially in the event of a false allegation
because no oppression is severer than a false allegation. Imam Sadiq
says: It is heavier than a mountain.[^16] In short God helped the
helpless Yusuf. What could Yusuf do? Should say: No? Who would believe
him? But the Lord of the Universe exposed the piety of Yusuf. A baby in
the cradle testified and produced two evidences. The whole world has
testified to it. It said: Look at the shirt of Yusuf. If it is torn from
the front it means Yusuf was guilty of embracing Zulaikha. But if it is
torn behind it shows that Zulaikha was at fault.[^17] Almighty Allah
absolved Yusuf and produced a testimony to his truthfulness and piety.
The Aziz of Egypt also looked at Zulaikha and said, “Repent over your
sin as you are an offender.”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿يُوسُفُ: أَعْرِضْ عَنْ هَذَا، وَاسْتَغْفِرِي لِذَنْبِكِ، إِنَّكِ
كُنتِ مِنْ الْخَاطِئِينَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O Yusuf! Turn aside from this; and (O my wife)! Ask forgiveness for
your fault,*** ***surely you are one of the wrongdoers.”***[^18]

He also asked Yusuf, “Drop the matter here, let it go. Ignore it.”  
 Now, we are not dealing with the story of Yusuf except the aspect that
man must not blame others for hiding his error or sin and for proving
his innocence or piety. Accountability is there for sure. Be sure that
if the matter is not compensated in this world, there is the Hereafter
for doing justice. In fact, this world is not a place for compensation.

The place for such compensation is the Hereafter, on the Day of
Judgment. It is not without a motive when He says that every man will be
raised in the Grand Gathering on that Day so that all can see him and an
announcer will announce: O people! Whoever has to take back his trampled
right from this person may come up and ask for it.[^19] The rightful
persons will be those who were backbitten, whose wealth was snatched,
who were made helpless. Amirul Momineen says, “O My Shias! If possible
die in such a state that your hands are not dirtied with blood or
property of a Muslim. Your tongue must also not be dirty due to
insulting and disgracing a Muslim.” It is correct; Ali wants this from
you.

[^1]: Surah Isra 17:36

[^2]: Surah Humazah 104:1

[^3]: Kafi, vol. 2; pg. 357

[^4]: Kafi 2:99

[^5]: Fiqahur Reza (a), Chapter of Drinking Wine

[^6]: Surah Luqman 31:18

[^7]: Kafi 2:72

[^8]: Safinatul Bihar, 1:621

[^9]: Bihar 3:132

[^10]: Bihar 3:143

[^11]: Layaliyal Akhbar

[^12]: Kashfur Reebah

[^13]: Makasib, Shaykh Ansari

[^14]: Mustatraff, pg. 206

[^15]: Surah Yusuf 12:25

[^16]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 6, 170

[^17]: Surah Yusuf 12:26-27

[^18]: Surah Yusuf 12:29

[^19]: Layaliyal Akhbar pg. 548


