Part 24
=======

We have discussed about backbiting. Now an explanation of the Holy verse
and its application to what we talked about. This Arabic word ‘gheebat’
(backbiting) should be pronounced with vowel ‘ee’ after the first letter
‘g’. If it is read with vowel ‘a’ after ‘g’ it becomes ‘ghaebat’ meaning
‘disappearance’.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَلا يَغْتَبْ بَعْضُكُمْ بَعْضًا﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…nor let some of you backbite others. (49:12)”***

This is a negative command. None of you should backbite some of you.
This style of ordering is for stimulation, meaning you are one. O
Muslims! Do not backbite your own selves.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿أَيُحِبُّ أَحَدُكُمْ أَنْ يَأْكُلَ لَحْمَ أَخِيهِ مَيْتًا؟﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Does one of you like to eat the flesh of his dead brother?
(49:12)”***

A strange comparison is made so that man may hate backbiting to the
utmost extent. Does anyone of you like to eat the flesh of his brother
who had died? Would he like to cut his dear brother’s flesh with a knife
or with his own teeth and chew it or devour it? Imagine this scene. Can
anyone ever like this gruesome deed! Doubtlessly, it is an extremely
abhorring thought. Eating corpse is the deed of a vulture and of a dog.
God desired that no corpse should remain lying on the surface of the
earth so that the earth may be clean for habitation of mankind. A man
does not do this. This is an example for making people detest backbiting
and for explaining the facts of the other world.

Comparing backbiting with eating of dead
----------------------------------------

God says that backbiting is like eating the flesh of a corpse. To
deprive one of his honor or respect is just like snatching his flesh. It
is mentioned in a narration that if someone disrupts the talk of others
and does not allow him to speak a word, it is just like piercing claws
into someone’s face and scratching flesh off his face. The honor, which
you snatched is like blood, flesh and skin. By backbiting him you have
snatched flesh from his face.  
 Being dead is in the sense of being unaware. The poor fellow is sitting
in his house and does not know that you are snatching away his honor. He
is in the dark. He does not know so that he may defend himself. He is
just like a dead person who cannot defend himself!

Collective benefit
------------------

Another comparison is with “brother’s flesh.” God says: O People! Do not
harm yourselves by yourselves. Do not clash with one another in this
wild way. This snatching of the flesh of one another! It is like eating
corpses of one another! There is a subtle aspect in this comparison to
which I had hinted a few days back. It has a logical proof. It exposes
the impermissibility of backbiting.

The logic is this. God has made this mankind in such a way that everyone
benefits everyone so that the system of the world may work nicely. In
other words, every person (whoever he or she may be) has his or her own
influence or effect. It must become manifest and he or she should also
get benefit of the influence of others. I will give an example. One
knows how to bake bread nicely. He should continue working and bake
bread for the benefit of people with the influence of his existence. He
must also buy oil and rice etc. from the one who sells provision. He
should also take the services of a tailor for his clothing needs. Thus
one must benefit from others and benefit others.

This world’s face is like the eye and the skin and the eyebrow.
Everything is good in its place. (Persian couplet)

Here, everyone should benefit from one another. This is possible when
they are together and in unison. It should also be the same with the
class of spiritual leadership. The scholar should also benefit others
and get benefit from others. He must correct the religion of the people
and it can be so only when they are joined with one another. If they
have relations with the people they get benefit from them. If there is
no unison, benefit will not be available.

Backbiting is the cause of creating disunity between the organs of human
society. It is like killing one and throwing him away from society. They
have thus made him useless. The one who backbites anyone from a pulpit
or from any place wants to prevent people from taking any benefit from
him.

This is why God had prohibited backbiting and so also He has prohibited
spying. Such spying and peeping into the affairs of others becomes a
prelude to disunity. Disunity causes non-availability of one another’s
benefit. If this ruthless fellow had not backbitten about him, people
would have continued to go to him and take benefit of his knowledge. But
the backbiter killed him and disconnected him from society, cut off his
relation with the Islamic society and religious brotherhood and thus he
(the backbiter) became the cause of depriving both the society and the
individual from the benefit of each another.

Pious Shaykh, yet known as unclean
----------------------------------

About fifty or sixty years ago, there was a man with knowledge living in
Shiraz. No one prayed behind him and it was alleged that this Shaykh
does not purify himself, though he had all the niceties and virtues of
being a scholar and a just man. Despite all these specialties he was
alleged to remain unclean so much so that no one was prepared to pray
behind him (in his leadership or Imamat). Formerly he was being very
much respected and honored. Due to this when he decided to go to Mashad
for Ziyarat a number of people arrived with him. They had prayed behind
him earlier.

They were traveling on donkeys and mules. The Shaykh felt the urge to
urinate but it was not possible to urinate in the middle of the road. So
he came down from his donkey, distanced somewhat from the people and
went to a corner in the forest. There was no water for purification so
he dried himself after urinating with the intention that when water is
available he would purify the private parts with water as required by
Islamic Law. (Sometimes, when it is harmful for health it is prohibited
to restrain urine). But no one ever saw him cleansing himself. T

hen he saw that people praying behind him were decreasing by and by. O
God! But what should we do? Then they returned to Shiraz. But then no
one from those who had prayed behind him came to pray behind him in the
mosque. This situation continued till the last part of his life. Those
reckless fellows who had traveled with him had brought about this
adverse change.

They said that this Shaykh does not purify himself and the masses that
do not make any inquiry after hearing anything believed the talk. They
blindly accepted whatever was said. It is the case with masses that if
it is said he is good they also say he is good. If it is alleged that he
is bad, they also say he is bad. They say what the whole town says that
the Shaykh does not purify himself. As a consequence they cut off an
existence, which was beneficial to the society. Then no one offered
prayers behind him till he lived. Formerly, a number of people used to
benefit from his knowledge. Woe unto one who backbites a scholar. There
is quite a difference between backbiting about a scholar and a grocer.
The difference is on the basis of giving and taking of benefit to and
from one another in the society.

Refer a definite sin to yourself
--------------------------------

You are told that if you have seen a defect in any Muslim, you have no
right to talk about it. First, you think about the matter positively and
in a nice manner. Think and imagine that perhaps there is no defect in
him. But if the sinning is definite then it is obligatory for you to
address yourself from the viewpoint of “Nahy Anil Munkar” (stopping
evil). Make a decision to make him give up this sin. Do not stand up and
begin to degrade and disgrace others. For example, you say: I have seen
him walking behind a woman. May be she was his wife.

You do not know him. She may be his mother or sister. Even if you are
sure that she was a stranger lady, it is obligatory for you to tell him:
What is this deed that you did? And not that you may disgrace him. Yes,
I saw him going to the house of an ill-famed woman. Whatever sin you see
in anybody, you have no right to expose it, so that the society may not
be disintegrated and its parts may not get separated. The system of
taking and giving benefit to one another may not be paralyzed. With the
opening of the gate of backbiting the door of corruption, dishonesty and
unfaithfulness also open wide.

Corruptions resulting from backbiting scholars
----------------------------------------------

Most dishonesty and faithlessness seen in the masses is due to their
being distanced from scholars, due to backbiting, rather by making false
allegations against them. Take some trouble, bring a man for attending
sermons and for attending congregation prayers in the mosque. But these
things are against selfish desires. However for giving it up, it is
enough to say a word. If you are a man then pick up one and bring him to
the sermons, not that you drive away one who is attending the sermons.
It is a devilish deed. Instead of bringing one who does not pray to the
mosque. You make the worshippers leave the mosque. For example, you ask
one: In which mosque do you pray? There? O Man, there is a talk about
that Imam.

Did you not hear? Now due to this, one who used to attend a mosque not
only leaves attending that mosque but also does not go to any other
mosque. He becomes free and loose. It takes a long time for that man to
find someone whom he may trust and follow. Curse of God on one who, by
his backbiting, creates disunity in Muslim society and comes in the way
of those who want to turn their face towards God in prayers. Such a
fellow becomes:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿الَّذِينَ يَسْتَحِبُّونَ الْحَيَاةَ الدُّنْيَا عَلَى الآخِرَةِ
وَيَصُدُّونَ عَنْ سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ وَيَبْغُونَهَا عِوَجًا أُوْلَئِكَ
فِي ضَلالٍ بَعِيدٍ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“(To) those who love this world’s life more than the hereafter, and
turn away from Allah’s path and desire to make it crooked; these are in
a great error.”***[^1]

He says: I do not lie. I am telling truth. If you tell a lie, it is
allegation. Backbiting means to say a thing, which you know, a thing,
which you saw with your own eyes. If you relay it to others it is
backbiting. What you are ordered is: Not only do not say what you do not
know, but also do not say what you know. Many narrations show that
whatever a man does in this world has two aspects: Apparent and hidden
(bodily and spiritual). When you describe someone’s defect what is
apparent is the deed of your tongue and mouth etc. What is hidden is the
eating of a corpse.

Abu Bakr and Umar backbite Salman and Usamah
--------------------------------------------

Abu Bakr and Umar sent Salman to the Holy Prophet for getting some food.
The Messenger of God sent him to Usamah, the son of Zaid, who was the
treasurer or accountant of the Prophet. Usamah said, “I do not have
anything.” So Salman returned to Abu Bakr and Umar. These two persons
said, “Usamah has shown stinginess.” Then said to one another, “If we
send Salman to a well which never dries, its water will dry up.”

Thereafter Abu Bakr and Umar came to the Prophet who asked them, “What
is the matter: I smell meat in your mouth?” They said, “We did not eat
meat today.” The Prophet said, “Why? You did eat the flesh of Salman and
Usamah (You did backbite about them).”[^2]  
 That is the spiritual effect of the deed of Abu Bakr and Umar; same as
eating carrion, and it was detected by Muhammad.  
 He also is reported to have said, “I can see the flesh of Salman and
Usamah in your teeth.”

Man does not understand this now. At the time of his death, he himself
sees that dead body and smells its offensive smell.

Once, in the gathering of the Holy Prophet, an offensive smell came out
without any apparent reason. It was the offensive smell of a corpse. It
made the Holy Prophet restless. He said, “This is the smell of
backbiting” and added that some hypocrites have backbitten the faithful,
which created this stench.[^3]

Amazing effects of five things
------------------------------

We have said that every word and every deed of man has a spiritual
effect, other than its apparent effect. As narrated by Imam Sadiq, the
Prophet said, “Angels told an earlier messenger,[^4] ‘Tomorrow eat the
thing which you see first, bury the thing which you see next, preserve
the third, do not disappoint and deprive the fourth and run away from
the fifth.” The messenger said, “All right, I will do so.” Next morning,
the angelic or spiritual world came before him. He exclaimed, “I have
been asked to eat the thing which I see first. O God! This is a
mountain. What should I do?” Then he satisfied himself saying, “I have
been asked to eat it so it must be possible. Let me approach it.”

So he went towards the mountain and found that with every step, the
mountain got smaller and smaller until it became the size of a morsel.
So he swallowed it to find that it was as sweet as sweetmeat. Now, here
is a hard and rocky mountain, which turns into delicious eatable.
Spiritual taste is different from material taste. It has a hundredfold
effect. Then he moved forward. He was asked to bury the next thing. He
saw a golden plate and he at once buried it. As he turned to go, the
ground quaked, earth went back and the golden dish dazzled. He said, “I
have nothing to do with this gold. I have been asked to bury it and so I
did. That’s all.”

The third thing, which he saw was that an eagle was pursuing a pigeon.
The pigeon came directly to the messenger and got his refuge as he was
asked to preserve or protect it, he at once hid it under his sleeve. The
fourth thing, which he came across was the hunter eagle. He told to
himself, ‘I have been asked not to disappoint it.’ So he gave it a piece
of mutton. The fifth thing to be seen was to be fled from. He saw a foul
smelling corpse (Most foul smelling is the human corpse. Hence it has
been ordered to bury it so deep that its smell may not rise and spread
out). So when he saw that it was a dead body, he ran away from it. (But,
O my friend! Be sure that after you die, you cannot flee from yourself.
The Holy Qur’an states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿يَوْمَ تَجِدُ كُلُّ نَفْسٍ مَا عَمِلَتْ مِنْ خَيْرٍ مُحْضَرًا وَمَا
عَمِلَتْ مِنْ سُوءٍ تَوَدُّ لَوْ أَنَّ بَيْنَهَا وَبَيْنَهُ أَمَدًا
بَعِيدًا﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“On the day that every soul shall find present what it has done of
good and what it has done of evil, it shall wish that between it and
that (evil) there were a long duration of time;”***[^5]

You will strongly wish to get away from it but that would not be
possible. God forbid, wherever you go, your body is with you). Now,
after observing the five spiritual scenes the messenger asked for the
wisdom behind it all. He was then given to understand that the mountain
stands for anger. When a man becomes angry, if he wants to control
himself, it is very hard as if he were asked to eat up a mountain. But
if he suppresses anger for the sake of God, the result is that he feels
a sort of peace and then he says to himself: It is good that I did not
say anything and did not hit out at anyone. May God save us! Sometimes
an angry person tears up his clothes, sometimes he faints, gets
paralyzed beyond treatment. But if he controls himself and does not show
his anger, it is like eating a tasty morsel.

Second: A pure and selfless deed – O Muslims! If you have done anything
for the sake of God, keep it secret. Do not tell about it to anybody. Do
not say: Praise be to Allah! I have done a good deed. Sometimes you fool
yourself by telling yourself: I am doing this so that others may be
encouraged. You are fooling yourself. You are showing off. Hide it. God
will make it apparent. God will make people praise it. Do not wish for
it yourself.

Third: The pigeon. I told you to catch admonition. If anyone gives you
any advice, do not turn away from it. Do not say: Who are you to advise
me. Whoever and whatever he may be, may be elder than you or younger and
weaker, may even be a greater sinner. Hear and listen to his advice,
whomsoever it may be.  
 The fourth thing, which we asked you not to disappoint is a beggar or
anyone who asks from you anything, whoever he may be. Do not disappoint
and deprive him.

The fifth thing from which you are asked to flee is backbiting. It is a
corpse–a dead body. If you see that someone is about to be backbitten,
run away from that meeting. Do not hear it. If you hear it, it becomes
your duty to reject it, to reply to the backbiting, to reform, to
restrain. Ask the backbiter to repent. Then what is better? Before you
are caught, run away from there.[^6]  
 Every act of a human being has a spiritual effect. O Muslims! This foul
deed of backbiting is like eating a dead body which becomes manifest for
all after death.

Legitimacy after one year!
--------------------------

Haji Noori writes in *Darus Salam* that once a man backbited someone by
saying to himself: This man is a burden for all, he is a parasite. Then
in his sleep, he saw that there was a dead body before him and he was
told to eat it. He said, “I did not eat even permissible flesh in the
world, how can I eat a dead body?” He was told that he did eat it in the
graveyard. So the poor person, for one full year, visited that graveyard
daily to find the one whom he had supposedly backbitten to seek his
pardon and be absolved from the guilt. But he could find no one.

How restless was his heart! You and I? Do we become restless for
absolvement even when we have actually backbitten someone? After one
year, he saw the man who began by asking: Have you prepared yourself for
sincere repentance? How strange! By coincidence, he had backbitten one
who was among the friends of God. Good deeds also have spiritual
effects. For example, this fasting in the form of withholding oneself
from eating permissible food and to benefit from both physical and
spiritual divine rewards. All this will be known at the hour of death.
The Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿كُلُوا وَاشْرَبُوا هَنِيئًا بِمَا أَسْلَفْتُمْ فِي الأَيَّامِ
الْخَالِيَةِ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Eat and drink pleasantly for what you did beforehand in the days
gone by.”***[^7]

The condition of those who weep for Husain and the weepers for fear of
Allah is also similar. It causes heart burning due to shedding tears.
Its spiritual effect (which is hidden) is happiness, gaiety,
cheerfulness and getting drinks from the Pool of Kauthar as shall be
explained in the next topic. Husain has said to the effect that the
happiness of the mourner would exceed his grief.

The happiness of mourners is higher than their grief
----------------------------------------------------

It is written in the beginning of the book *Nafasul Mahmoom* with a
chain of authorities quoting *Kashaf-e-Haqaaiq Ja’far bin Muhammad
as-Sadiq*. The holy Imam was asked, “Where is you grandfather Husain
now?” The Imam replied, “How small is your stature and how big is your
question! His (Husain’s) body is in the grave but his soul is right near
those of his father, mother and grandfather near the Throne of Allah.
His eye is on two matters: First on those who visit his grave and
second: On those attending the mourning programs for him.” Then he said,
“Husain requests his grandfather, father, mother and brother to pray for
the forgiveness of his mourners so that God may pardon them.”[^8]

Also there is a word for the mourners themselves: If the mourner knows
how much reward is there for him from God, his happiness will be more
than his grief.  
 Your outward, is your weeping and mourning whereas your inner is
happiness as a result of God’s grace and His favors, His rewards and His
compensations. Ultimately there is a curtain over deeds. It should be
so. A barrier must be there so that man may pass some days properly and
then get the result.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَحِيلَ بَيْنَهُمْ وَبَيْنَ مَا يَشْتَهُونَ كَمَا فُعِلَ
بِأَشْيَاعِهِمْ مِنْ قَبْلُ إِنَّهُمْ كَانُوا فِي شَكٍّ مُرِيبٍ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And a barrier shall be placed between them and that which they
desire, as was done with the likes of them before: surely they are in a
disquieting doubt.”***[^9]

Man fears his sins and God’s wrath. He weeps but, at the same time, his
interior is at peace,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَتَطْمَئِنُّ قُلُوبُهُمْ بِذِكْرِ اللَّهِ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And whose hearts are set at rest by the remembrance of
Allah;”***[^10]

You must have experienced that whenever you pray, supplicate, cry and
weep, thereafter you experience a sort of happiness. Sometimes man
himself feels that there is sweetness in the remembrance of Allah. When
you extend your hands in supplication you place a crown of honor on your
head; you become honorable. And then at a time, my dear, you degrade and
lower yourself before Almighty Allah.  
 I hoped to be the master so I chose to serve you. I desired kingdom,
therefore I worshipped You. (Persian couplet)

[^1]: Surah Ibrahim 14:3

[^2]: Tafsir Noorus Thaqlain, vol. 5, pg. 95

[^3]: Mustadrakul Wasael

[^4]: Layaliyal Akhbar p.184

[^5]: Surah Aale Imran 3:30

[^6]: Layaliyal Akhbar, p. 185

[^7]: Surah Haqqah 69:24

[^8]: Nafasul Mahmoom, Qummi

[^9]: Surah Saba 34:54

[^10]: Surah Raad 13:28


