Part 25
=======

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اجْتَنِبُوا كَثِيرًا مِنْ الظَّنِّ،
إِنَّ بَعْضَ الظَّنِّ إِثْمٌ، وَلا تَجَسَّسُوا، وَلا يَغْتَبْ
بَعْضُكُمْ بَعْضًا، أَيُحِبُّ أَحَدُكُمْ أَنْ يَأْكُلَ لَحْمَ أَخِيهِ
مَيْتًا؟ فَكَرِهْتُمُوهُ، وَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ، إِنَّ اللَّهَ تَوَّابٌ
رَحِيمٌ. يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ إِنَّا خَلَقْنَاكُمْ مِنْ ذَكَرٍ
وَأُنثَى وَجَعَلْنَاكُمْ شُعُوبًا وَقَبَائِلَ لِتَعَارَفُوا، إِنَّ
أَكْرَمَكُمْ عِنْدَ اللَّهِ أَتْقَاكُمْ، إِنَّ اللَّهَ عَلِيمٌ
خَبِيرٌ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who believe! Avoid most of suspicion, for surely suspicion in
some cases is a sin, and do not spy nor let some of you backbite others.
Does one of you like to eat the flesh of his dead brother? But you abhor
it; and be careful of (your duty to) Allah, surely Allah is
Oft-returning (to mercy), Merciful. O you men! Surely We have created
you of a male and a female, and made you tribes and families that you
may know each other; surely the most honorable of you with Allah is the
one among you most careful (of his duty); surely Allah is Knowing,
Aware. (49:12-13)”***

Qur’an for the good of this world and the hereafter
---------------------------------------------------

Interpretation of dreams is a science, which does not reach one without
divine inspiration and grace and it is beyond common people. Almighty
God had granted this knowledge to Ibn Sirrin. He gave amazing
explanations conforming to facts. Once a man came to him and said: Last
night I saw a dream, which has made me restless and helpless. What is
its explanation? In my dream I saw that I possessed both this world and
the Hereafter but then I lost both. What a loss! What does it mean or
show? Ibn Sirrin thought over it for a while. Then said, “Did you not
have a Qur’an which you have lost now?”

That man replied, “Why? It is so. I had a Qur’an but for the last few
days it is missing.” Ibn Sirrin said, “This is what you saw in your
dream. There is both this world and the Hereafter in the Holy Qur’an. If
you want a pure life it is in Qur’an. If you desire a life of peace,
security and comfort, it is in Qur’an. If you want to be at ease in your
Hereafter right from the time of your death till eternity it is Qur’an.
You lost the Qur’an and hence lost both this world and Hereafter.” Then
that man asked, “What should I do now?” Ibn Sirrin replied, “Just sit
down. God is, after all Almighty.” Before long there came another person
who also had seen a dream but quite opposite. He said, “In my dream I
saw that both the world and the Hereafter have been granted to me.” Ibn
Sirrin said, “The copy of the Holy Qur’an which you have found belongs
to this man. Please give it to him.”

Qur’anic Commands and worldly comforts
--------------------------------------

What I wanted to convey by relating the above dream was that you should
have connection with Qur’an. If you do so, both your world and Hereafter
are fine. If you give up Qur’an, it means loss of both the lives, before
and after death. The commands of Qur’an, which I have conveyed to you
during the last few days about the calamities caused by the tongue are
important also for your present worldly life besides the Hereafter. O
Muslims! If you act according to the Holy verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنْ جَاءَكُمْ فَاسِقٌ بِنَبَإٍ فَتَبَيَّنُوا﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“If an evildoer comes to you with a report, look carefully into
it,”***

And do not instantly believe any word which you hear and if you do not
react recklessly at once and if you do not believe that word until you
have made inquiries, then how much useful is it for the present world!
How many troubles can be averted by following this divine instruction.
Do not have adverse opinion about anyone. It is better for yourself. A
man who thinks and imagines badly about others leads a life of misery.
He even doubts his own wife. Can thereafter he live a peaceful life with
that woman? He also thinks adversely about his children, his friends
too. Bad opinion about others is a calamity, which destroys man’s whole
life.  
 Faultfinding is also prohibited in Islam. It is also harmful for your
world. Mischief making and spreading scandalous news is harmful to
yourself.

Imam Sajjad’s words to a mischief maker
---------------------------------------

Once a man came to Imam Zainul Abideen and in a foolish gesture of
sympathy, told him that in such and such gathering such and such fellow
has backbitten you, saying that Ali bin Husain is misguided fellow and
an innovator. Curse of God on every false allegation maker and against
whom! Against Zainul Abideen. The Imam, who was busy worshipping his
Lord in a corner of his house, addressed that person. Summary: First of
all, you are dishonest to that person about whom you have complained. A
person spoke badly about me in my absence. You have no right to tell it
to me and expose what he hid when he considered you honest and
trustworthy. Secondly, you did not observe my respect by telling me a
thing, which I did not need. Then the holy Imam said, “Did you not know
that slanderers are dogs of hell. Tell that man we will die, our place
will be the grave and the promise of Judgment Day has been given to us
and Almighty God is the arbitrator between us.”[^1]

Restrain yourself from the beginning
------------------------------------

Another fact is that when a man hears backbiting, then if he is
habituated, he is unable to restrain and he also begins backbiting. He
finds out a defect in someone and tells it to others. Then both parties
fall in a continuing prohibited matter. As a result, backbiting is easy
to indulge in and it becomes so common that its wickedness wanes and
even those religious minded people who refrain from adultery devour
backbiting like sweetmeats.

They become habituated to it and see nothing wrong in it and it becomes
a routine thing. It is said: O parents! Do not speak badly in front of
your children so that their respect may not vanish. Do not speak a lie
in front of a child, do into give a false promise to him. If you have
told your child: I am going to the market to buy sweetmeat for you, then
do buy sweetmeats. If you do not bring it, the child feels that breaking
a promise is an ordinary and easy thing and he also feels that lying is
not so serious an offence. This is why backbiting becomes easy and
common for the people. Consequently everyone indulges in backbiting and
no one prevents anyone from it.

Pious looking backbiting
------------------------

Sometimes one indulges in backbiting as a kind of piety. By so doing he
puts a cap on his own head and on the head of people also. For instance,
one comes to you, sits down, then takes somebody’s name and says: How
good a person so and so is, praises him for a while and then says: But
alas, how much my heart is burning for him as he is not behaving nicely
with his wife and children. The first words of sympathy and praise were
a show, so that, thereafter, he may sting him and also boast that he did
not indulge in backbiting.

Thus he added show-off to backbiting. It is a show of piety. It is, as
if to say that I have a religious heart that is why I had to backbite
one, to make allegation, to disgrace someone. He calls it religiousness
and piety.

The late Second Martyr says in *Kashfur Reebah*: There also is a sin of
joining the sin of backbiting with the sin of show-off. After the Second
Martyr, whoever wrote a book about backbiting has considered the
aforesaid backbiting (joined with show-off) as a most dangerous sin. How
fine is the supplication of Dua Makarimul Akhlaq. You recite: O My Lord!
Make my tongue mention You instead of uttering a bad and shameless word,
instead of backbiting someone, instead of disgracing or insulting a
believer, instead of attacking someone’s honor.[^2]

Too bad is a tongue, which can plant a tree in Paradise by saying,
“There is no god except Allah”, indulges in backbiting and thereby puts
a few trees, which he had put to fire and burned them down. It is hoped
that those who are present here will convey them to those who are not
here and do not forget themselves. The Messenger of Allah says: By God
in whose control is my life, (this is both from the Prophet and Amirul
Momineen) faith does not become aright unless the heart does not become
aright and the heart also does not become aright until this tongue is
reformed.[^3] These three are always with one another: faith, heart and
tongue. They are constantly attached to one another. If the tongue
becomes right, the heart also gets steadiness and when the heart is
right, faith also becomes correct.

Do not pride on one another
---------------------------

One more of the very big calamities brought by the tongue, which derails
man from the road of faith and which creates many spiritual troubles and
a lot of social losses is to show pride to one another. One boasts and
glorifies himself before others about anything. The more ignorant is
one, the more boasting he indulges in. One of such prides is to be proud
of one’s knowledge.

How many books have I read, I am a philosopher, I am an expert in logic
and history, who knows, more than me? Such pride makes him more ignorant
than the ignorants. It drives him to the lowest of the low places of
Hell, where Balam Baoor had gone.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿فَمَثَلُهُ كَمَثَلِ الْكَلْبِ؛ إِنْ تَحْمِلْ عَلَيْهِ يَلْهَثْ أَوْ
تَتْرُكْهُ يَلْهَثْ، ذَلِكَ مَثَلُ الْقَوْمِ الَّذِينَ كَذَّبُوا
بِآيَاتِنَا، فَاقْصُصْ الْقَصَصَ لَعَلَّهُمْ يَتَفَكَّرُونَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…So, his parable is as the parable of the dog; if you attack him he
lolls out his tongue; and if you leave him alone he lolls out his
tongue; this is the parable of the people who reject Our communications;
therefore relate the narrative that they may reflect.”***[^4]

It is written that this man used to tell the truth. He was also a
scholar, having twelve thousand students in those days, which is
remarkable. Rather it is said that he was the one to write a book on
Oneness of God. Such was this man. But how strange that this unfortunate
fellow began to be proud of his knowledge with the words quoted above.
In his opinion, he had obtained greatness by uttering the said words.
But it is not so. Greatness is not obtained by reading. One does not get
nearness to God without worship and prayer, humility, courtesy,
lowliness in fact.[^5]

You read all logics. O philosopher! What are you if you do not know what
you want? What is the benefit if you did not recognize your weakness and
extinction? At last, this man, Balam Baoor whose ignorance not only led
him to pride, ego and disobedience of the legatee of Musa but, by and
by, he began to tell Musa and his legatee: Who are you and whom am I!
Woe unto such knowledge, which is not accompanied by Noor (light) of
servitude and submission to Only One God. Finally he reached a bad end
and the Holy Qur’an likened him to a dog.

Being proud of race is also ignorance
-------------------------------------

After the pride of knowledge comes the pride of race or lineage, which
is referred to in this Holy verse. This verse shows the remedy of this
spiritual illness. Such pride of race was much prevalent among Arabs, it
is, perhaps, there even now. It is hoped that non-Arabs who should hold
fast to the Holy Qur’an will come out of such ignorance to such an
extent that you will never be proud of ‘my family’, ‘my mother’. Let
your father be in his place. Give up all such superstitions.

Harmful interruption is also prohibited
---------------------------------------

Showing pride over race is a calamity brought by the tongue, which
causes trouble and harassment to Muslims. By one word spoken by you,
which makes one restless you ignite fire in your own grave. By the way,
when our talk has come upto this, let me remind you of some jokes, which
make others restless.

On the whole, everything, which makes others unhappy, is prohibited. It
is possible that by a joke you give trouble to others. For example one
enters someone’s room suddenly or shouts loudly at someone. Such foolish
gestures prick like a thorn. The Holy Qur’an ordains that if you want to
enter your own house, do not enter abruptly. It may frighten someone
inside. If a joke or wit, lie or backbiting is harmful, it is all the
more prohibited, that is, its impermissibility is twofold: lying and
backbiting, and harassing.

Sinister effects of telephonic talks
------------------------------------

They once lied on the telephone to a poor mother: You son has met with
an accident and his body is at such and such place and it will brought
at such and such time. The helpless mother got a shock and died. Though
the one who had telephoned was joking. Such joking without any thought
of the harm involved therein is prohibited.

It is quoted that a youth once went to his friend and by way of joking,
told him, “I had gone to make inquiry. You have failed in your exams.”
That youth had no faith, which could have protected him. So he thought
that as he has failed he has lost everything and his world has come to
an end. I have heard that this youth of seventeen or eighteen years of
age swallowed some tablets and died. Thereafter, it was revealed that,
that fellow had only been joking. Even if it were true, it was
prohibited to talk in this way.

Then how about a lie? I say: O young man! Suppose your friend had
failed. Even then you had no right to come to him suddenly and say it.
According to the Shariat, you are a security to your friend’s blood. But
you participated in killing a Muslim. Such jokes, which are harmful and
shocking are also the calamities brought by the tongue.

God created all from a father and a mother
------------------------------------------

This command, which Almighty Allah has issued is an essential part of
the knowledge concerning man. O Man! Know thyself.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ إِنَّا خَلَقْنَاكُمْ مِنْ ذَكَرٍ وَأُنثَى
وَجَعَلْنَاكُمْ شُعُوبًا وَقَبَائِلَ لِتَعَارَفُوا، إِنَّ أَكْرَمَكُمْ
عِنْدَ اللَّهِ أَتْقَاكُمْ، إِنَّ اللَّهَ عَلِيمٌ خَبِيرٌ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you men! Surely, We have created you of a male and a female, and
made you tribes and families that you may know each other; surely the
most honorable of you with Allah is the one among you most careful (of
his duty); surely Allah is Knowing, Aware. (49:13)”***

“We created you from one man and one woman”, father and mother. Adam and
Eve. Now since the number of men and women is very big and as they are
bound to live along with one another, distinctions are necessary. A
gathering of millions and billions who have to deal with one another
must be differentiated or distinguished so that there may not be any
doubt about recognition. If there is no distinction, confusions may
arise. Suppose one’s name is Zaid. Is he an Arab or a non-Arab, is he a
resident of a city or he is a tribal, from which city is he, which area,
which family. If these distinctions are not available then how will you
find out the Zaid with whom you have made a deal. The word used in the
verse in ‘Sho’b’.

It means big classes. Whether one is a dweller of a city or is a
villager or Bedouin. Is he from Persia or is he a Turk or an Arab. Every
one of them has further sects. If you have become one who knows mankind,
you have understood that all of you and us are originally from one
father and one mother and then became various tribes and from every
tribe different families: O Arabs! And O non-Arabs! O Turks! These names
are for disguising, not for taking pride. No Arab should say: Where am I
and where a non-Arab. No Turk should boast “Where am I and where an
Arab.”

Such pride of ones tribe over another tribe also brings haughtiness with
it like the Bani Israel who think that they are higher than the entire
mankind. They claim to be rulers over the whole mankind; that since they
are the children of Yaqub, kingship is only their right and that all
other people are their servants or slaves. Only they are free. This is
the aim and object of their religion!

So much so that God made them disgraced and they became unable to obtain
leadership. I am hopeful that, God willing, they will never be able to
raise their heads. Otherwise, how many troubles and mischief would they
create? They believe that ruling the world is only their right. The Holy
Qur’an gives them a realistic reply: What are these claims? After all
the origin of all of you and us are Adam and Eve. There is no high and
low among us except from the angle of piety and righteousness. Those who
are more pious will refrain more from sinning and so only they are
better.

Disbeliever’s insult Bilal, the Muezzin of the Prophet
------------------------------------------------------

The muezzin (announcer of call for prayers) was a black Abyssinian
slave. He was thin and his tongue did not work properly. Instead of
‘Sh’, he used to pronounce ‘S’ and said: As-hadu anna muhammadar
rasoolallaah. When idols were broken in the Ka’ba after the conquest of
Mecca, in spite of the enmity of Abu Lahab and Abu Sufyan, the Holy
Prophet asked Bilal, “Go to the roof of the Ka’ba and announce ‘there is
no god except Allah’”

Bilal went there, placed his hand on his ears and recited the call for
prayer. Of course his voice was not very melodious. When his voice was
raised once, the cursed Utbah said, “Had Muhammad no one else? He sent
this black crow up who makes such a noise.” Another fellow came out and
said, “Thank God my father died last year and did not live to hear this
crowing.” Abu Sufyan said, “I do not say anything. I am afraid God of
Muhammad may inform him and we may have to face trouble.” But Jibraeel
informed the Prophet about the whole episode and he called all of them
and said, “You said like this and you said like this.” Then he recited
this verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّا خَلَقْنَاكُمْ مِنْ ذَكَرٍ وَأُنثَى وَجَعَلْنَاكُمْ شُعُوبًا
وَقَبَائِلَ لِتَعَارَفُوا، إِنَّ أَكْرَمَكُمْ عِنْدَ اللَّهِ
أَتْقَاكُمْ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely, We have created you of a male and a female, and made you
tribes and families that you may know each other; surely the most
honorable of you with Allah is the one among you most careful (of his
duty); (49:13)”***

What you are saying are not the criteria. Do not say that I am pious and
that person is not. “How do you know he fears God more? Be more away
from sins. It is the measure of piety. Abstaining from sins, nearness to
God, selflessness and sincerity are the criteria.

Abbas and Shayba show pride to Ali
----------------------------------

Before the arrival of Islam and during the early years of Islam, one of
the difficult tasks was to supply water to the Hajj pilgrims. Those who
lived in Mecca, used to supply the water of the Zamzam spring. Those who
were somewhat near Taif used to fetch water from another spring from a
valley called Leemoo. But in the Hajj season it was hard to arrange
water for such a large number of hajj pilgrims, especially in Mina and
Arafat. Before the advent of Islam, Abbas, the Prophet’s uncle had
accepted this respectable job of supplying water to Hajis. Shayba was
holding keys of Ka’ba and was in charge of its construction work. Both
these persons, Abbas and Shayba, used to show their pride before Imam
Ali.

I have said several times that these vain thoughts were no criterion of
nobility in the eyes of God. For example: I am an orator, I am a
propagator, I am the president of the meeting, I am a reciter of Qur’an,
I am a good reader of books, I am a writer, I am a whole-night
worshipper. These ‘I’s are all vain. It has not the slightest value in
the sight of God.  
 We look to the interior of the deeds. We do not see the exterior and
the words. (Persian couplet)

This couplet is the translation of a tradition of the Holy
Prophet.[^6]  
 The Second Martyr has quoted in *Asrarus-us-Salat.* What is your heart,
what does it want? O the one who climbs the pulpit! How much meekness
and courtesy is there in your heart? Talking from the pulpit is no
criterion. What kind of relation is really there between the speaker’s
heart and Almighty Allah? God does not look at this type of talking. He
does not look at the pulpit. It is the people who look at the exterior.
God, Who knows all hidden things, looks at the state of the heart of the
speaker. Does he want to make a show of his oratory or he truly and
sincerely intends to draw people towards God? Does he desire his own
prestige or does he long for making the sinners return to God and
repent? So the divine attention is to the heart, not to the tongue. Let
us leave it here.

O Abbas! You say that you have the honor of supplying water to the
Hajjis, which Ali does not have! O Shayba! You boast that you possess
the key of Ka’ba which Ali does not posses! But Ali has faith. He is a
struggler in the path of God. Ali is the one who does not care for his
life in the path of Allah. You are comparing yourselves with Ali by such
measures!

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿أَجَعَلْتُمْ سِقَايَةَ الْحَاجِّ وَعِمَارَةَ الْمَسْجِدِ الْحَرَامِ
كَمَنْ آمَنَ بِاللَّهِ وَالْيَوْمِ الآخِرِ وَجَاهَدَ فِي سَبِيلِ
اللَّهِ، لا يَسْتَوُونَ عِنْدَ اللَّهِ، وَاللَّهُ لا يَهْدِي الْقَوْمَ
الظَّالِمِينَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“What! Do you make (one who undertakes) the giving of drink to the
pilgrims and the guarding of the Sacred Mosque like him who believes in
Allah and the latter day and strives hard in Allah’s way? They are not
equal with Allah; and Allah does not guide the unjust people.”***[^7]

Such prides are all wrong, as taking pride in once race is wrong. O
intelligent! In this Supremes Court, nothing is accepted except the fear
of God in hearts. What is the state of your heart in relation with God?
How much does your heart show tenderness and how much humility does you
heart show before God? The one who is lowlier before God is more
graceful. What is noteworthy is that the one who is really and truly
righteous never becomes proud or egotist except when he has to prove the
truth or pull down falsehood. Here is an interesting story for you.

The words of Imam Hasan were no boastings
-----------------------------------------

You must have heard that when Muawiyah captured Iraq through intrigues
and Imam Hasan made a treaty with him in helplessness. Muawiyah went on
the pulpit in the Jama Masjid of Kufa and insulted Amirul Momineen. At
that time Imam Hasan told him:  
 O the one who remembers Ali and speaks ill of him before me, I am
Hasan. My father is Ali bin Abi Talib. You are Muawiyah and your father
is Sakhar, that is, the one who, till the last years of the Prophet was
the flag-bearer of the polytheists and unbelievers and had fought with
the Prophet.

My mother is Fatima and your mother is ‘Hind’ that very woman, who was
shameless and so brazen that she chewed the liver of Hamzah, the uncle
of the Prophet and cut off his nose and genitals, and hung them around
her neck.  
 My grandfather is the Messenger of Allah and your grand father is Harb.
My grandmother is Khadijah, the mother of the faithful and your
grandmother is Fateelah (who was among the openly practicing
prostitutes).

Then he added: May God curse everyone of us and yours who is more
shameless and whose lineage is lower and whose disbelief is older and
whose hypocrisy is greater and whose entitlement to Islam is lesser.

The audience roared and exclaimed, “Amen!”[^8] You may also say: Amen. O
Lord! Multiply your anger on Muawiyah and the entire Bani Umayyah.

The above words of Imam Hasan were for establishing the truth and for
defeating falsehood. It was neither pride nor boasting. In fact, he
disgraced Muawiyah with these short utterances so much that Muawiyah
came down from the pulpit, very shamefully withdrew and went away. Know
that, in the sight of God, words are not the criterion. Measure is
God-fearingness. More righteous more dear and near is he or she to God.

Words of Imam Sajjad before Asmai
---------------------------------

They have quoted from Asmai: Once, in the Masjidul Haram (Great Mosque
of Mecca), I heard a heart-rending voice. I went near the Ka’ba and saw
that, in Hajre Ismail, my master, Imam Sajjad was weeping deep-heartedly
holding the curtain of Ka’ba. He was praying:  
 O the One Who answers the supplications of the helpless in the dark
nights – O the One Who wards off all restlessness – Your guests are
asleep around Your House. Only You are awake, You never sleep – O the
Eternal Self-existent, Who never sleeps…

Then his voice felt silent. After a few moments he again began to recite
these heart-rending stanzas: O Lord! Who is more guilty than me? Who is
more denigrated than me? Which of the servants committed more crimes
than me? O God! Will You, after all burn me in the fire? Then what will
happen to my hopes? What about my fear? You Yourself have promised that
You will not disappoint one who puts faith in You and who hopes from
You. I hope that You will forgive me. Your pardon is the object of my
hopes.[^9]

Asmai says: Then I did not hear my master’s voice. I went near him and
found that he is Zainul Abideen Ali Ibnul Husain; and that he had
fainted. I placed his holy head in my lap. My tears fell on his radiant
face. He opened his eyes and asked, “Who is it?” I said, “It is Asmai,
your slave. O my master! Your honor! And so much weeping and wailing!
You are so pious, so chaste and faultless. Your grandfathers are the
intercessors. O my master! You belong to the family about whose purity
God sent the Verse of purification.” When I said this, the master said,
“Leave these things please. Don’t you know that God has created Paradise
for everyone who worships Him, anyone who is righteous, be he or she
even a black slave. Hell is also created by God for every sinner even if
he belongs to the noblest of tribes on earth.[^10]

The noblest is Quraish. The Messenger of the last era Muhammad also
belongs to this tribe of Quraish. These races and lineages are of no
importance. Do not say: I am a Sayyid. Be whatever you are. Yes, a good
tiding has come for a Sayyid Fatimid, provided his lineage is correct
and, finally, he dies with repentance. On the Day of Judgment,
intercession first reaches the Sayyids but not if their deeds are bad.
It is not like that. In Islamic laws there are no exceptions. Every rule
that is for the common people is also for the Sayyids. There is no
difference. Just as a common man should pay Zakat and Khums so also
should a Sayyid. It is so about every obligatory duty also, as well as
about the prohibited misdeeds.

If a Sayyid, God forbid, indulged in adultery, he will not be
differentiated from others. He will also be given a hundred lashes, not
that, as he is a Sayyid, there should be some leniency. There is no
difference in the commandments of Allah. In short, Imam Sajjad said,
“Leave me alone. Hell has been created for every sinner even if he is a
Quraishite and belongs to the noblest lineage on earth.”

Thereafter he recited this holy verse: Tomorrow, on the Day of Judgment,
no one will be asked: Whose son are you? In the Highest Court of God,
there is no place for such questioning. They will not ask who your
parents were? Did you belong to a noble family or a common one? These
things belong to this world. These are mere delusions. The questioning
there will be: Who is your God? Who is your deity? Whom did you worship?
Whose word did you accept? Which religion you followed? Who was your
Imam? Ali, Hasan, Husain…the Husain! Since you remembered them all your
life, it is hoped that the one whom you remembered will come to your
help.

[^1]: Layaliyal Akhbar, pg. 603

[^2]: Sahifa Sajjadiya, Dua: 20

[^3]: Safinatul Bihar, 2:510

[^4]: Surah Araf 7:176

[^5]: Mafatihul Jinan, pg. 17

[^6]: Asrarus Salat, pg. 110

[^7]: Surah Tawbah 9:19

[^8]: Muntahaiul Amal, vol. 1, pg. 167. Events of Imam Hasan

[^9]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 11,pg.18

[^10]: Biharul Anwar


