Part 26
=======

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ إِنَّا خَلَقْنَاكُمْ مِنْ ذَكَرٍ وَأُنثَى
وَجَعَلْنَاكُمْ شُعُوبًا وَقَبَائِلَ لِتَعَارَفُوا، إِنَّ أَكْرَمَكُمْ
عِنْدَ اللَّهِ أَتْقَاكُمْ، إِنَّ اللَّهَ عَلِيمٌ خَبِيرٌ. قَالَتْ
الأَعْرَابُ آمَنَّا؛ قُلْ: لَمْ تُؤْمِنُوا وَلَكِنْ قُولُوا
أَسْلَمْنَا وَلَمَّا يَدْخُلْ الإِيمَانُ فِي قُلُوبِكُمْ، وَإِنْ
تُطِيعُوا اللَّهَ وَرَسُولَهُ لا يَلِتْكُمْ مِنْ أَعْمَالِكُمْ
شَيْئًا، إِنَّ اللَّهَ غَفُورٌ رَحِيمٌ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you men! Surely, We have created you of a male and a female, and
made you tribes and families that you may know each other; surely the
most honorable of you with Allah is the one among you most careful (of
his duty); surely Allah is Knowing, Aware. The dwellers of the desert
say: We believe. Say: You do not believe but say, We submit; and faith
has not yet entered into your hearts; and if you obey Allah and His
Apostle, He will not diminish aught of your deeds; surely Allah is
Forgiving, Merciful. (49:13-14)”***

We created you from one man and one woman, that is, Adam and Eve. So you
are not different from one another.  
 These differences, which are about branches and families are for
recognition so that man, in social living and dealings with one another
may not fall in doubts. When there is no proper recognition, it makes
things difficult. So the distinction or variations, which God has made
about tribes and sections etc. are for recognition, not for taking pride
in them. The Arabs say: We are Arabs, where we and where the non-Arabs?
Or the non-Arab retorts: We are non-Arabs, we are higher. Both are
wrong.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّ أَكْرَمَكُمْ عِنْدَ اللَّهِ أَتْقَاكُمْ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely, the most honorable of you with Allah is the one among you
most careful (of his duty); (49:13)”***

That which you are taking as measure or criterion, for example, being
Arab or belonging to such and such tribe, all that is wrong. In fact,
the true criterion is righteousness or piety.

All are from same father and mother
-----------------------------------

Some commentators of Qur’an have shown another probability that “of a
male and a female” refers to every person, not to all. Both are right as
they mean Adam and Eve. However, more probable seems that “We created
each and everyone of you from one father and one mother”. All of you
are, from this angle, equal and like one another. There is no difference
between you. To make it clearer: Be you an Arab or non-Arab, be a Lor or
a Turk, a villager or a city-dweller.

Be whatever you like either a disbeliever or a believer, doubtlessly you
have been ejected from passages of urine. Keep aside all pride and
prejudice. One who has passed through this unclean path, how can he take
pride in himself? Where is ‘my honor’, ‘my family’, ‘my relatives’, ‘my
lineage’? Perhaps what the holy verse hints at is that one should never
be proud. Just think from where you have arrived?

It is mentioned in *Usul al-Kafi* that Imam Zainul Abideen said,
“Strange is a man who is proud and thinks oneself high and claims to be
honorable and respectable whereas yesterday he was semen and tomorrow,
when he dies, he is to be a foul-smelling corpse!”[^1]

Nocturnal emission reminds one of his origins
---------------------------------------------

The late Haji Noori has, in the first part of *Darus Salam*, mentioned
sixteen benefits of the dream. One of them is nocturnal emission.
Another benefit is getting harmful substance out of the body, which
keeps the physique safe, because, if it remains in the body it is likely
to result in illness and trouble. When he awakes, he smells that foul
odor which reminds him of his initial state. How strange! Was I like
this in the beginning? Had it been so that a man may not have
ejaculation and was the semen to reach the womb directly, without being
shed out, he might have hardly looked at himself.

Almighty God, through His far-reaching wisdom and strategy, ordained it
so that, sometimes, the semen should, unintentionally drop on man’s
clothes so that you may remember your initial state of being. Leave
aside all pride. The foul smell which you now smell is you yourself. Was
it otherwise? At first he was a foul-smelling semen and at the end? Even
if his grave is opened after a hundred years, nothing is seen except
dust. Had it not become dust he would still be giving out terribly foul
smell. What are you but a handful of dust? Finally only dust. The holy
Imam says, “Fist semen and finally a corpse. Of what one is to take
pride in?” Say: Wealth is ignorance. It is really so, wealth is indeed
ignorance. If one reaches the truth he never takes pride in lineage,
wealth and beauty.

O poor woman who is proud of your beauty! A single microbe of malaria
can change your face. This beauty is borrowed or artificial. Do not be
deceived. Look at its end. Pride in wealth and possessions is also same.
However wealthy you may become, you will not be wealthier than Qarun.
Many strong men could with much difficulty lift the keys of his treasure
(not the treasure itself).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّ قَارُونَ كَانَ مِنْ قَوْمِ مُوسَى فَبَغَى عَلَيْهِمْ،
وَآتَيْنَاهُ مِنْ الْكُنُوزِ مَا إِنَّ مَفَاتِحَهُ لَتَنُوءُ
بِالْعُصْبَةِ أُولِي الْقُوَّةِ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely, Qarun was of the people of Musa, but he rebelled against
them, and We had given him of the treasures, so much so that his hoards
of wealth would certainly weigh down a company of men possessed of great
strength.”***[^2]

How vast what his treasure? What happened to Qarun’s wealth?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿فَخَسَفْنَا بِهِ وَبِدَارِهِ الأَرْضَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Thus, We made the earth to swallow up him and his abode…”***[^3]  
 He went down in the earth himself along with the wealth as if it was
nothing at all. Now what about the property about which you say that it
is my property, it is my park, my machinery? Greatness of man is due to
his God-worship and righteousness. If man reaches the station of
God-worship and, in fact, becomes Abdullah (God’s servant) there is
every grace in his wealth.

Such a grace, which will never end. O the one who wants to attain real
grace; be a slave of God. This is grace, greatness and real honor. The
pride of Ali bin Abi Talib was only that he was the slave of the Lord of
the worlds. Slave and servant of God Almighty. No other state can ever
be imagined to be higher than it. This is the capital of grace. The one
who is more slave-like before God, greater is his grace and honor. God
knows well where to give grace.

You do not know. In your imagination, wealth and property is the cause
of grace or good luck whereas they are to vanish and end. Neither name
nor fame or status. All this is playthings and vanities. Man’s grace and
greatness is his piety and righteousness. That is why God informs you: O
those who believe! Put aside all these things. Do the deeds which may
make you righteous and which may take you nearer to your Lord.

Slave, yet God’s friend
-----------------------

It is written in the explanation of this holy verse that once they
wanted to sell their slave. A customer arrived. The slave announced in a
loud voice: Anyone who wants to buy me, may know that I have one
condition. My condition is that I must be allowed to perform prayers
five times day. I must be freed to perform my prayer behind the Prophet.
At last a buyer accepted this condition and he bought the slave and
allowed him to be free to perform all his five daily prayers behind the
Prophet in the Prophet’s mosque. Days passed in this manner.

Then the Prophet did not see that slave in the mosque. So he inquired
about him (It is desirable to inquire if a social man is not seen for
some time) and was told, “O Messenger of Allah! That man is ill.” The
Holy Prophet said, “I want to visit him (though a slave in those days
and in that society was quite valueless).” But the Prophet looks at his
interior. His exterior is that of a slave but internally he was a friend
of God. So the Holy Prophet went to his place, sat at his side and
talked nicely with him to make him happy.

Then after another two or three days, the Holy Prophet inquired about
that slave’s health and was informed that he was on his deathbed. The
Holy Prophet said, “Let us go to him.” So they went to that slave’s
place and finally the slave died. The Holy Prophet did not entrust his
dead body to anyone. The Prophet himself washed the body, covered him
with shroud cloth, offered prayer on his body and then buried him. In
short, he behaved in such a nice manner with that slave that some of the
emigrants and helper companions of the Holy Prophet said: The Holy
Prophet has done so much for a slave as he has not done even for us
though we have served the religion so much and we are in the first rank
in this matter. He has done so much for a black slave! The Prophet heard
such talks. At that time Almighty Allah revealed this Holy verse and the
Prophet recited it to them:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ إِنَّا خَلَقْنَاكُمْ مِنْ ذَكَرٍ وَأُنثَى
وَجَعَلْنَاكُمْ شُعُوبًا وَقَبَائِلَ لِتَعَارَفُوا، إِنَّ أَكْرَمَكُمْ
عِنْدَ اللَّهِ أَتْقَاكُمْ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you men! Surely, We have created you of a male and a female, and
made you tribes and families that you may know each other; surely the
most honorable of you with Allah is the one among you most careful (of
his duty); (49:13)”***

A slave or a slave girl are no different from freemen. White and black
skins are equal in the sight of God.

The Holy Prophet told quite unequivocally in the sermon of the Farewell
Hajj: Muslims have no distinctions. An Arab has no superiority over a
non-Arab, nor a white over a black.[^4] Never look with contempt at one
as he is a slave or a black man.

You have bought a slave, not created him
----------------------------------------

He is called Maula (slave). I have bought him, not created him. Have you
created him? God has created him just as He has created you. The only
thing you did is that you spent money and bought him. All this is a
fabricated lie. It does not alter the facts. In fact there is no
distinction between you, O Master! And him (this slave). O Lady! What is
the difference between you and the maidservant working in your house as
a matter of fact? Outwardly, you are wearing costly, new clothes whereas
she wears old and cheaper ones. But you should look at the interior. In
the sight of God, the criterion is something else. How many slaves and
maidservants are dearer to God than the owners of these servants. This
is the Day of Judgment, which raises the lower high and makes the high
low.

So no one must be proud
-----------------------

Therefore it is better if we do not forget this verse of Qur’an. During
our entire life we should not be proud, even compared to a disbeliever
who says: I have faith. Faith means God-worship. It is all lowliness and
humility. To say with pride: ‘I am God’s servant’ is not correct? It is
not God-worship.

Marriage of Safiya with Miqdad
------------------------------

With a view to make Muslims remember, till the Day of Judgment, the said
meaning and to make them understand that all are equal and that class
distinctions are meaningless, the Prophet once went up the pulpit and
announced the marriage of Safiya who was the daughter of his uncle
Zubair bin Abdul Muttalib (she belonged to the noblest family of Quraish
among the high ranking Bani Hashim) with black slave, Miqdad bin Aswad.

He did so that, till the doomsday, all may know that ‘his tribe’ and ‘my
family’ etc. are vain thoughts; that only righteousness is the
criterion. Give you daughter to anyone you like but see that, first of
all, he has righteousness or not? Does he perform prayers regularly or
not? Do not look at his family, name or fame. Even today you see that
this looking at the interior is the problem. The problem of white and
colored is still there. This is ignorance. These unfortunate ones do not
have the light of Oneness of God, knowledge of God, the real knowledge
and intelligence. The shining show of their lives must not dazzle your
eyes nor their arts, sciences and industries.

The engineering craft of the honeybee without tools
---------------------------------------------------

These are not the signs of man’s humanity. Animals also compete with
humans in arts and crafts. But this industry is not ever advancing and
not moving towards perfection. Look at this honeycomb. In which college
of engineering did these bees get training? Is the house (block of the
honeycomb) bigger than a pea? Its length and width is almost same as
that of a date seed. It has six sides, so clearly made. Are they holding
a compass in their hands? Just find out an engineer who has graduated
from an engineering college and who can with his fingers make such a
block as the honeybees do, having two acute and two obtuse angles. They
won’t be able to do it.

I would like you to know: These crafts are nothing that they can be made
a criterion of humanity and civility. About today’s industry and
workmanship, we hear that they know what is underground; that here is a
stream of water and here is an oil well. Hud Hud (woodpecker) also
knows. It is written in relevant books: Almighty God has granted an
extraordinary sight to this bird. It can know where ground water is. Man
knows this after a lot of study and with a number or means but this bird
is able to know more and better without instruments. The real knowledge
is other than these sciences and industries. It is sufficient to say
about the ignorance of this community, which says that blacks have no
right to participate in government and community affairs. Can any
ignorance be higher than this! Why? For what offence? Because his skin
is black. You, the one whose skin is white are a ruthless, inhumane and
unjust oppressor. How are you higher than him? Is your wisdom greater
than his? Is your knowledge and perfection more? Do you know the truth
more? Are you having more divine virtues?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّ اللَّهَ عَلِيمٌ خَبِيرٌ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…Surely, Allah is Knowing, Aware. (49:13)”***

God knows everything. You are ignorant of the reality. You see only the
exterior and then give such false judgments. God looks at the real thing
and gives true news. He says: All of you are equal like one another –
alike. The one who is more God-fearing, more pious and cleaner, more
humble, more obedient to God is in truth, more graceful.

Intercession of the righteous on Judgment Day
---------------------------------------------

The summary of a narration noted in volume 3 of Bihar is that, on the
Day of Judgment, a voice will be heard from the Source of Majesty: O
People! You fixed ranks of grace and honor on lineage, race, wealth and
beauty. We have also fixed righteousness the criterion of gracefulness
and honor. You acted in the world on the basis of your own standards and
took pride in the said race, wealth, name and fame. All of you acted on
this basis.

What you did not do was to see who has righteousness for honoring him.
Now today is the day on which I act according to My criteria. Then comes
a voice: O Righteousness people! Get up. O those who were God’s servants
indeed! Rise up as your grace is to be manifested this day. According to
the narration, every one of such righteous people will intercede for
communities as big as Rabeeah and Mazar (two largest tribes in
Arabia).[^5] God will multiply their honor. One of the wisdoms behind
intercession is the manifestation of the grace of the intercessor. Hence
the intercession of Husain in the highest of all, which, we hope, will
reach everyone.

Bani Asad arrives in Medina
---------------------------

We will speak about faith and Islam and the circumstances of the
revelation of the holy verse afterwards. The tribe of Bani Asad, whose
population was apparently big, got up, took up their means and arrived
in Medina and remained there. Greedy Arabs arrived and said: We want to
become Muslims. They accepted Islam and stayed in Medina. They filled up
the city of Medina. A number of them struck tents outside Medina and
lived there. Every morning and evening, they came to the mosque and
stayed with the Prophet saying, “O Messenger of Allah! We are different
from all other tribes. Others submitted under pressure after wars and we
did not resort to fight but have arrived ourselves willingly to become
Muslims. Everyone else had come alone but we have come with our women
and children and our belongings. Please include us in sharing the war
booty.”

This shows with what thinking they had become Muslims. In short, they
created a sort of trouble for the Prophet. This verse, which I want to
recite, refers to this group and so that all may know, till Judgment Day
that what the Muslims who come later on and say: “There is no god except
Allah, Muhammad is the messenger of Allah” and offered prayer, have an
apparent or outward faith. This expression of faith is only on the
tongue. There is nothing in the heart. It is of no use after death. As
it was related only to the tongue, it has vanished. Does a man not lose
his tongue after his death? Everything else also which is merely on
tongue goes away. But what is in the heart or soul stays forever.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿قَالَتْ الأَعْرَابُ آمَنَّا﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The dwellers of the desert say: We believe. (49:14)”***

These Bedouin Arabs arrived in Medina and said: We are believers.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿قُلْ: لَمْ تُؤْمِنُوا﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: You do not believe… (49:14)”***

Say, you have not put faith. Is faith a joke? Is it merely on tongue or
it is with devotions?

Faith is the awakening of the heart
-----------------------------------

True Faith is a divine light hidden in the heart. When did they believe
truly? Yes, they say: We have submitted. So there is a difference
between Faith and Islam, (between faith and submission). Islam means
apparent acceptance, that is when they are told: Say “I witness that
there is no god except Allah and I witness that Muhammad is the
Messenger of Allah”, they utter so and also say Judgment Day is truth.
You must offer prayer, observe fasts in Ramadhan, and go for Hajj also
if possible.

Surely they accepts all this. That is very good. This is Islam, which is
like the skin. Its keeps the body clean and makes one eligible for
marriage, inheritance, and protection of life, wealth, property and
honor. It is allowed to give them daughters, and to take daughters from
them in marriage. Even when he dies, his relatives inherit from his
property and he also gets inheritance from others. These rules are
related to the confession by tongue, even if he has no faith in the
heart. But if he dies in this state or condition, he has no benefits in
the Hereafter.

Woe if one becomes a Muslim due to some greed. It also happens sometimes
that a young boy intends to marry a Muslim girl. She says: I will not
marry you until you become a Muslim. The boy says: All right, I become a
Muslim. He takes that girl too. This marriage is also valid. His Islam
also is good for this job. But if death comes to him, it is not known
what will happen. This Islam, which was for getting a girl will be
accepted and admitted in the society of Muslims. But this not the faith
for which the Holy Prophet had arrived. The faith desired by the Holy
Prophet is that man’s heart should know Allah. His interior should have
fear of God. He must be afraid of the accountability on Judgment Day.
Only verbal utterance of the words: The Hour will arrive, no doubt
therein,” is not enough.

He must, from his heart, believe in: “The questioning of Munkar and
Nakeer in the grave is truth”. He must truly realize and know that
dreadful things are ahead. Until this thing does not exist in one’s
heart, hundreds of verbal utterances are of no use. This is Islam. But
until there is true belief in Paradise, Paradise is not attainable.
Faith in Paradise is different from Islam. Faith in Paradise means that
the heart must long for the reward of Allah and strive to attain it in a
serious way. O friend! If you have a strong desire to build a palace;
you work for it with or without saying, “I want a palace.” The deep
desire in your heart makes you work for your desired thing. But if he
does not work for a thing he will not get it even if he calls for it a
hundred times with his tongue.

If one says only with his tongue that Paradise is true, he does not go
to Paradise. Hell is true. Does he escape from fire? What is required is
belief in Paradise and hell in heart, not only on the tongue. In other
words, on the tongue and in the heart, both. Islam means tongue. Faith
means heart. God is present everywhere and sees everything. “He is with
you wherever you may be.” This is Islam. Faith is that the heart should
develop a condition whereby even in his house he says: God is present
everywhere. If there is an opportunity of sinning and even if there is
no deterrent. There is a fear in his heart, which says God is
Omnipresent. A kind of light (Noor) is created in his heart whereby he
sees that God is present everywhere.

Faith has not yet entered your hearts
-------------------------------------

The Arabs say: We have believed. Say: You have not yet believed. But
say: We have accepted Islam. Faith has not yet entered your hearts. If
faith has entered the heart it must show some signs. It is not possible
that real faith be signless. Fear and hope are two solid pillars of
faith. It is impossible that there is Faith in heart but man does not
fear divine punishment. At a thought of sinning, he does not tremble due
to what is to happen on Judgment Day. It is not possible for the
faithful not be eager for divine reward and Paradise. He will run after
every good for buying Paradise, for building Paradise, for making
arrangements for the Hereafter. If you see one who has become cold and
lazy, know for sure that faith has not entered his heart.

They did not come up for jihad
------------------------------

The same Arabs who said: We are believers, when the Holy Prophet called
upon them to participate in the battle of Hudaibiyah they turned back.
Those who said: ‘We are the faithful’ did not arrive. This shows that
Jihad requires Faith. It also required spending money in the path of God
and even sacrificing ones life. Unless the noble aim is not in one’s
mind, how can he give his money? Anyone in whom you see that he finds it
difficult to spend in the cause of God, know that his faith is weak. If
he does not spend at all, then know that he has no faith at all.  
 Therefore, He says: If you obey the orders of Allah and His Prophet, He
will not decrease anything from your reward. O Arabs! O Bedouins! O the
ones who claimed to have faith! We also tell you that you still do not
have sincere faith. If you do act according to faith sincerely, then you
should obey the commands of God and His Prophet. Your reward will not
only not be decreased but you will receive it multiplied.

A deed done for God is not little
---------------------------------

If a man does anything, and if it is for the sake of anyone or anything
other than God, then its reward is less as it is perishable. Any work
which you do for getting its reward or recompense be it trade or any
other job like farming, industry etc. every work which is other than a
deed for God, its reward is less because everything is perishable. It
lasts only upto the brink of the grave. You may do an extraordinary work
for anyone, it will end at the time of death.

But if one works for the sake of Only One God, its reward will be full
and perfect. It does not end with the arrival of death but death is the
rising time of the reward of God. Now, pay attention to the meaning of
this verse: O Arabs and non-Arabs! If you come and do the work for God,
if your faith is in God, if your deed is for God, if your expense is for
Allah “He will not diminish aught of your deeds.” You will get the
reward without any cut or decrease in it. Not only this, Allah will also
multiply and increase it. Here there is no decrease as it is forever.

Between Yazid and Husain
------------------------

Yazid followed Satan, desire, lust and greed. How long did its reward
last? He remained for three years after Husain. He desired happiness and
governance. This unfortunate fellow ruled for only three years.
Thereafter he went to hell with his wretchedness.

Husain also did a deed or dealing, but with God. “He will not diminish
aught of your deeds.” Allah also, for any reason, did not belittle his
deed. He granted an unending and unlimited reward. Now Husain is Sultan
(the king). O gentleman and ladies! You know that Husain is the king of
the world of grave and the higher one. We must not forget. Forty years
ago a noble gentleman from Shiraz said: We some youths of about 18 to
20, were holding discussion sessions. Once it was the turn of one of our
friends whose father was Husaini. We went to his house for holding a
mourning meeting for Imam Husain too. After sometime, this friend of
ours fell ill and died. His death shook the ground beneath our feet.
After sometime, I saw him in my dream. He looked very happy and pleased.
I told him, “O my friend! You went away and made us grieve very much.”
He replied, “Why do you grieve? I am at rest, in peace and pleasure. I
am free from worldly anxieties and troubles. So you too should feel
happy. You must also think of this eternal life, and should not worry as
to why I died.”

I had heard, that if someone undertakes washing of a body of the
deceased, it (the body) replies to any question, which is asked to it. I
held his hand and said, “I will not release your hand until you tell me
what all you went through after your death.” The body trembled and
replied, “Please release me. It is not worth telling.” I said, “Then
please tell me the gist of what you have understood so that I may also
follow the things which you did not know in the world and have
understood now.” He replied, “We did not know and recognized Husain in
the world. We understood and knew here what a kingdom Husain is having
here in the affairs of this eternal world.” It amounted to the same
sentence, which I had spoken, that is, God’s reward is different from
the reward of Satan, greed, desire and passion. Whoever deals with God
is never in loss. His reward is both full and perfect. Of course it has
ranks. Husain’s deal with God was different.

[^1]: Usul al-Kafi 4:11

[^2]: Surah Qasas 28:76

[^3]: Surah Qasas 28:81

[^4]: Tafsir al-Mizan, vol. 18, pg. 363

[^5]: Biharul Anwar 3:271


