Part 28
=======

Faith in origin and end is the basis of all religions
-----------------------------------------------------

The original religion, which Almighty Allah initiated with the father of
mankind (Adam) and ended with the messengership of Muhammad is to
understand the beginning and the end.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿لا نُفَرِّقُ بَيْنَ أَحَدٍ مِنْ رُسُلِهِ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“We make no difference between any of His apostles…”***[^1]

The purpose of sending Messengers and of revealing divine Books from the
scriptures of Adam upto the Holy Qur’an on Muhammad is faith in God, the
Hereafter and good deeds. This is the whole of it. Ibrahim talked about
God, Hereafter and good deeds and so also talked Musa, Isa and the Last
Prophet. This is towards which people were called and invited by Torah,
Bible, Zabur and Qur’an.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَالْعَصْرِ. إِنَّ الإِنسَانَ لَفِي خُسْرٍ. إِلاّ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا
وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ وَتَوَاصَوْا بِالْحَقِّ وَتَوَاصَوْا
بِالصَّبْرِ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“I swear by the time, most surely man is in loss, except those who
believe and do good, and enjoin on each other truth, and enjoin on each
other patience.”***[^2]

Religion means faith and good deeds. All the messengers arrived for this
purpose.  
 Faith in God, the Messenger and the Hereafter does not mean only
confession by tongue due to some temptation or because of habit or mere
outward expression and saying: Allah, Muhammad, Hereafter and Judgment
Day are true; death is true.

Inclination towards something amounts to having faith in it
-----------------------------------------------------------

The meaning of Faith in Persian is, as mentioned in all the Qur’anic
commentaries, is inclination or attraction. The thing towards which man
gets inclined is due to faith in that thing. Faith in God is inclination
towards God. Today’s man has left God. He has no faith in Him. All the
faith and inclination is towards the material world, wealth, affluence,
financial power, status and position. All are running after these
things.

The Jew says I am in the community of Musa and my belief is in Torah.
Rather, he also has strange claims. He says, “Ruling the world is our
right and Paradise is also absolutely for us.”  
 What do the Christians say? Christians say: We are children of God and
His friends. Paradise is our property and Isa lived in hell for three
days so that no Christian may now go to hell, and all such nonsense.  
 Muslims also say Paradise is for us. I am a believer; partisan of Ali
the Wali of Allah and Paradise is reserved for us, not for others.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿…مَنْ آمَنَ بِاللَّهِ وَالْيَوْمِ الآخِرِ وَعَمِلَ صَالِحًا فَلَهُمْ
أَجْرُهُمْ عِنْدَ رَبِّهِمْ وَلا خَوْفٌ عَلَيْهِمْ وَلا هُمْ
يَحْزَنُونَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…whoever believes in Allah and the Last day and does good, they
shall have their reward from their Lord, and there is no fear for them,
nor shall they grieve.”***[^3]

The Holy Qur’an has clearly nullified such claims. O Muslims, Allah
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَالَّذِينَ هَادُوا وَالنَّصَارَى
وَالصَّابِئِينَ مَنْ آمَنَ بِاللَّهِ وَالْيَوْمِ الآخِرِ وَعَمِلَ
صَالِحًا فَلَهُمْ أَجْرُهُمْ عِنْدَ رَبِّهِمْ وَلا خَوْفٌ عَلَيْهِمْ
وَلا هُمْ يَحْزَنُونَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely, those who believe, and those who are Jews, and the
Christians, and the Sabians, whoever believes in Allah and the Last day
and does good, they shall have their reward from their Lord, and there
is no fear for them, nor shall they grieve.”***[^4]

These titles are meaningless. The names like Jews, Christians, Sabian,
Muslim etc are of no use. The path of God requires truthfulness,
requires Faith or religion. Religion is in the heart. Unless the heart
realizes God and Hereafter, until man is totally inclined towards God
and Hereafter it is no religion.

Be, if you like, a Christian or a Shia. Unless and until heart is
inclined towards God and Hereafter it is of no use. The man of today,
may he belong to any community, is attracted only towards material
things of this world. If you tell him: Fear your grave, think about the
forthcoming questioning after death, and Judgment Day is also there, he
replies: These talks have now become old. Is this man a religious
believer? Maybe his name is like the names of Muslims or Christians or
Jews but around what is he circling? Only around money, lust, greed,
passion and desires. Who is revolving around God? Who is running after
Paradise? Wherever I see, I see that all are after big bungalows and
buildings. When did you turn towards the House of the Hereafter? I do
not know when you turned towards the House of the Hereafter to see if
its walls are aright and its construction good.

Hereafter requires prior preparation
------------------------------------

You do not arrive in the Hereafter in a readymade house. When you came
out of your mother’s womb a readymade house was awaiting you. A lamp
like the sun during day and moon at night. So also the leveled earth for
your habitation. As for your food, mother’s breasts were pre-filled. In
short, you came in a well-prepared life. Then you lived in this world
until you return and go away from it. But when you get out of the womb
of this world and enter the higher world, you see that there is no
readymade living for you. Do you know what does a readymade living
means? It means that when you die there is no existent light like the
light of the sun there. The Noor or Light over there is the same Noor
which you carry with you, that you earned during the holy month of
Ramadhan, the Noor of good deeds, the light of Faith, the radiance of
repentance, the brilliance of sincerity. Your Noor is in your self.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿يَوْمَ تَرَى الْمُؤْمِنِينَ وَالْمُؤْمِنَاتِ يَسْعَى نُورُهُمْ بَيْنَ
أَيْدِيهِمْ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“On that day you will see the faithful men and the faithful women-
their light running before them…”***[^5]

On the earth of the final grand gathering (Hashr) there is no sun or
moon.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِذَا الشَّمْسُ كُوِّرَتْ. وَإِذَا النُّجُومُ انكَدَرَتْ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“When the sun is covered, and when the stars darken,”***[^6]

There is no shining star on Judgment Day. Conditions are totally
different over there. There will be no light except the Noor of the last
Prophet, Muhammad. Anyone who has earned from this radiance in the world
will get it there automatically in the Hereafter.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿لَهَا مَا كَسَبَتْ وَعَلَيْهَا مَا اكْتَسَبَتْ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…For it is (the benefit of) what it has earned and upon it (the evil
of) what it has wrought…”***[^7]

There are some, for whom, as per narrations, the Noor is just in front
of them. There are some Muslims for whom the light gets extinguished and
they become almost blinded. You have seen that sometimes a lamp gives a
little light and is about to go off and then again it becomes bright.
For some the light is so less that they can barely see their feet.
Sometimes it becomes so dim that it has almost gone out. This condition
in the higher world comes to pass when one had committed sins in the
world. Repenting is its lightening up once more. After your death you
will see and pass through your time in the spiritual state. Lightening
and darkening and again lightening.

One who had sinned had repented too. May God let not the darkness
prevail. Be the outward surface of your grave dark or brightened by a
thousand lights such light belongs to this world. But where you are
after death requires a different kind of light, the light or radiance of
Faith or sincerity, brightness of truthfulness, dazzling of good deeds.
Your bed is also like that. You recite in Dua Abu Hamzah during these
nights: Why should I not weep over my empty-handedness? What is your
property and belongings after your death? Ali says, “After death, no one
has any house except that which he had prepared in this world.” There
are some, of course pure believers, whose house there (in the Hereafter)
is as vast as the eyes can see.

The body is under dust but his soul or spirit is in the heavenly
kingdom. Faith in Judgment Day means revolving around Judgment Day. Such
person does deeds, which are useful in the Hereafter. He keeps away from
sinful acts. This is faith in Judgment Day. He does not go even near any
sin, away from lust, passion and greed, which imprisons everyone, except
a true believer. It is not possible that a faithful person bows before
passion and lust. Lustful behavior removes Faith from man. I will tell
you a short story to illustrate this point.

Models of Faith
---------------

They say twelve persons of the Muslim army became prisoners of war while
fighting the Romans. The emperor said: Bring the captives to me as I
desire to look at them and to know as to how a small number can win over
a huge army! When these twelve great men were brought in the presence of
the emperor, the king of Byzantine asked them, “I will not kill you. I
will also give jobs to you. The only thing you have to do is to come and
reform our army so that they may be trained like yourselves and our
armies may also make advances like your Islamic forces.”  
 The Muslims opposed the proposal saying, “We are not prepared for this
as God is not pleased with such a thing.” The Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿رَبِّ بِمَا أَنْعَمْتَ عَلَيَّ فَلَنْ أَكُونَ ظَهِيرًا لِلْمُجْرِمِين
َ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“My Lord! Because Thou hast bestowed a favor on me, I shall never be
a backer of the guilty.”***[^8]

We will never do such a thing. The emperor ordered, “Take these men to
the church, point out to them the beautiful female monks and hand them
over to them. Also tell the girls to show affection to these Muslims.
Let the Muslims know that these girls will submit to them provided they
agree with the said proposal. Moreover you will also get much more
rewards.”

When these Muslims were brought to the church and their eyes fell on
those lustful and beautiful girls they exclaimed, “Is this a house of
worship or a house of passion!” They cast their eyes down so that the
seeing may not be repeated as the repetition of such seeing is
prohibited. If one’s eye falls on an alien lady, to look at her again is
unlawful, it being full of risk. They lowered their heads and eyes and
did not move from their place. The king was informed of this. In our
opinion, these are men indeed. They are not childish, lustful or greedy,
who may bow down before money or be enslaved by women. They are Muslims,
honorable and respectful. They believe in the Might God.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَلِلَّهِ الْعِزَّةُ وَلِرَسُولِهِ وَلِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and to Allah belongs the might and to His Apostle and to the
believers…”***[^9]

As such they keep aside wealth and passion. They submit to none and
nothing but Only One God. Their faith is not in money and lust. Their
condition is such, day and night. It is said: He lives in his worldly
house but his heart and soul is in the grave. He is always caring for
the means of the grave. If you want to get benefits in the other world,
after death, in fact, you will be with what you are in this world. If
your heart is involved and drowned in the worldly corpse, your foul
smelling body will be with you in the grave.

If your heart was revolving round Muhammad and the Progeny of Muhammad,
if you were loving Qur’an and longing for Paradise and its bounties they
will be with you after death. What is the condition of a world-lover?
How madly he runs after worldly wealth, which is material. His entire
thinking is about gathering money and dearness and cheapness of worldly
possessions etc. One who loves the Hereafter should also be after the
things related with the other world. His entire attention is towards
God, Hereafter, religion and truth.

Whatever is in the flask oozes out of it too. (Persian Saying)  
 World-lover has signs and so also has the one who loves Hereafter. One
who wants this material world is constantly after getting the material
benefit and tries his best so that his income may not diminish. One who
loves the Hereafter too must be like that. He says to himself: Before
the holy month of Ramadhan ends let me collect as many benefits as
possible. What is the condition of a materialistic man? What does he do
to gain benefit from land costing a thousand toomans per meter? Almighty
God grants you a thousand fold more. Then how much more you should
strive to get it? You must do as many good deeds as you can before the
holy month comes to an end. Believer is one who trembles at the mention
of God’s name before him. His heart fills up with the fear of the
Judgment Day when it is talked about. This is the sign or symbol or
Faith. Otherwise his faith is only in this material world. In his grave
is also a rotten corpse, which symbolizes this low world. This is the
reality.

The summary of our talk of today is: What is required after death is
Faith and a heart full of reality. What was only on the tongue goes
away. If your heart has fear of God, you must decide what should be with
you at the moment of your death. So remain with faith, fear, lowliness
and humility before truth. Of course it also has its signs. How the
worldly people attend their work in time? O believer! The sign of your
faith is that when you hear the call “Hasten for Prayer” from the
minaret of the mosque, O the one who really believes in the Hereafter,
rush and race towards prayer, the best deed and be not lazy and
careless.

Ali bin Abi Talib appeals in Dua Kumail: O God! I request you earnestly
not to let me be lazy with regard to the affairs of the Hereafter.
Please forgive me as I have been lazy in my affairs pertaining to my
Hereafter.

If a proposal for a good deed is put before me, I reject it myself. This
is a weakness of faith. Otherwise if man has true faith he himself
rushes towards a good deed and undertakes it immediately.

Do not turn again to lust
-------------------------

Now, as God Almighty has granted you this precious holy month of
Ramadhan, and as you have faith and affection for good deeds and as you
are regularly attending prayer and hearing the commentary of Holy
Qur’an, and observing fasts etc., pray to God so that you may be able to
maintain these habits even after the holy month is over. Woe unto the
eye, which shed tears during the holy nights, which looks at Holy Qur’an
and also looks at shameless scenes on the television screen, which are
against God’s pleasure.

The neglectful things restrain you from the path of the Hereafter. When
would you be anxious for the Hereafter? Why people are not at all
mindful of their Hereafter? It is only due to these passionate, exciting
and lustful scenes and affairs. In short, now that you have arrived
here, may God keep us all stuck to the right path and may we give up
sinning and may we prepare for our journey to the other world and may
all of us love one another.

Friendship with one another brings bliss
----------------------------------------

Begin at home and go unto the two worlds. If the wife and the husband
love one another for God’s sake, His bounties are also with them. How
sweet then is their life! If there is good behavior with the neighbor,
between the buyer and seller, partner and partner or associate, if one
considers the property of other as his own, if they consider the loss of
others their own, they will really become sincere friends. In such
circumstances God rains favors on them, which are beyond imagination
indeed.

God deserves to be more affectionate
------------------------------------

It is narrated that a youth had much affection for Prophet Dawood. He
had full faith in him and was attending him regularly for learning the
Psalms. This youth was so much attracted to this, that he did not do
anything else. Briefly speaking, one day the angel of death visited
Dawood. At that moment the angel looked rather sharply at that youth.
Dawood asked the angel, “Why did you cast such a sharp look at my
friend?” The angel replied, “Yes, I have to visit him (for taking his
soul) next week.” Dawood asked again, “Is it firmly fixed?” The angel
replied, “Yes, this man will not live for more than a month now.” Then
the angel went away.

Dawood also loved this youth for the sake of God. So he felt much on
hearing about his early end. He talked sweetly with him and asked, “Have
you married?” The youth replied, “No.” Dawood told himself: This youth
is not going to live for more than a week. He is not yet married. He
began to think about finding a wife for him. So that he may benefit from
her at least for one week. He put forth a proposal before a person among
Bani Israel and said, “For God’s sake give your daughter to this youth
in marriage tonight.” That gentleman also accepted the proposal readily,
asked his daughter and she also agreed. They made arrangements for the
honeymoon, which was held the same night.

The youth, as usual, continued to visit Dawood daily. On the seventh day
while Prophet Dawood was expecting news about that youth’s demise, he
arrived there himself. Dawood did not say anything to him. In short,
after one week, the angel of death once again came to meet Dawood. The
latter asked the former what had happened. How is it that the youth
remained alive? The angel replied, “The time of his death had arrived
but you, the girl’s father and the girl herself performed deeds that
attracted God’s mercy. The mutual love for one another stirred divine
mercy. When God saw them doing this He said, ‘It is for Me more than you
to love and to be kind to this youth, so We extended his life.’”[^10]

Wife’s obedience to husband for God’s sake
------------------------------------------

It is written in the book *Muhjjatul Baiza* that during the days of the
Holy Prophet, in Medina, there was a woman whose husband intended to go
on a journey. He told her, “Do not go out of the house till I come
back.” The lady agreed.

Before long her father fell ill. She sent a word to the Holy Prophet
asking, “O Messenger of God! While going abroad, my husband had asked me
not to leave the house, but my father is ill, so can I visit him?” The
gist of the matter is that the Holy Prophet did not give her permission
and considered that husband’s obedience was essential.

The woman’s father was about to breathe his last. The lady’s heart again
became restless and she once again sent a word to the Holy Prophet
seeking permission but got the same reply. Then her father expired. She
again asked the Holy Prophet whether she could attend the funeral? The
Holy Prophet repeated his reply saying, “Since your husband has asked
you to remain in the house, you must not go out.” As the woman had
faith, she accepted the order. She feared God’s punishment and knew that
God’s pleasure was in her husband’s pleasure. The Messenger of God gave
her good tidings: Almighty God has, due to the deed of this lady,
forgiven her, her father, her mother and her husband. God pardoned all
of them due to the goodness of the deed of this lady. Just see, how one
deed enables a woman to become so lucky! Let us leave the matter here
and proceed further.

Farewell to the dear month of Ramadhan
--------------------------------------

O faithful lovers of God! You know our beloved month is about to leave
us. Once the veil is lifted you can see how blissful this holy month of
Ramadhan was. It has ended now. It is preferable to bid farewell to this
holy month during the last Friday, during the last night. Let the
relevant supplication be recited. How to bid farewell to a dear one who
is leaving us with a promise to meet again in the Hereafter. How is such
a dear one given farewell?

Time and space pass away speedily in this material world. But it has
spiritual aspect, which lasts forever. Its name is Ramadhan. How is it?
No one knows but (God and His Messenger tell the Truth) every existing
one has to be gathered after death. Time and space also have a
gathering. This same month of Ramadhan, which has passed away is there
in the higher world. The brightness of this very month of Ramadhan will
be witnessed by us after our death. The outward of the hours, which we
spent in the Holy nights have passed away but its interior (spirit) is
still there. It will be the cause of the light and brightness of your
eyes after death.

Hours of our life
-----------------

Ibn Fahd Hilly narrates from the Holy Prophet that hours of a man’s life
are of three kinds. They are such that when their other worldly
appearance comes before a faithful, he will become so happy that if that
happiness is distributed among the people of hell, they too will become
happy. Such hour is when a faithful passed it in the remembrance of God,
remaining in the mosque, hours when he fasted for God’s pleasure,
gathered with other faithful people in religious meetings wherein the
youths, the old ones called upon God meekly and in humiliation. Such
deeds and hours are permanent.

Every word, which you uttered for God, every deed, which you did for the
pleasure of God, every repentance, which you made during this month, you
will observe that all of them have lasted. What I am telling you is bid
farewell to the dear holy month. Perhaps you may not see it again except
in the Hereafter. It is about to slip away from our hands. Imam Zainul
Abideen says: O Dear month of Ramadhan! You had brought the holiday
(Eid) for the friends of God. How fast you left for the friends of God
and how hard were you for others!

I now narrate the rest of this narrative –another hour is such that it,
if you see, makes all so restless that if its restlessness is
distributed among the people of Paradise all of them will turn restless.
It is the hour or time in which you committed a sin. Alas, if our eyes
can see the sins which we might have committed during Ramadhan,  
 The Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿الْيَوْمَ نَخْتِمُ عَلَى أَفْوَاهِهِمْ وَتُكَلِّمُنَا أَيْدِيهِمْ
وَتَشْهَدُ أَرْجُلُهُمْ بِمَا كَانُوا يَكْسِبُونَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“On that day We will set a seal upon their mouths, and their hands
shall speak to Us, and their feet shall bear witness of what they
earned.”***[^11]

Tomorrow, on the Judgment Day, all the limbs and organs will witness to
the deeds done by each. The hand, the eye, the flesh, the tongue, all
will speak up. Do not ask: How? It is a different power and a different
world.  
 By the way, there also is a narration. The Imam says: When one repents
and repents heartily, God sends a decree to the writers of deeds and
also to the limbs or organs of that person: Do not give witness to this
servant’s sinning on the Day of Judgment because My servant has himself
confessed to his sin and repented over it.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿يَوْمَئِذٍ تُحَدِّثُ أَخْبَارَهَا. بِأَنَّ رَبَّكَ أَوْحَى لَهَا﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“On that day she shall tell her news, because your Lord had inspired
her.”***[^12]

The very ground beneath your feet will be a witness against you.  
 The third (kind of) hour is medium, neither happiness nor sorrow. It is
the hour, which passed in deeds, which were neither in obedience nor in
His disobedience. Such hours also cause sorrow. One will really feel
sorry as to why he did not perform deeds of God’s obedience for getting
benefits now!

Recite the prayer of farewell
-----------------------------

Jabir narrated from the Messenger of Allah: Recite briefly this
supplication on the last Friday of Ramadhan so that God Almighty may do
to you either of the two things: Either He will extend your life span so
that you get another holy month or if your death is already decreed He
will improve your affairs. O Lord! Let this month may not be the last
holy month of Ramadhan of my life. May I not be buried this year. I may
worship and fast also the next year and recite Qur’an.

But if it is Your determined decree whereby this year may be the last
year of my life (for which there may be no remedy through supplication
or charity) then please, kindly, let there remain no sin in my account
unforgiven (making me pure and clean). Be Merciful to me. Give me
liberty through salvation. Improve my deeds so that I may not be
deprived. I may not go out empty-handed from the holy month of Ramadhan.
Please grant me the happiness of Eid-ul-Fitr by Your Mercy. O Lord! Let
not these hands return empty-handed from Your Court.

Bid farewell to the holy month of Ramadhan with the final farewell to
Husain.  
 Peace of Allah be upon you, O Aba Abdillah (Husain)!

[^1]: Surah Baqarah 2:285

[^2]: Surah Asr 103:1-3

[^3]: Surah Baqarah 2:62

[^4]: Surah Baqarah 2:62

[^5]: Surah Hadid 57:12

[^6]: Surah Takwir 81:1-2

[^7]: Surah Baqarah 2:285

[^8]: Surah Qasas 28:7

[^9]: Surah Munafiqeen 63:8

[^10]: Biharul Anwar vol. 6

[^11]: Surah Yasin 36:65

[^12]: Surah Zilzal 99:4-5


