Commentary : Verse 24.25.26.27.28.29.30.31.32
=============================================

(24) فَلْيَنظُرِ الْإِنسَانُ إِلَى طَعَامِهِ

(25) أَنَّا صَبَبْنَا الْمَاءَ صَبًّا

(26) ثُمَّ شَقَقْنَا الْأَرْضَ شَقًّا

(27) فَأَنبَتْنَا فِيهَا حَبًّا

(28) وَعِنَبًا وَقَضْبًا

(29) وَزَيْتُونًا وَنَخْلًا

(30) وَحَدَائِقَ غُلْبًا

(31) وَفَاكِهَةً وَأَبًّا

(32) مَّتَاعًا لَّكُمْ وَلِأَنْعَامِكُمْ

24. Then let man look to his food,

25. That We pour down the water, pouring it in abundance,

26. And We split the earth into fragments,

27. And We produce therein corn,

28. And grapes and grasses,

29. And the olive and the palm,

30. And gardens, dense with trees,

31. And fruits and fodder,

32. Provision for you and for your cattle.

**Commentary:**

**Man should look at his food!**

Since the aforementioned verses allude to the Resurrection and the next
verses also refer more vividly to this very matter, it seems that these
verses are a proof for the Resurrection. By explaining Allah's authority
over all things and, also, reviving the dead lands by sending down rain,
which is a resurrection in itself for plants, proves the possibility of
Resurrection.

By the way, since these verses mention the different kinds of
nourishment that Allah has given to Man and his cattle, they call him to
thank Allah and pay heed to the knowledge of Him.

First, it says: Then let man look to his food; and considers how Allah
has produced it.

The closest exterior substance, to Man, is his food which, after some
changes, is easily absorbed and becomes part of his body, therefore, if
he cannot obtain it he will perish. That is why the Qur'an, among all
things, puts emphasis on the nourishment; especially those produced from
trees and plants.

It is clear that the aim of saying 'look to' is not a simple look, but
it means with deep care and contemplating on the vital elements and
wonderful structure of the nourishment, and the surprising effects they
have on him, so, consequently, he should think about the Creator, Who
has created them.(1)

There is the idea which says that it may mean 'a superficial look, a
look which stimulates the salivary glands and, as a result, helps the
digestion'. This seems improbable because, in comparison with its pre
and post verses, the verse does not carry such a meaning at all; but
some food scientists look at the contents of the Qur'an with their own
narrow view points, then, it is natural for them to have an idea like
that about the verse.

Some others believe it to mean that when one sits at the table to eat,
one must look carefully at the foods to see how they are prepared;

(1) The term /fal-yanzur/ may originally mean that 'if Man is in doubt
of his Creator and the Resurrection, then let him look to his food'.

whether they are permitted or forbidden, lawful or unlawful and, thus,
one may consider the moral and religious aspects in eating.

In some narrations from the sinless Imams, the term /ta'am/ 'food',
here, means 'knowledge', the sustenance of Man's soul, then, one should
be careful and 'look' at Whom he has taken it from. Among these is a
narration from Imam Mohammad Baqir (p.b.u.h.) for the commentary of the
above verse which says: Be careful from where and from whom you get your
information.

Another narration, similar to this, has been quoted from Imam Sadiq
(p.b.u.h.) .

Undoubtedly, the apparent meaning of the verse is about the bodily
foods which are described in later verses, but the soul's sustenance can
analogically be understood from it, since Man is a combination of soul
and body; as his body needs bodily food so his soul requires spiritual
sustenance, as well.

When Man should be careful about his bodily nourishment, and knows of
its origin which, according to the next verses, is life-giving rain, he
should also be careful about his spiritual nourishment, the Message
revealed from above (like rain) to the Prophet's heart (p.b.u.h.) . The
very place where the hearts of the sinless Imams got it from and store
it like fountains of youth for others to make their own hearts fruitful
with faith, virtue and morals.

Yes, one must completely be aware of the main origin of one's knowledge
or one may call it 'spiritual nourishment', lest it may come from a
corrupted source and, as a result, cause one's soul and body to become
sick or die.

And the matter of things being lawful /halal/ or unlawful, /haram/, and
permitted or forbidden can anologically be understood through the
potential guidance, too.

This is also probable that the terms 'food' and 'look' both have 'vast
meanings in this verse, hence all the three above commentaries can be
gathered in it.

It is evident that the term 'man', used in the verse, includes all
members of the human race whether they are believers or unbelievers.
They must care about what they eat and, also, the wonder of its creation
in order for the unbelievers, to find the right way, and for the
believers to increase in their faith.

Verily, each article of food: fruits, nutritious seeds, and vegetables
have some interesting properties which can be studied, separately, in
our lifetime and many things can be learned from them to enlighten us
and give us insight into the wonders that they contain.

Then, to explain the nourishments and their origins, it says:

That We pour down the water, pouring it in abundance.

The term /sab/ means 'to pour water over from above', and here it means
'sending down rain'. The term /sabba/ at the end of the verse, is used
for emphasis and to note the abundance of water.

Water, which is very necessary for every living creature, often comes
down sufficiently, because of Allah's grace. And we know that the
essential source of water existing in rivers, streams, springs,
subterranean canals and wells is rain, so that if it does not rain one
year, all of them will dry up.

Thus, while studying articles of food, first and foremost, Man should
refer to the importance of the regularity of rainfall. The sun shines
over the seas where vapor, in the form of clouds, rises from and moves
above the earth where winds scatter the clouds high in the sky. At cold
points in the atmosphere, the clouds change into pure, harmless water
again and fall gently on the ground in the form of droplets of rain or
little pieces of snow that soak into the ground. Trees, plants and
living things draw up water from the ground.

After mentioning water, which is an important factor in human life, it
refers to another great factor; the earth, and says:

And We split the earth in fragments.

Many commentators have said that this splitting is the splitting of the
land by plant seedings. It is really wonderful that a little smooth
seedling can break the hard, solid land and sometimes it shoots up
through stone. What a surprising power the Creator has given to this
tiny smooth seedling which enables it to do so!

Some others have said that the split may be the splitting of the land
when man ploughs it or even when some worms burrow through it; a kind of
ploughing for the purpose of some other life activities.

Ploughing is one of Man's activities, of course, but Allah has given
him all its necessary means, therefore it relates to Allah.

The third commentary, which has been cited for the verse, and seems
preferable for certain considerations, says that the meaning of
'splitting the earth' is 'the act of breaking the stone into pieces on
the splitting of the earth.'

**Explanation:**

At first the surface of the earth was covered with a mass of stone.
Heavy rains fell, continuously, and cleft the stone asunder and spread
its little parts onto the low lands and, thus, a mass of agricultural
soil was formed, some of which is now carried to the seas by floods. But
the new soil, produced by the succeeding rain and snow was replaced by
it, therwise Man would be faced with the lack of agricultural soil.

Then, the verse points to one of the miracles of the Qur'an, in
science, when it says it rains, first, then the earth cleaves asunder
and becomes fit for farming. This not only happened in the very early
days, but also keeps occurring today.

This commentary seems more suitable, because the growth of plants and
the production of grains are mentioned in the next verses.

Here, again, all three commentaries, together, can be probable.

After mentioning the two basic factors; i.e. water and soil, it refers
to the eight items of plants which contain the main nutrients for Man
and cattle. And We produce therein corn,.

Corn /habba/ is 'grain, the seeds of cereal grass; wheat, oats, rye or
barely, or the plants producing them '. They are the essential sources
of Man's and cattle's nourishments during the year, the lack of which,
because of drought, causes famine and starvation, a great plague for the
world.

The term /habban/ 'corn', in a general sense, shows the importance and
the variety of the seeds. Some others have only meant it as 'wheat' or
'rye' which is not reasonable, because the term 'corn' can include all
seeds, which was mentioned before.


**And grapes and grosses**

The term /inab/ which means both 'grapes and vine', in the verses of
Qur'an, is mentioned, here, because it contains many nutrients, as a
complete food and more than other fruits. It means only grapes in this
verse.

The term /qathb/ originally means 'the vegetables which are cut several
times', and, here, it means the different kinds of vegetables. Its
occurrence after the term 'grapes' is for its importance as a food
material.

Today, vegetables enjoy a high position in food science and are
especially recommended.

The term /qathb/ is sometimes used with the meaning of 'to cut, or to
pick'.

It is probable that /qathb/, used, here, in this verse, has a broader
meaning which includes both vegetables and fruits.

And the olive and the palm.

It is clear that these two items are both from the most important
articles of food which are useful, sound, and nutritious. This is why
they are mentioned and emphasized on, here.

And gardens, dense with trees.

The term /hada'iq/ is the plural form of 'hadiqah' which is 'a garden
surrounded by a wall', but originally it means 'a piece of land
containing water for irrigation'. The word is derived from /hadaqah/
'eye-socket' where water exists, constantly.

Since these kinds of gardens are usually fruit gardens, the word may
hint to the kinds of fruits in Heaven.

The term /qulb/ is the plural form of /aqlab/ and /qulba/ which means
'thick-necked' and is originally derived from /qalaba/. Here, it means
'tail, thick trees'.

And fruits and fodder.

The term /abb/ means 'herbage not sown by men' or 'herbage prepared for
pasture and for cutting'. Basically it means 'preparation' and, since
these pastures are prepared for the usage, so, they are called /abb/.

Some others have also said that /abb/ is used for the fruits that are
suitable for drying and storing to be used in winter, because they are
always ready for use.

The late Mufid in his book, Irshad, has narrated from Amir-al-Mo'mineen
Ali (p.b.u.h.) that the word meant 'herbage as a pasture', and he added:
What God said in the verse And fruits and fodder' is a divine gift for
His servants that He created as a part of their food and for their
cattle, from which their lives receive merit arid their bodies are
strengthened. (1)

In the former verses some special fruits were named, while here fruits,
in general, are discussed. Moreover, the last verse spoke about
'gardens' which seemed to mean 'the fruits of gardens', then, how are
the fruits dealt with, here, again?

The answer to this question is this: There, some definite fruits such
as grapes, olives, and dates, which are of great importance among all
fruits, were named; but, here, fruits are mentioned separate from
'gardens', perhaps because, besides fruits, gardens have some more
advantages, such as, fresh air, nice views, etc.

Moreover, the leaves of some trees and the twigs, the roots, and the
barks of some others (for example: tea, cinnamon, ginger and the like)
are among the edibles; in addition to the leaves of many trees which are
suitable food for cattle. And it is a fact that the items stated in the
aforementioned verses are edible for both human beings as well as their
cattle.

For this reason, in the next verse, it says:

Provision for you and for your cattle.

The term /mata/ means 'anything that Man uses or enjoys'.

(1) Irshad-i-Mufid, from Al-Mizan, vol.20, p. 319.


**Explanation:**

**Wholesome Nutriments**

There are eight nutriments named, in these verses, for Man and cattle.
It is interesting that all of them are from herbages and that is because
of the importance of vegetables, grains and fruits in Man's diet, so, in
other words, they are the true original nutriments, while meat, obtained
from animals, is in the second position and in a lesser amount.

Also noteworthy is that food science, which is one of the wide spread
and important sciences and has a broad field with a large scope of
investigation, is an explanation for what is mentioned in these verses
and shows the magnificence of the Holy Qur'an, especially when this
science emphasizes on the value and the efficiency of these food
materials.

In any case, taking note of these materials and thinking about the
creator of them may cause Man's awareness of Allah grace and mercy to
Mankind.

Yes, paying attention to ones bodily food and, then, the sustenance of
the soul from the points of both its structural content and how one
obtained it, can push one forward along the path of knowledge of Allah,
righteousness, and self-perfection. Verily, Then let man look to his
food, and what a meaningful sentence this short, single statement is!


