Letter 100
==========

**Rabi’ al-Thani 8, 1330**

I The Debater Digresses from the Subject-Matter,
------------------------------------------------

1) You have admitted their conduct regarding those well-known instances,
and you have believed what we had said first; so, all praise is due to
Allah. As regarding their good intentions and their preference of the
common interest, their seeking of what is best for the nation, its faith
and unity, this is a departure from our main topic, as you yourself
know.

II Responding to His Request.
-----------------------------

2) In your latest letter, you have requested the details of the
authentic ahadith regarding ‘Ali (as) in matters other than the imamate
which they did not follow; nay, they did not even pay them any
attention.

You are the imam of traditions of our time; you are well acquainted with
them; you have spent a great deal of effort in tackling the details of
what we have summed up, and who else is more knowledgeable than you of
the details of what we have referred to? Is there anyone else who equals
you or is able to compete with you regarding the Sunnah? Certainly not;
yet, the matter is just what the axiom says: "How often do people ask
about things with which they are familiar?"

You know very well that there are quite a few companions who hated ‘Ali
and were his enemies. They deserted him, hurt him, cursed and wronged
him, opposed him, fought him, struck his face and the faces of his Ahl
al-Bayt as well as those of their followers with their swords, as is
well-known by necessity from the history of the ancestors. The Messenger
of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny, has said:

- "Whoever obeys me obeys Allah, and whoever disobeyes me disobeyes
Allah;

whoever obeys ‘Ali obeys me, and whoever disobeyes ‘Ali disobeys me
too."

- "Whoever deserts me deserts Allah, and whoever deserts you, O ‘Ali,
deserts me, too."

- "O ‘Ali! You are a leader in this life and a leader in the life
hereafter; I love whoever loves you, and the one I love is loved by
Allah; your enemy is my enemy, and my enemy is the enemy of Allah; woe
unto whoever hates you after me."

- "Whoever denounces ‘Ali denounces me, too, and whoever denounces me
denounces Allah."

- "Whoever hurts ‘Ali hurts me, too, and whoever hurts me hurts Allah."

- "Whoever loves ‘Ali loves me, and whoever hates ‘Ali hates me."

- "Nobody loves you, O ‘Ali, except a true believer, and nobody hates
you except a hypocrite."

- "O Allah! Befriend whoever befriends him, and be the enemy of whoever
sets himself as his enemy; support whoever supports him, and forsake
whoever forsakes him."

One day, he looked at ‘Ali, Fatima, al-Hasan and al-Husayn (as) and
said: "I fight whoever fights you, and I am peaceful unto whoever is
peaceful to you." Having covered them with a blanket, he (pbuh) said: "I
fight whoever fights you, and grant asylum to whoever seeks peace with
you; I am an enemy of your enemy."

There are many such traditions which quite a few companions did not
implement; nay, the latter's actions contradicted their injunctions in
preference of their own desires since they sought their own
self-interest. Those whose insight is keen know that all the very
well-known traditions in honour of ‘Ali - which are several hundreds,
such as the ones enjoining acceptance of his taking charge, forbidding
everyone from becoming his enemy - are all proofs testifying to his
great status and prestige, and to his lofty position in the eyes of
Allah and His Messenger. We have narrated quite a few of them in these
Letters, and what we have not narrated is many times more.

You are, by the Grace of God, among those who are very well familiar
with traditions and their meanings. Have you found any tradition which
enjoins opposition and enmity towards him, or any particular one
indicative of harming him, hating him, or bearing animosity towards him,
or anything like hurting him and wronging him, denouncing him from the
Muslims' pulpits, or making that a tradition followed by the preachers
who preach during Fridays and eids?

Certainly not. But those who did all of these things never paid any
attention to such traditions in spite of their abundance and sequential
narration. They did not hinder them from behaving in any way that would
best serve their political interests. They knew that he was the brother
and friend of the Prophet (pbuh), his heir and confidant, the chief of
his progeny, his Aaron over his nation, his son-in-law in his own right,
the father of his descendants, the foremost to accept Islam, the most
sincere in faith, the most knowledgeable, the most diligent in doing
good deeds, the most clement, the strongest in conviction, the hardest
worker in the cause of God, the most courageous, the most virtuous, the
one possessing the most feats, the most cautious about the interest of
Islam, the nearest to the Messenger of Allah, the closest to him (pbuh)
in guidance, manners, and loftiness, the most exemplary in his deed,
speech, or silence... But personal interests were to them above any
other argument or consideration; so, why then the amazement at their
preference to follow their own personal views regarding the imamate to
following the spirit of the Ghadir hadith, for example?

Yet isn't the Ghadir hadith but just one of several hundred others which
they saw only through their own glasses, preferring their own views and
considering their own interests?

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny, has also
said: "The similitude of my Ahl al-Bayt among you is like that of Noah's
ark; whoever boards it is saved, and whoever lags behind it is drowned,"
and "The similitude of my Ahl al-Bayt among you is like the Gate of
Salvation to the children of Isra'il: forgiven are the sins of whoever
enters through it."

He, peace be upon him and his progeny, has also said: "The stars are the
security of the inhabitants of the earth against drowning, and my Ahl
al-Bayt are the nation's security against dissension; so, if any Arab
tribe opposes them, they will all dispute with each other and become the
party of Iblis (Eblis)," in addition to many such traditions all of
which were ignored completely by them..., Wassalam.

Sincerely,

*Sh*


