Letter 106
==========

**Rabi’ al-Thani 18, 1330**

I Ibn ‘Abbas's Argument,
------------------------

1) May I invite your attention to the dialogue between Ibn ‘Abbas and
‘Umar in which the latter, in a lengthy conversation between both men,
asked: "O Ibn ‘Abbas! Do you know what stopped your folks [from
demanding the caliphate] after Muhammad (pbuh)?" Ibn ‘Abbas narrates
saying: "I hated to answer ‘Umar's question, so I said to him: ‘If I do
not know, the commander of the faithful [i.e. ‘Umar] knows.'" ‘Umar
said: "[Some people simply] hated that both prophethood and caliphate be
confined to your House; so, they were happy about their scheme. Quraysh
sought it for thmselves, and were able to obtain it." I said: "O
commander of the faithful! Do you permit me to say something and promise
to control your anger?"

He answered in the affirmative; therefore, Ibn ‘Abbas said: "As
regarding your statement, O commander of the faithful, that Quraysh
sought it for themselves and were successful in obtaining it, I say that
had Quraysh sought what Allah had chosen for them, their choice would
have been unobjectionable and unblamed. As regarding your statement that
they hated to see both prophethood and caliphate in our House, I say
that Allah, the Exalted and the Sublime, has described some people to be
malicious, saying, ‘... that is so because they hated what Allah has
revealed, so He rendered their deeds vain.'" ‘Umar then said:
"Impossible, O Ibn ‘Abbas, for I heard things about you which I hate to
believe else your status in my eyes should be reduced."

I asked: ‘What are they, O commander of the faithful? If they are true,
they should not lower my status in your esteem, and if they are not, I
am capable of defending myself against false charges.' ‘Umar then said:
‘It has come to my knowledge that you say that they have deprived you of
it [caliphate] out of envy, oppression and injustice.'

I said: ‘As regarding your statement, O commander of the faithful, that
it was oppression, then that has become quite obvious to those who are
ignorant as well as to those who are clement. As regarding your
statement about envy, then Adam was envied, and we are his descendants
who also are envious.' ‘Umar then said: ‘Impossible, impossible; your
hearts, O descendants of Hashim, have become filled with envy that can
never dissipate.'

I therefore said: ‘Wait, O commander of the faithful, do not attribute
this to the hearts of those whom Allah has purified with a perfect
purification.'"[^1]

He argued with him in another incident, asking: "How did you leave your
cousin?" Ibn ‘Abbas said he thought ‘Umar meant ‘Abdullah ibn Ja’far;
so, he answered: "I left him in the company of his friends." He said: "I
did not mean him; I meant the greatest among you, Ahl al-Bayt." Ibn
‘Abbas said: "I left him exiled, irrigating while reciting the Qur'an."
‘Umar said: "O ‘Abdullah! I implore you not to be shy but tell me if he
is still concerned about the issue of caliphate." He answered in the
affirmative.

Then ‘Umar asked: "Does he claim that the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has
selected him for it?" Ibn ‘Abbas answered: "Yes, indeed; moreover, I
even asked my father if there was any statement made by the Messenger of
Allah regarding selecting him for the caliphate, and my father informed
me that that was the truth."

‘Umar then said: "The Messenger of Allah held him in very high esteem
through his speeches and actions in a way that left no argument nor
excuse for anyone,[^2] and he kept testing the nation regarding him for
some time;[^3] nay, even when he was sick [prior to his demise], he
wished to nominate him for it, but it was I who stopped him."[^4]

In a third dialogue between both men, ‘Umar said: "O Ibn ‘Abbas! I can
see how wronged your friend [‘Ali (as)] is." Ibn ‘Abbas said: "O
commander of the faithful, then affect justice on his behalf." Ibn
‘Abbas said: "But ‘Umar pulled his hand from mine and went away
whispering to himself for a good while.

Then he stopped; so, I rejoined him, and he said to me: ‘O Ibn ‘Abbas! I
do not think that his people denied him [the caliphate] for any reason
other than his being too young for it.' I said to him: ‘By Allah,
neither Allah nor His Messenger regarded him as too young when they both
ordered him to take Sürat Bara'a (Qur'an, Chapter 9) from him [from Abu
Bakr].' Having heard this, he turned away from me and started walking
fast; so, I left him alone."[^5]

How often has ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Abbas, who is the scribe of the Muslim
nation, the spokesman of the Hashimites, and cousin of the Messenger of
Allah (pbuh), encountered such stances? In Letter No. 26, you have come
to see how he argues with the oppressive party by citing a tradition
that counts ten exclusive merits of ‘Ali (as).

It is a lengthy and eminent tradition in which he quotes the Prophet
(pbuh) asking his cousins: "Who among you would be my supporter in
[matters related to] this life and the life hereafter?" They declined,
but ‘Ali (as) said: "I support you in this life as well as the life to
come." The Prophet (pbuh) then said to ‘Ali (as): "You are my *wali* in
this life and the life to come."

In another tradition, Ibn ‘Abbas narrates that during the Tabuk raid,
the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) went out, accompanied by many people, and
‘Ali (as) asked him: "Shall I accompany you?" The Messenger of Allah
denied his request; so, ‘Ali (as) wept; whereupon the Prophet (pbuh)
said to him: "Are you not pleased that your status to me is like that of
Aaron to Moses, except there is no Prophet (pbuh) after me? I ought not
leave except after you represent me in my absence." The Messenger of
Allah has also told him: "You are the *wali* of every believer after
me," and "Whoever accepts me as his *wali*, ‘Ali (as) [henceforth] is
his *mawla*."

II Arguments of al-Hasan and al-Husayn,
---------------------------------------

2) The dignitaries among the descendants of Hashim often argued
likewise. Once al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali (as) came to Abu Bakr who had seated
himself on the pulpit of the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) and told him to
get down from a place his father was more worthy of. Al-Husayn (as) is
reported to have said similarly to ‘Umar who was also seated on the same
pulpit.[^6]

III Arguments of Prominant Shi’ah Sahabah,
------------------------------------------

3) Books written by imamites who dealt with this topic cite many
incidents wherein the Hashimites and their followers among the *sahabah*
and *tabi’in* argued likewise, and they ought to be reviewed by those
who are interested in their contents. Suffices here to cite the book of
arguments by imam al-Tibrisi in which he quotes statements made by the
Omayyad Khalid ibn Sa’id ibn al-’?s,[^7] Salman al-Farisi, Abu Tharr
al-Ghifari, ‘Ammar ibn Yasir, al-Miqdad, Buraydah al-Aslami,
Abul-Haytham ibn al-Tihan, Sahl and ‘Uthman sons of Hanif, Khuzaymah ibn
Thabit of the two Shahadas, Ubayy ibn Ka’b, Abu Ayyüb al-Ansari, and
many others among those who researched the history of Ahl al Bayt and of
their followers.

Yet they never missed any opportunity to prove their point by citing
explicit or implicit references, strongly or smoothly worded, speeches
and writings, poetry and prose, according to whatever their
circumstances, though critical, permitted.

IV Reference to their Applying the Will as an Argument.
-------------------------------------------------------

4) They repeatedly referred to the will, using it as an argument, as is
well-known by researchers, Wassalam.

Sincerely,

*S*

[^1]: We have quoted it verbatim from Al-Tarikh al-Kamil by Ibn al-Athir
who includes it at the conclusion of ‘Umar's biography among the events
of the year 23 A.H., page 24, Vol. 3, and it is also quoted by the
Mu’tazilite scholar in ‘Umar's biography, too, page 107, Vol. 3, of
Sharh Nahjul Balaghah

[^2]: He means that the speech of the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) praising
‘Ali indicates that ‘Ali enjoys quite a lofty status, obviously an
admission by ‘Umar.

[^3]: He means that the Prophet (pbuh), due to praising ‘Ali in such
wise words, is testing the nation to see if it would accept him as his
successor.

[^4]: This is quoted by Imam Abul-Fadl Ahmad ibn Abu Tahir in his book
Tarikh Baghdad, indicating his reliable source to be Ibn ‘Abbas. It is
also quoted by the Mu’tazilite scholar who discusses ‘Umar in his Sharh
Nahjul Balaghah, page 97, Vol. 3.

[^5]: This dialogue is quoted by authors of books of biographies in
their discussions of ‘Umar, and we have quoted it here from Sharh Nahjul
Balaghah by the Mu’tazilite scholar; so, refer to page 105 of its third
volume.

[^6]: Ibn Hajar has quoted both cases in his fifth maqsad of the verse
enjoining kindness to the Prophet's kin, and it is verse 14, of the ones
dealt with in Chapter 11 of his book Al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqa; so, refer to
page 160 of this reference. Al-Dar Qutni has quoted the case of al-Hasan
with Abu Bakr, and Ibn Sa’d has quoted the case of al-Husayn with ‘Umar
in his biography of the latter in his Tabaqat.

[^7]: Khalid ibn Sa’id ibn al-’?s was among those who rejected Abu
Bakr's caliphate; he refused for three months to swear allegiance to
him, as stated by a group of reliable Sunnis such as Ibn Sa’d in his
biography of Khalid in his Tabaqat, page 70, Vol. 4, adding that when
Abu Bakr dispatched troops to Syria, he prepared the standard for him
and came in person to his house, but ‘Umar said to Abu Bakr: "Do you
give charge to Khalid after having heard what he has said?" He continued
trying till he sent Abu ‘Arwah al-Dawsi with the message that "The
successor of the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) asks you to return our
standard." He did so saying: "Your government has never pleased us, nor
has your deposition harmed us." Having heard such a statement, Abu Bakr
came to him to apologize, and he earnestly requested him not to mention
‘Umar in public. All writers who mention the incident of this campaign
to Syria mention this incident as well, for it is one of such detailed
incidents.


