Letter 110
==========

**Rabi’ al-Thani 29, 1330**

I Shi’ah Faith is Sequentially Derived from the Imams of Ahl al-Bayt,
---------------------------------------------------------------------

1) All those endowed with wisdom and discretion know by necessity that
the derivation of the roots and branches of the Shi’ah imamite faith is
from their forefathers and ancestors ending with the purified progeny.
Their views, therefore, are conducive to those of the Imams of the
purified progeny in the roots and branches of the faith, as well as all
deductions arrived at from studying the Book and the Sunnah, or in any
matter related to them or to all branches of theological science.

They do not rely in their understanding of the latter except upon such
progeny, and they refer to none other than them. They worship Allah, the
Exalted, and seek nearness to Him, Praised be He, through the faith of
the Imams of Ahl al-Bayt, without seeing any deviation therefrom, nor
desiring any substitute. This has been the policy of their good
ancestors since the time of the Commander of the Faithful, al-Hasan,
al-Husayn, and the nine Imams from the progeny of al-Husayn (as) till
our time.

Those who have learned the roots and branches of the faith from Ahl
al-Bayt are quite a few reliable Shi’ahs, and the number of those who
learned from the latter is much larger. The number of those known for
piety, verification and correction is more than sequential. They have
narrated all this to those who succeeded them through *tawatur*, and
after them it was thus narrated to others, and so on. This has been the
case with each and every generation, till it reached us as clear as
mid-day sun, without any cloud obstructing it.[^1]

We now, in understanding the roots and branches, are followers of the
Imams from the progeny of the Messenger (pbuh). We have quoted our
forefathers who all quote them. This has been the case in all
generations till the time of the Naqis, ‘Askaris, Rizas, Jawads, Kazims,
Sadiqs, ‘Abidins, Baqirs, both grandsons of the Prophet (pbuh), peace be
upon all of them, and finally the Commander of the Faithful (as), not
counting Shi’ah ancestors who kept company with the Imams of Ahl al-Bayt
(as), learning the religious injunctions from them, quoting them while
discussing Islamic knowledge.

There is no room here to count all of them and read their roll call.
Suffices you what the pens of their renown scholars have written of
interesting works a list of which does not fit in this narration. They
derived all that from the light of the Imams of guidance, the progeny of
Muhammad, peace be upon him and them, quoting it from their own oceans
of knowledge, hearing it directly from them. They are the scribes of
their knowledge and wisdom.

Their works were authored during the life-time of those purified ones,
and such works became references for all Shi’ahs who succeeded them.
Through them, the superiority of the sect of Ahl al-Bayt manifested
itself over all other Islamic sects.

We do not know any follower of the four Sunni Imams, for example, who
authored a book during the life-time of their Imams. Rather, people
authored works in abundance dealing with their faith after those Imams
had left this world, when it was decided that *taqlid* should be
confined to their sects alone.

During their life-time, they were just like any other contemporary
jurist or traditionist, not enjoying any distinction over others of
their class; therefore, nobody among their contemporaries was interested
in exerting an effort to record their speeches like that exerted by
Shi’ahs in recording the statements of the Infallible Imams (as). Ever
since the inception of the Shi’ah sect, nobody was permitted to refer in
the religious matters to anyone other than their Imams.

For this reason, such an effort was unavoidable, and they became the
sole source of religious scholarship. A great deal of effort and
resources were spent in recording their verbal statements, and many
exhausted their resources in doing so in a manner that is unmatched so
that they might preserve the knowledge which, according to such sect, is
the only one accepted by Allah.

The books authored during the life-time of Imam al-Sadiq (as) alone
numbered four hundred dealing with four hundred different topics
containing the religious verdicts [*fatawa*] issued by al-Sadiq (as)
during his life-time. The disciples of al-Sadiq (as) have written many,
many times this number, as you will hear in detail shortly, Insha-Allah.

As regarding the four Sunni imams, nobody looks at them in the eyes
Shi’ahs look at the Imams of Ahl al-Bayt. Nay; they did not even have
followers during their own life-time! They did not live to enjoy the
status given to them after they had died, as stated by Ibn Khaldün
al-’Arabi in a chapter he dedicated to the science of *fiqh* in his
famous Introduction, and it is a fact admitted by many of their renown
scholars. In spite of all this, we do not doubt that their followers
followed anyone other than them, for theirs are, indeed, the views of
the followers of those Imams, the ones held reliable in dealing with
their affairs by every generation.

They recorded them in their books because their followers knew their
sects best, just as Shi’ahs best know the sect of their Imams, those who
worship Allah accordingly, believing that it is the only way to seek
nearness to Him.

II Advancement of Shi’ahs in Recording Knowledge During the Sahabah's Epoch,
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2) Researchers unhesitatingly accept the fact that Shi’ahs were *the*
pioneers in recording the branches of knowledge, more so than anyone
else. As a matter of fact, nobody in the first century of Islam besides
‘Ali (as) and those endowed with the gift of knowledge among his Shi’ahs
did so. The reason for this could be attributed to the differences of
opinion among the companions in permitting or forbidding the writing of
knowledge.

According to al-’Asqalani in his Introduction to *Fath al-Malik al-’Ali
Bisihhati Babil ‘Ilm ‘Ali*, and according to others, ‘Umar ibn
al-Khattab and a few others disliked the idea for fear hadith might be
mixed with the Book, versus the permission granted by ‘Ali (as), and
after him al-Hasan al-Mujtaba (as), grandson of the Prophet (pbuh), and
a group of other companions, to such writing.

During that time, Ibn Jurayh authored in Mecca the first book dealing
with the legacies in which he quotes Mujahid and ‘Ata'. Al-Ghazali says
that it is the first book authored in Islam. The truth of the matter is
that it is the first book authored by a non-Shi’ah in Islam. After it,
Mu’ammar ibn Rashid, of San’a, Yemen, wrote his, then Malik authored his
*Mawti'*.

The Introduction of *Fath al-Malik al-’Ali Bisihhati Babil ‘Ilm ‘Ali*
states that al-Rabi’ ibn Sabih was the first to compile information, and
that he lived at the sunset of the time of the tabi’in.

**Anyhow, the consensus of opinion is that Sunnis did not author a
single book during the first Islamic century.**

As regarding ‘Ali and his Shi’ahs, these spent a great deal of effort
and time to attain that end during the first century of Islam. The first
writing of the Commander of the Faithful was the Book of Allah, the
Exalted, the Praiseworthy. Having finished the rituals pertaining to the
preparation for the departure of the Prophet (pbuh) from this world,
‘Ali (as) decided not to dress except to either say the prayers or
compile the Qur'an.

He, therefore, compiled it arranged in the order of its revelation. He
pointed out its general and specific meanings, absolute and restrictive,
perfect and those that seem to be alike, revocation and what revokes it,
emphasis and relaxation, injunctions and instructions, pointing out the
occasions which necessitated the revelation of its perfect verses,
explaining what might be confusing to other people.

Ibn Sirin used to always say: "If you are lucky enough to obtain that
book, then you will find in it abundant knowledge." This is cited by Ibn
Hajar in his *Al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqa*, and by many other renown writers.
Several companions who could read took pains to compile the Holy Qur'an,
but they could not compile it in the order of its revelation, nor could
they mark it the way explained above, leaving ‘Ali's compilation more
than just a compilation - rather an exegesis.

Having finished working on the Book of the Dear One, he authored a book
which he dedicated to the Mistress of the Women of Mankind. It came to
be known to her purified sons as "Mushaf Fatima," Fatima's book, which
contained axioms, pieces of wisdom and counsel, morals, historical
events and unique occurrences, written as a solace for her after being
bereaved by the loss of her father the Prophet (pbuh). After that, he
authored a book dealing with blood monies which he titled *Al-Sahifa*.

It is referred to by Ibn Sa’d at the end of his work titled *Al-Jami’*
giving the credit of authorship to the Commander of the Faithful. Both
al-Bukhari and Muslim mention this work and quote it in several places
of their Sahih. Among their narrative is what they have quoted from
al-A’mash from Ibrahim al-Taymi who quotes his father saying: "‘Ali
(as), may Allah be pleased with him, told me once: ‘We have no book for
you to read, besides Allah's Book, other than this *Sahifa*.'

Then he brought it to me. It contained matters related to wounds and
camel teeth. Also among its contents is a statement reading: ‘Medina is
a sanctuary from cIr to Thawr; anyone who desecrates it, or shelters a
desecrator, will incur the curse of Allah, the angels, and man.'" This
is the wording of al-Bukhari in his section dealing with the sins of
those who disown their mawali, in his chapter on ordinances, page 111,
Vol. 4, of his *Sahih*, and it is referred to in the chapter on Medina's
sanctity, when the pilgrimage is discussed on page 523, Vol. 1, of
Muslim's *Sahih*.

Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal repeatedly refers to the narrative regarding this
Sahifa in his *musnad*. He quotes ‘Ali (as) on page 100, Vol. 1, of his
*Musnad*, transmitted by Tariq ibn Shihab who says: "I have witnessed
‘Ali, peace be upon him, telling people from the pulpit: ‘By Allah! We
have nothing to recite for you other than the Book of Allah the Exalted,
and this Sahifa,' which he was attaching to his sword, ‘I have learned
its contents from the Messenger of Allah.'"

Quoting ‘Abdul-Malik, al-Saffar narrates: "Abu Ja’far asked to have
‘Ali's book brought to him, and his son Ja’far brought something bulky
shaped like a thigh. Among its contents was a sentence reading: ‘If a
man dies, his women will not inherit any of his estates.' Abu Ja’far
said: ‘This, by Allah, is the hand writing of ‘Ali (as) and the
dictation of the Messenger of Allah (pbuh)!'"

A group of Shi’ahs who were contemporary to the Imam (as) followed in
the footsteps of the Commander of the Faithful (as) and authored a
number of books. Among those authors were: Salman al-Farisi and Abu
Tharr al-Ghifari, as stated by Ibn Shahr ?shüb who says: "The first to
author in Islam is ‘Ali ibn Abu Talib (as), then Salman al-Farisi, then
Abu Tharr."

Among the latter is Abu Rafi’, freed slave of the Messenger of Allah
(pbuh), and treasurer of *baytul-mal* [state treasury] during the rule
of the Commander of the Faithful, peace be upon him. He was among the
elite of his followers who sought his guidance.

He wrote a book dealing with traditions, ordinances and other matters
which he compiled mostly from ‘Ali's hadith. It enjoyed a prestigious
status among our ancestors who used it as a source of quotations and
narrations. Among them is ‘Ali ibn Abu Rafi’ who, according to his
biography in Isaba, was born during the life-time of the Prophet (pbuh)
who named him ‘Ali.

He authored a book on the science of *fiqh* according to the teachings
of Ahl al-Bayt who, peace be upon them, used to cherish that book and
refer their Shi’ahs to it. Musa ibn ‘Abdullah ibn al-Hasan has said: "A
man inquired about *tashahhud* from my father. My father told me to
fetch the book written by Abu Rafi’. He took it and dictated to us from
it."

The author of *Rawdat al-Jannat* concludes his discussion by stating
that the latter was the first book dealing with *fiqh* written by
Shi’ahs, but he, may Allah have mercy on him, has certainly erred. Among
them is ‘Ubaydullah ibn Abu Rafi’, a scribe and a follower of ‘Ali (as),
who learned from the Prophet (pbuh) and narrated to Ja’far his (pbuh)
saying: "Your form and manners are similar to mine." This is quoted by a
group of scholars including Ahmad ibn Hanbal in his *Musnad*.

Ibn Hajar has mentioned it in Part 1 of his *Isaba* under the heading
"‘Ubaydullah ibn Aslam." The name of the father of Rabi' is Aslam. This
‘Ubaydullah authored a book dealing with the sahaba who fought the
Battle of Siffin on ‘Ali's side, from which Ibn Hajar quotes extensively
in his own Isaba;[^2] so, you may refer to it. Also among them is
Rabi’ah ibn Sam’ who wrote a book dealing with *zakat* on cattle herds
derived from the hadith of the Prophet (pbuh) which is narrated by ‘Ali
(as).

They include ‘Abdullah ibn al-Hurr al-Farisi who narrates a glitter of
ahadith all reported by ‘Ali (as) from the Messenger of Allah (pbuh).
And among them is al-Asbagh ibn Nabatah, a friend and disciple of the
Commander of the Faithful (as) who quotes the Imam's instructive epistle
to Malik al-Ashtar and his will to his son Muhammad. Both are recorded
by our fellows in their authentic books of traditions directly from him.
Among them is Salim ibn Qays al-Hilali, a companion of ‘Ali (as), who
quotes his hadith and that of Salman.

He wrote a book dealing with imamate which is mentioned by Imam Muhammad
ibn Ibrahim al-Nu’mani in his book *Al-Ghayba*, saying: "Nobody among
all Shi’ah scholars and narrators of the hadith of the Imams disputes
the fact that the book written by Salim ibn Qays al-Hilali is a major
bibliography of works dealing with *usul* [basics of jurisprudence]
narrated by scholars and traditionists from Ahl al-Bayt, and one of the
pioneers in its subject-matter. It is one of the major sources to which
Shi’ahs refer and upon which they rely."

Our fellows have also recorded the names and works of those of the same
caliber among their good ancestors who authored books, in addition to
the indices and biographies to whose authors everyone is referred.

III Their Authors Contemporary to the Tabi’in, and the Latter's Followers.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

3) As regarding the authors among our ancestors who belong to the second
generation, i.e. that of the tabi’in, this Letter falls short of
elaborating on them, and the best to do in getting to know them, their
works and sources in detail, is to refer to the bibliographies and
biographies compiled by our scholars.[^3]

Upon that class did the light of Ahl al-Bayt (as) brightly shine,
whereas it was earlier obstructed by the clouds of the oppression of
oppressors. The calamity of the Taff disclosed the enemies of the
progeny of Muhammad (pbuh), and made them lose face before the wise. It
also drew attention to the atrocities meted to Ahl al-Bayt (as) since
losing the Messenger of Allah (pbuh). Their horrible implications forced
people to look for the reasons and obligated them to research the
causes. Thus did they come to know the seeds and roots of the calamity.

Those among them who were blessed with a conscience rose to protect the
status of Ahl al-Bayt (as) and support them [both Imams], for the human
nature is made to assist the wronged and dislike wrong-doing. Muslims,
in the aftermath of that catastrophic incident, entered a new era in
which they rushed to support Imam ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn Zaynul-’?bidin
(as), refer to him in their quest for answers regarding the roots and
branches of the faith, and to all Islamic sciences derived from the Book
and the Sunnah.

After his death, they started referring to his son Imam Abu Ja’far
al-Baqir (as). Followers of both Imams, i.e. Zaynul-’?bidin and al-Baqir
(as), among ancient Imamis, wrote innUmarable books, but those scholars
whose names and biographies were recorded in biography books were about
four thousand heroes, and their works numbered approximately ten
thousand[^4] or more which are narrated by our friends in every
generation quoting them from reliable sources. A group among the elite
of those heroes won the honour of serving them, while the rest served
Imam al-Sadiq, peace be upon all of them, and luck had it that a large
number of them reached their ultimate objective of attaining authentic
knowledge.

Among the latter is Abu Sa’id Aban ibn Taghlib ibn Rabah al-Jariri, the
famous reciter of the Qur'an, the traditionist, lexicographer, and
linguist who was one of the most reliable among scholars. He was
contemporary to three Imams from whom he transmitted a great deal of
knowledge and a large number of traditions.

Suffices you the fact that he narrates from al-Sadiq (as) alone thirty
thousand ahadith, as stated by al-Mirza Muhammad in his biography of
Aban in his work *Manhaj al-Maqal* wherein he quotes Aban ibn ‘Uthman
citing al-Sadiq, peace be upon him. He enjoyed their respect and high
esteem. Al-Baqir, peace be upon him, said to him, while they were both
at the sacred city of Medina, "Take your place at the mosque, and issue
your verdicts to people, for I love people to observe a man of my own
Shi’ahs like you." Al-Sdiq (as), peace be upon him, said to him once:
"Debate with the people of Medina, for I love to see men like you among
my narrators and friends." Whenever he came to Medina, people came to
him in large numbers and arranged for him to sit where the Prophet
(pbuh) used to sit. Al-Sadiq (as) said to Salim ibn Abu Habbah: "Visit
Aban ibn Taghlib, for he has learned a large number of ahadith from me,
and whatever he narrates to you, you should narrate, too."

He, peace be upon him, has said to Aban ibn ‘Uthman: "Aban ibn Taghlib
has narrated thirty thousand ahadith from me; so, quote the same from
him." Whenever Aban ibn Taghlib visited al-Sadiq (as), the Imam would
hug him, shake his hand, and order a couch to be given to him to lean
on, and he would lend him his full attention. When the news of his death
was brought to him, he, peace be upon him, said: "By Allah! My heart is
aching because of the death of Aban." He died in 141 A.H. Aban has
narrated traditions from Anas ibn Malik, al-A’mash, Muhammad ibn
al-Munkadir, Sammak ibn Harb, Ibrahim al-Nakh’i, Fudayl ibn ‘Umar, and
al-Hakam. He is relied upon by Muslim and all authors of the four books
of traditions, as we explained while discussing him in Letter No. 16.

Aban is not harmed by al-Bukhari's reluctance to rely on his authority,
for his solace is that the man does not rely on the authority of the
Imams of Ahl al-Bayt (as) such as al-Sadiq, al-Kazim, al-Rida, al-Jawad,
al-Taqi, and al-Hasan al-’Askari al-Zaki, peace be upon all of them,
either. Bukhari does not consider these men reliable; nay, he even does
not rely on the authority of the elder grandson of the Prophet (pbuh)
and the master of the the young of paradise! On the other hand, he
relies on men like Marwan ibn al-Hakam, ‘Umran ibn Hattan, ‘Ikremah
al-Barbari and their likes; so, we are Allah's, and to Him is our
return.

Aban has written very interesting books. One of them is *Tafsir Gharib
al-Qur'an* [exegesis of what is unusual in the Qur'an], whose contents
are mostly Arabic verses of poetry cited to testify to the truth
contained in the Perfect Revelation.

Later, ‘Abdul-Rahman ibn Muhammad al-Azdi al-Küfi combined the contents
of Aban's book with those of Muhammad ibn al-Sa'ib al-Kalbi and Ibn
Rawaq ‘Atiyyah ibn al-Harith and published them in one volume,
highlighting the views in which they differed among themselves as well
as those they agreed upon.

He once quotes Aban independently, and once he quotes what agrees with
‘Abdul-Rahman's views. Our friends have quoted both books through
various reliable sources. Aban has authored a book dealing with moral
excellences, and one dealing with the Battle of Siffin, and he has
authored one of the major reference books on which the Imamites rely in
their derivation of jurisdic injunctions. All his books have been
reported with reference to his authorship thereof. Their details are in
bibliography books.

Among them is Abu Hamzah al-Thamali ibn Dinar, a trustworthy authority
and a dignitary among our ancestors. He derived his knowledge from three
Imams: al-Sadiq (as), al-Baqir, and Zaynul-’Abidin, peace be upon them.
He remained in close contact with them, and won their respect. Al-Sadiq
(as), peace be upon him, lauded him saying: "In his age, Abu Hamzah is
like Luqman in his own time." He has written a book on the exegesis of
the Qur'an, and I noticed imam al-Tibrisi quoting him in his *tafsir*
titled *Mujma’ul Bayan fi Tafsir al-Qur'an*.[^5] He has also written a
book on rare ahadith, another on asceticism, and a dissertation on
rights[^6] narrated from Imam Zaynul-’?bidin ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn from
whom he narrates his own invocation recited at early dawn which shines
brighter than the sun and the moon. He also narrates from Anas and
al-Sha’bi. He in turn is quoted by Waki’, Abu Na’im, and a group of
their class who are our own friends, and from others, as we stated in
his biography in Letter No. 16.

There are other valiant men who did not live to meet Imam
Zaynul-’?bidin, but they won the honour of serving both al-Baqirs, peace
be upon them.

Among these are: Abul-Qasim Bard ibn Mu’awiyah al-’Ajli, Abu Basir
al-Asghar Layth ibn Murad al-Bakhtari al-Muradi, Abul Hassan Zararah ibn
‘Ayan, Abu Ja’far Muhammad ibn Muslim ibn Rabah al-Küfi al-Ta'ifi
al-Thaqafi, and many other standards of guidance and lighthouses that
shone in the dark. To elaborate on them is not possible here.

As regarding these four men, they have, indeed, achieved a special
status and won the coveted prize and a lofty station. When Imam al-Sadiq
(as), peace be upon him, mentioned them once, he said: "I find nobody
who kept our name alive like Zararah, Abu Basir Layth, Muhammad ibn
Muslim, and Burayd; without them, nobody would have learned as much."

Then he added: "These are the custodians of the faith who were trusted
by my father to safeguard what Allah has decreed as permissible or
forbidden. They are the ones who are foremost in seeking our company in
this life, and they will be the foremost in joining us in the Hereafter.

***" Once, he, peace be upon him, recited: "Convey the glad tidings to
those who pray for attaining Our Paradise (Qur'an, 22:34),"***

and he followed his recitation by naming these four persons, adding, in
a lengthy statement lauding them, "My father is said to have trusted
them to safeguard Allah's permissible and forbidden matters, and they
were the custodians of his knowledge; today, they are my faithful
confidants and the true friends of my father; they are the stars of my
Shi’ahs alive or dead; through them does Allah dispel every innovation.

They protect this religion from the lies of the innovators, and the
interpretations of the extremists," in addition to other eminent
statements he made in which he credited them for their contributions,
honour, dignity, and true service in a way which we cannot describe. In
spite of all this, they were charged by the enemies of Ahl al-Bayt (as)
with every possible false charge, as we have explained in our work
*Mukhtasar al-Kalam fi Mu'allifi al-Shi’ah min Sadr al-Islam*.

This does not undermine their lofty status and great significance in the
eyes of Allah, His Messenger, and the believers. Those who envied the
Prophet (pbuh)s only increased the loftiness of those Prophets' status,
without affecting their canons other than their promotion thereof among
those who recognize and follow the truth, making them acceptable to
those endowed with wisdom.

During the lifetime of al-Sadiq (as), peace be upon him, knowledge was
disseminated like never before, and the Shi’ahs of his forefathers (as)
rushed to him from far and wide. He approached them with a pleasant
countenance, making them feel at home, sparing no effort to educate them
and acquaint them with the secrets of knowledge, the particulars of
wisdom, and the nature of matters, as admitted by Abul-Fath
al-Shahristani in his book *Al-Milal wal Nihal*.

When he mentions al-Sadiq (as), he comments: "He was a man very much
informed of the religion, endowed with perfect manners in wisdom,
extreme renunciation of this world, and a complete abstinance from
temptations."[^7] He has also said of him: "He stayed in Medina for some
time instructing the Shi’ahs belonging to his faith, lavishing the
secrets of knowledge upon those who were loyal to him.

Then he went to Iraq and stayed there for a period of time during which
he did not publicly criticize nor covet authority... Whoever drowns in
the oceans of knowledge never desires to see the shore, and whoever
ascends to the peak of reality never fears descending," up to the end of
his statement; "And truth makes itself manifest to the fair minded, and
to the obstinant."

A large number of the companions of al-Sadiq (as) achieved ultimate
wisdom, and they became leaders to righteousness, lanterns in the dark,
oceans of knowledge, stars of guidance. Among those whose names and
biographies are stated in biography books are four thousand men from
Iraq, Hijaz, Iran, and Syria. They are authors of works very well known
by Imamite scholars. Among them are the four hundred books of basics of
jurisprudence mentioned above which deal with four hundred subjects, all
written during the time and derived from the verdicts of al-Sadiq (as).

They were rendered indispensable for both theoretical and practical
knowledge, so much so that a group of the nation's scholars and
emissaries of the Imams summarized their contents in special books to
facilitate their comprehension by students and make them more
accessible. The best among such compilations are the four books which
are the major sources for the Imamites in referring to the roots and
branches of their faith.

They have been referring to them since the first century of Islam, and
these are: *Al-Kafi, Al-Tahthib, Al-Istibsar*, and *Man la Yahdaruhul
Faqih*. All are sequentially narrated, and the authenticity of their
contents is never doubted. *Al-Kafi* is the oldest among them, the
greatest, the best, and the most authentic. It contains sixteen thousand
one hundred and ninety-nine ahadith which include all what now exists in
the six *sahih* books [al-Sihah al-sitta of the Sunnis], as admitted by
al-Shahid in his *Al-Thikra*, and by many other renown scholars.

Husham ibn al-Hakam, one of the companions of al-Sadiq (as) and al-Kazim
(as), authored several books ninety-nine of which became quite famous.
They are narrated by our friends who quote him, and their details exist
in our book *Mukhtasar al-Kalam fi Muallifi al-Shi’ah min Sadr
al-Islam*. They all are very interesting books, dazzling in the clarity
of their contents and the glitter of their arguments. They deal with
both roots and branches of the faith, and with *tawhid* and rational
philosophy; they rebut the atheists, heretics, pantheists,
predestinarians, determinists, and those who are extremist in their
beliefs regarding Ali (as) and Ahl al-Bayt (as). They also rebut the
Kharijites and Nasibis, those who denied that a will [by the Prophet]
was made regarding Ali (as), those who obstructed his way to attain the
caliphate, and those who preached that someone else should be elected as
caliph before Ali (as), in addition to other topics.

In the second century, Husham was the most knowledgeable person in the
science of speech, divine wisdom, and all rational and deductive
sciences. He was distinguished in *fiqh* and hadith, surpassing everyone
else in tafsr and all other sciences and arts. He is the one who
discussed the concept of imamate and cultivated the sect through
observation.

He quotes al-Sadiq (as) and al-Kazim, and he enjoys a special status in
their eyes which cannot be described. He won such praise from them that
elevated his status to high heaven. He was first a Jehmi, then he met
al-Sadiq (as) and came to see the light of guidance through him, so, he
joined his party, then he followed al-Kazim and surpassed all the
disciples of both Imams. Those who desire to put out Allah's light, out
of envy of Ahl al-Bayt (as), and out of malice, accused him of saying
that the Almighty has a physical form, and of other serious charges. We
are most knowledgeable of his sect.

We have within our reach reports of his life-style and norm of speech.
He has written works defending our sect as referred to above; so,
nothing of his speech can be known to others and not to us, since he is
among our ancestors and descendants, while his critics are far from his
sect and taste. What al-Shahristani has quoted in his *Al-Milal
wal-Nihal* of Husham's speech does not imply his belief in a physical
form for Allah. Let me quote for you what he has quoted him:

"Husham ibn al-Hakam has studied *usül* in depth. We must not forget his
arguments with the Mu’tazilites, for the man is above what his opponent
charges, and beneath what similitude he strikes, for he argued with
al-’Allaf saying: ‘You claim that the Creator is the One Who knows, and
His knowledge is His own essence; so, He then becomes a knowledgeable
person who is different from the world [His creation]; why then don't
you say that He has a form unlike all other forms?'"

It is no secret that this statement, if true, proves only that he
opposes al-’Allaf's views. Not everyone who argues about something is a
believer therein, since it is possible that his purpose is to test
al-’Allaf's beliefs and sift his knowledge, as al-Shahristani suggests,
saying: "The man is above what his opponent accuses him and beneath what
similitude he strikes." If we suppose that it is proved that Husham
believes as such, this could be before his going back to the true
guidance [through Imam al-Sadiq (as)].

You have come to know that he used to believe like the Jehmis, then he
saw the light of guidance through Muhammad's progeny (as), and became an
Imam of those who followed their Imams. Nobody among our ancestors has
found any proof of what the opponent attributes to him, yet we find some
traces of what they have attributed to Zararah ibn ‘Ayan, Muhammad ibn
Muslim, Mu'min al-Taq, and their peers. This comes in spite of the fact
that we spared no effort to research the accusation and found its bases
nothing more than injustice and animosity, intrigue and false
allegation; "Do not think that Allah is unmindful of what the oppressors
do."

As regarding what al-Shahristani has alleged of Husham's belief in Ali
(as) as Allah, this is a joke that causes even a bereaved woman whose
child has just died to burst in laughter. Husham is above such nonsense
and superstition. Husham's statements dealing with *tawhid* call for the
glorification of Allah above being reduced to a physical form of any
nature, and His sublimity above what the ignorant allege.

His statements dealing with imamate and *wisayat* reflect his preference
of the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny, over Ali
(as). He declares that Ali (as) is just a member of the Prophet's nation
and a subject, his vicegerent and successor, and that he is a servant of
Allah who has been wronged and overcome and was unable to secure what is
rightfully his, being forced to succumb to the power of his opponents,
continuously afraid about his safety, having neither supporter nor
helper; so, how can al-Shahristani say: "Husham ibn al-Hakam has studied
*usül* in depth.

We must not forget his arguments with the Mu’tazilites, for the man is
above what his opponent charges, and beneath what similitude he strikes,
for he argued with al-’Allaf saying: ‘You claim that the Creator is the
One Who knows, and His knowledge is His own essence; so, He then becomes
a knowledgeable person Who is different from the world [His creation];
why then don't you say that He has a form unlike all other forms?'"

He then attributes to Ali (as) the allegation that he is Allah Almighty!
Isn't this a clear self-contradiction? Is it proper for Husham, in spite
of his abundant knowledge and contributions, that such nonsense is
attributed to him? Certainly not. But these people have insisted on
piling charges out of their own envy and animosity towards Ahl al-Bayt
(as) and those who follow their views; so, we are Allah's, and unto Him
is our return.

Authorship flourished during the lifetime of Imams al-Kazim, al-Rida,
al-Jawad, al-Hadi, al-Hasan al-Zaki al-’Askari, peace be upon them, in a
way that was never preceded, and traditionists quoting them and other
Imams spread far and wide throughout the land, trying their best
reasoning to attain knowledge, in pursuit of it and of its secrets,
enUmarating its issues, verifying its facts, saving no effort to record
the arts and collect particles of knowledge.

Al-Muhaqqiq, in his *Al-Mu’tabar*, says: "Among the students of
al-Jawad, peace be upon him, were virtuous men like al-Husayn ibn Sa’id
and his brother al-Hasan, and also Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Abu Nasr
al-Bazanti, Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid al-Barqi, Shathan, Abul-Fadl
al-’Ami, Ayyüb ibn Nüh, Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn ‘gsa and others whose
list is quite lengthy... Their books till today are in current
circulation among the companions reflecting their abundant knowledge."

Suffices you the fact that al-Barqi's books outnumber a hundred, and
al-Bazanti has authored his renown work titled *Jami’* *al Bazanti*,
while al-Husayn ibn Sa’id has written thirty books. It is not possible
in such a Letter to count what has been written by the students of the
six Imams who descended from Imam al-Sadiq (as), peace be upon them, but
I refer you to the available biographies and bibliographies; so, read
about the biography of Muhammad ibn Sinan, ‘Ali ibn Mahziyar, al-Hasan
ibn Mahbüb, al-Hasan ibn Muhammad ibn Sam’ah, Safwan ibn Yahya, ‘Ali ibn
Yaqtin, ‘Ali ibn Fadal, ‘Abdul-Rahman ibn Najran, al-Fadl ibn Shathan
(who authored two hundred books), Muhammad ibn Mas’üd al-’Ayyashi (who
wrote more than two hundred titles), Muhammad ibn ‘Umayr, Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn ‘gsa (who quoted one hundred companions of al-Sadiq (as),
peace be upon him), Muhammad ibn ‘Ali ibn Mahbüb, Talhah ibn Talhah ibn
Zayd, ‘Ammar ibn Müsa al-Sabati, ‘Ali ibn al-Nu’man, al-Husayn ibn
‘Abdullah, Ahmad ibn ‘Abdullah ibn Mahran who is better known as Ibn
Khaniba, Sadfah ibn al-Munthir al-Qummi, ‘Ubaydullah ibn ‘Ali al-Halabi
who brought his book to al-Sadiq (as), peace be upon him, to edit and
verify, which he appreciated and said: "Do you see these folks having a
book like this one?!" Add to them Abu ‘Amr the physician, ‘Abdullah ibn
Sa’id who brought his book to Abul-Hasan al-Rida, peace be upon him, for
the same purpose, and «nus ibn ‘Abdul-Rahman who brought his book to
Imam Abu Muhammad al-Hasan al-Zaki al-’Askari, peace be upon him.

Anyone who researches the biographies of the followers of the progeny of
Muhammad, peace be upon him and them, and researches those who kept
company with the nine Imams from the descendants of al-Husayn, counting
their works contemporary to their respective Imams and reviewed by those
they quoted, disseminating the hadith of Muhammad's progeny in every
branch and root of religion..., will come across thousands of such men.

Then if he gets acquainted with these sciences in every class as handed
down from the time of the nine Infallible Imams (as) till our time, he
will certainly be convinced then that the sect of these Imams is
*mutawatir* (consecutively reported), dispelling any doubt he might have
about the fact that our worship of the Almighty Allah in the roots and
branches of the faith is derived from the Messenger's Household. Nobody
doubts this fact except one who is arrogant and prejudiced or dumb
ignorant; so, praise be to Allah Who has guided us to this, for without
His guidance, we would not have been thus guided; Wassalam.

Sincerely,

*Sh*

[^1]: Al-Huda, the Iraqi magazine, quoted this Letter and published it
in series in its first and second volumes in a column signed by the
humble author.

[^2]: Refer to the biography of Jubayr ibn al-Habab ibn al-Munthir in
Part One of Al-Isabah.

[^3]: Such as al-Najashi's Index, Shaykh Abu ‘Ali's Muntahal Maqal fi
Ahwalir Rijal, Mirza Muhammad's Minhajul Maqal fi Tahqiqi Ahwalir Rijal,
and many other books dealing with this branch of knowledge, and they are
quite few.

[^4]: Indicated so by many masters of the art such as Shaykh al-Baha'i
in his Wajiza, and many other renown personalities.

[^5]: Refer to al-Tibrisi's Mujma’Bayan fi Tafsiril Qur'an in the
section dealing with the exegesis of the verse reading: "Say: ‘I do not
ask you for any reward for it other than being kind to my kin'" in Sürat
al-Shüra, and you will find him quoting Abu Hamzah's own tafsir.

[^6]: Our fellows have reported all of Abu Hamzah's books, giving him
credit for the narration, and the details are in their books. Our
dignitary-authority Sayyid Sadr ad-Din al-Müsawi has abridged Risalat
al-Huqüq and published it in order to be memorized by heart by Muslim
youths, and he has done a very good job; may Allah enable the Muslims to
enjoy the fruits of his concern and the magnitude of his effort.

[^7]: He does so when he mentions the Baqiriyya and Ja’fariyya among
Shi’ah sects in his book Al-Milal wal-Nihal.


