Prophetic Warning of the Quran
==============================

A miracle in the field of atomic science and atomism, a miracle
undeniable, and the only irrefutable proof of Quran's divine original,
and the only guidance to escape the atomic doom, indeed, Noah's Ark in
this fiery deluge of atomism, and redeemer of mankind from this temporal
atomic hell as well as its original prototype, the eternal atomic hell
(Hotama) of the next world .... the causes of both these forms of atomic
hell being identical, this 36 word prophecy of the Quran by the Grace of
Merciful Allah is my own discovery with my three thousand page
explanation of it. Read. The Quran says:

"Woe to every backbiter, defamer, who amasseth wealth (of this world)
and arrangeth it against the future). He thinketh that his wealth will
remain with him for ever. Nay, for, verily he will be cast into
Al-Hotama.And what could teach thee what Al-Hotama is? It is the fire of
Allah enkindled which leapeth up onto the hearts. It is (a fire) closed
in on them in outstretched columns". (Quran -104- Al-Homaza). Observe
now the description of this modern progress of Baconian atomism by the
Quran. Quran says, "backbiter and defamer".

Atomism, both ancient and modern, is a doctrinal slander against divine
religion. The spirit of critical rationalism, the distinguishing
philosophical standard of this modern Baconian age against every
premodern age, being perverted to critical slander, and permeating
through every phase of human affair, has rendered this age as the age of
calumny with its intellectualized slander named propaganda.

This age itself is the age of slander. See slander every where,
slander, every-way slander. The Quran says " He amasseth wealth (of this
world) and arrangeth it against the future". Observe this modern,
continuous systematic, organized, ever-increasing, infinite and
universal process, of wealth accumulation and increase, and its
arrangement for future as distinct from the system of every premodern
age.

The Quran says" He thinketh that his wealth will for ever remain with
him". Observe man's faith in the eternity of this modern progress. The
Quran says, "Nay,for verily he will be flung into Al-Hotama". Atomic
hell as the logical and scientific consequence of this Baconian progress
has now appeared. And now observe the distinguishing phenomenal
characteristics of atomic phenomenon against every other
phenomenon,chemical and electrical in this passage of the Quran.

The Quran says"Hotama". Hotama literally means a crusher, and so is the
atomic phenomenon. It crushes basic atomic structure irreparably. It
destroys atomic nucleus. In no other phenomenon atomic nucleus is so
much as touched. The atomic energy is generated by merely breaking the
binding of the atomic nucleus. No other kind of energy is generated in
this manner. Atomic radiations follow the suit. They cause nuclear
transmutations of atoms in inanimate matter while in living bodies they
break cell nucleus chromosomes irreparably.

This atomic phenomenon is an absolute,universal crusher. Both the basic
building block of the universe that is atom and the basic unit of life
that is cell nucleus are absolutely irreparably crushed. All the three
manifestations of atomic bomb that is Heat-flash, blast and radiations
are crushers.Heat-flash crushes the hearts of exposed persons.

The blast crushes structures, while radiations crush atomic nuclei and
cell nuclei. The appreciation of the Term BREMSTRAHLUNG by the
Physicists as highly descriptive when first coined by the Germans for
continuous spectrum of rays implied the realization of the crushing
trait of atomic phenomenon by the physicists, for, the term literally
meant breaking radiation. To this may be added Rutherford's surprise
recorded in his diary after his famous experiment of bombarding the Gold
Foil with Alpha Particles.

"It was the most incredible event thatever happened to me in my life.
It was as incredible as if you fired a 15 inch shell at a piece of
tissue paper and it came back and hit you",wrote Rutherford. Observe the
words like "Bombarding, hitting, smashing, crushing, breaking". etc. in
the standard text books of atomic physics, and mark the phrases like
"Target Concept, direct action, indirect action, snapping the cable with
a bullet, breaking the chromosomes", and sentences like "Radiations hit
the cell like a sledge hammer and crush them", in the standard text
books of Radio-biology. And in the end mark the phonetic as well as
functional identity that exists between the atoma of the scientists and
the Hotama of the Quran and wonder. The Quran says "Hotama is fire".

And so also is the atomic phenomenon exclusively a phenomenon of
energy, and energy is fire. Atomic bomb also is fire. So also are
radiations. Baquerrel, the discoverer of Radioactivity was the first to
experience a burn on his skin next to the pocket in which he had carried
a phial of Radium. The term cross-fire is used in Radiotherapy. The
Quran says"Hotama is fire of Allah". The atomic hell has appeared as the
result of the worldly ungodly philosophy of Baconian atomism and its
Baconian progress as retribution. The Quran says, "Hotama is a fire
which leaps up on to the hearts".

Atomic phenomenon actually is the nuclear phenomenon, for, the atomic
nucleus is involved. This again is a distinguishing feature of the
atomic phenomenon, for, no other phenomenon is nuclear. In no other
phenomenon nucleus is even touched. Quran's description of atomic fire,
that is a fire which leaps up on to the hearts or appears in the hearts
is confirmed merely by uttering the word, nuclear, since the nucleus and
heart are synonymous, and both the orthodox physicists and standard text
books of atomic physics frequently use the word heart for nucleus. Two
examples only will suffice:-

(1). "Each fast particle comes from the break up of the very Heart of a
single atom the nucleus of the radioactive material". (Vide
Physics -Physical Science Study Society Committee -second
edition -D.C.Heath and Company Lexinction Massachusetts. uly 1965 page
130).

(2). " How many nuclearheart-beats are in the life-time of a
radioactive nucleus which lasts onlybillionth of a second". (Ibid page
21, Short Problems).

Teller in 1939 spoke of taking energy from the heartof atom.The atomic
radiations follow the suit and have their actions in thenuclei ofatoms
and cells. The most spectacular spectacle of atomic fire'sleaping up
over the hearts may be viewed in the thermonuclear device whereinthe
fire is produced by the inner fission device is being directed onto
thenuclei that is the hearts of the outer fusile material.

The thermonuclear isthe scientific version of the statement of the
Quran,namely, a fire which leapsup on to the hearts. Radiations show a
discernible preference for the heart andall that is related to the heart
in a living body. They affect the coordinationof the function at the
level where it isbeyond the control of the brain. Thebone-marrow and all
the blood-forming organs are more sensitive to the effectof radiation
than the brain,the nerves and the muscles.The blood relation
ofbone-marrow and blood-forming organs with heart is known.

All the multi-cellularorganisms are more sensitive to the effect of
radiation than all theunicellular organisms. That the former have a more
elaborate circulatory andrespiratory system than the latter, is well
Known also in the blood relation ofcirculatory and respiratory system
with heart.The action of radiation isretarded in the absence of oxygen
and the blood-relation of oxygen with heartis known.Lastly the
heat-flash of the atomic bomb explosion kills its victimthrough shock to
the heart.

The Quran says, "Hotama is a fire closed in onthem". The atomic
phenomenon shows peculiar and distinctive characteristicof encompassing.
The inverted cauldron like form of the atomic bomb explosion,the
continuous series of enclosures of local and global type of
radioactivefallout, the relentless tenacity of the bone-seeking
radio-activematerials settled in the bones, the appearance of cancers
six to thirty sixyears after the actual exposure to radiation, the
appearance of the effects inanaphase inspite of the attack of radiation
on the cell in the resting state ofthe cell,

the encompassment of the whole body by the radiation even if only
oneorgan of the body is irradiated, the survival of the lethally
irradiated frogsfrom many months instead of dying in the usual time
interval that ofthree to six weeks if kept in a dormant state at a low
temperature just abovefreezing point, and the appearance of radiation
symptoms as soon as theseirradiated frogs are warmed up, and the
occurrence of their death thereafter inthe usual time interval that of
three to six weeks,

Alexander Haddow'ssuggestion that the cancer-producing action of the
cancer producing substancesmight be the result of prolonged interference
with normal growth, theencompassment by radiation of mankind to
generation, even to their extinctionthrough long-term radio-genetic
effects, and the encompassment of this earth byradiation in the age of
full-fledged atomic-energy-for-peace are some of thefacts which indicate
the distinct encompassing features of atomic phenomenon.The Quran says,
"in outstretched columns". Besides the symbolicallydistinctive feature
of the outstretched column associated with the atomic bombexplosion, the
atomic phenomenon has yet another side of this aspect, namelythat the
world of radioactivity may be regarded as a world of columns.

The 4 cmrise of the Alpha Particle would appear as a formidable column
if the size ofthe particle is seen in comparison to the height it has
assumed a footballrising in the same ratio to its size would appear in
the skies. The cosmic rayspresent a spectacle of amazing columns in
showers, having heights that maycause man's imagination to reel. The
Quran says " What could teach theeWhat Al-Hotama is?". This mode of
interrogation implies terribleness ofthe phenomenon according to the
early commentators of the Quran. To this may beadded the extreme
complexity of the subject of atomic science. The samequestion today,
namely, "What could teach thee what atomic scienceis"? could be put to
the leading atomists, and their reply wouldinvariably be, "Nothing".

The Quran has described the nuclear phenomenon, with such accuracy, and
hasanalyzed its characteristics with such precision, and has discerned
itsdistinctive features with so strange a peculiarity that might well
come as asurprise to the modern reader, particularly the scientists,and
we may welldescribe a truth without being supspected of resorting to
ancient and outmodedstyle of rhetoric if we say, that the description of
the characteristics of theenuclear phenomenon by the Quran,

would throw the scientist and the philosopherinto ecstatic moods,
provided indeed, if the faculty of imagination of thesecelebrated
geniuses have not been completely dulled and dried up, by science,by
materialism and by necessity.They will observe with some interest, a
factnamely, that,whereas even the fathers of atomic bomb had to depend
on practicalexperimentation in order to gain the knowledge of the
characteristics of theirinvention, the Quran has contained all that
knowledge,and something more thanthat,during these past fourteen
centuries since the time when men possessed aknowledge of thermodynamics
no more than that which could be derived from alime kiln or a fire that
glowed in their own hearts.

The true appreciation ofthis point could be expected from great
atomists of the calibre of Einstein,Fermi, Oppenheimer, Steller
andothers of note. The Quran contained all thismost accurate scientific
data about the nuclear phenomenon long before thescientists even had
heard the name of the Uranium Fission, nay even the veryname of Uranium
itself.

Let some one approach any of the renowned men of therealm of science
and ask him, how much did he know about the variouscharacteristics of
the nuclear phenomenon e.g. its heat-flash, its enclosingfeatures, its
column raising idiosyncrasy, its radiations and theirheart-reaching
tendencies, and the global extent of the radiobiological hazardof the
fallout before the actual experimentation, of the various processes. The
Quran has enumerated and explainedall these characteristics of the
nuclear phenomenon with such dexterity andclearness that could be the
wonder and delight of an atomist. Thecharacterization of the nuclear
phenomenon by the Quran are :-

(1) It is a fire.
(2) It is fire of Allah,enkindled.
(3) It leaps up over the hearts.
(4) It is fire closed in on them.
(5) In outstretched columns (Quran 104, Al - Homaza).


