Descreption of Hotama
=====================

It is most interesting astonishing and absorbing topic of a universal
nature and one of most momentous import, but in so brief a chapter, I
would no more be able than to give a bare skeleton, and hardly even all
the basic features. I on my own part have no reason to doubt that the
topic will be most welcomed every where the humanity exists.

Quran says: Woe to every backbiter, defamer, who amasseth wealth (of
this world) and arrangeth it (against the future). He thinketh that his
wealth will render him immortal. Nay, for, verily, he will be cast into
Al-Hotama. And what Al-Hotama is? It is fire of Allah enkindled which
leaps unto the hearts. It is a (fire) closed in on them in outstretched
columns".

(Quran -104-CIV-Al-Homaza).

HOTAMA

Hotama means a hell of fire generated by nuclear that is atomic energy
with all its attributes, namely, the heat radiation, blast and
radioactive fallout. This word etymologically speaking is derived from
the root verb (purely Arabic) HATAMA, which means "the process of
breaking something into pieces",

or "reducing something into particles". In scientific language we could
say, "the process of atomizing". The noun from the root verb HATAMA is
HITAMA which means a smitherine. Keep in your mind the identity between
the two words, that is the Arabic word Hatama or Hitama and the English
word Atom or its origin the Greek word Atomos, both as regards sound and
meaning. Further, first etymological inflection of Hatama is Hattama,
that is T is doubled. It means to shatter something to pieces. Second
inflection is Tahattama, which amounts in impact to explosion. The
Inhatama means, to be broken into pieces. Hutaam-ud-Dunia signifies, the
vanities of the world, which are perishable. And so also the term
Hutam-us- Safina which means, the wreckage of the ship.

Now the word Atom has been adopted from the Greek word Atomos. Atomos
means that which is uncuttable. The word atom therefore as is used by
the scientist seems to be a misnomer since the atom has been broken into
sub atomic parts, e.g. electrons, protons, neutrons, positrons etc. On
the other hand the word used by the Quran that is Hattama, is correctly
used. It is surprising to note that, the scientists gathered in a
conference in order to coin some suitable term in place of atom, but
after discussion they decided to leave the thing as it is.

All this in contradiction to the basic spirit of science and its
dictates. In this context we could with plausibility make a conjecture
that the very same power which had placed the prophecy about the atom
bomb in the Quran, it had also so managed the mind of the scientist as
to let atom remains atom due to the phonic resemblance between atom and
Hatam, so that when the time came, the discovery of the secret in the
prophecy be made possible. This phonic resemblance between these two key
words served as the clue. Without which even the most exact
corroboration of the descriptive facts contained in the prophecy would
find a little difficult recognition.

**WHAT IS HOTAMA**

The Quran says," What will convey unto thee what Al-Hotama is? This
question implies the strangeness of the phenomenon as well as its
terribleness. The Quran however proceeds with the description of
Al-Hotama. It is a miraculous description. The topic just as the Quran
has said, is, too deep too high and far too intricate. To appreciate it
fully, the knowledge of science, philosophy, theology, the Quran and the
Arabic language is necessary. The Quran says, " Hotama is the fire of
Allah, kindled, which leapeth up over the hearts. It is closed in on
them in outstretched columns". And now the five characteristics of the
fire of Hotama.

**THE CHARACTERISTICS OF THE FIRE OF HOTAMA:**

1. Fire :The nuclear explosion is fire. It has two main constituents,
namely the heat-flash and the ionizing radiations. Both these are fire.
The heat flash is the initial radiation, more dazzling than the sun. It
appears at a minute fraction of a second on detonation and lasts for but
two seconds. The ionizing radiations, that is alpha, beta, gamma rays
and neutrons are inherent in atomic explosion and appear as fission
products. There is indeed the blast as powerful as earthquake, but it is
only an associated effect. And there are colossal fires that consume
whole cities, but they are started through connection, or due to damaged
electrical appliances. Sixty percent of deaths and seventy five percent
at least of all causalities in Hiroshima were due to fire.

**FIRE OF ALLAH**

The fire of Hotama has appeared as wrath of Allah and as retribution,
because of a set of inconsistencies which the Quran has enumerated as
slander and back-biting, complete engrossment in the accumulation of
wealth, and wealth worship.

The intensity of flame, magnitude of fire and extent of destruction is
so great that, it could reasonably be attributed to the name of Allah.
Hiroshima bomb developed a temperature of million degrees C. Normal High
Yield bombs develop temperature of an order of tens of millions of
degrees C, while for the triggering of Thermonuclear bombs the
temperatures developed are of the order of hundreds of millions C. Such
temperatures are not of earthly but of solar and stellar nature. The
earliest commentators of the Quran justly defined Al-Hotama, as " a kind
of a hell in which whatever is cast is reduced to powder, through the
sheer intensity of the flame".

Barely a couple of pounds of Uranium-235 liberates energy equivalent to
twenty thousand tons of TNT. A thousand Kilograms of Uranium-235 that is
one metric ton, would liberate energy equivalent to twenty million tons
of TNT. This last means an energy of the order of large scale natural
phenomena like hurricanes and earthquakes. The explosion energy produced
by a single 15 megaton thermonuclear bomb far exceeds all the explosive
energy produced in the whole human history united.

Whereas the heat-flash, its subsequent fires, and the blast of a single
20 megaton thermonuclear bomb destroy largest cities in the world, the
radioactive fallout of such a bomb would lay waste areas equal to
states: to wit an area a little less than five hundredth part of the
whole surface of the earth. Five hundred such bombs therefor would
devastate the whole of the earth, so that unfortunate survivals if any,
would envy the doom of those dead, in a dungeon horrible on all sides
round as a huge furnace flamed, but from those flames no light but
rather darkness visible, to discover sights of worry, regions of sorrow,
doleful shades, where peace and rest can never dwell, hope never comes,
that comes to all, but rather an endless torture still urges in a fiery
deluge fed with ever-burning uranium unconsumed.

The ionizing radiations of Nuclear energy whether generated with
peaceful views or for war purposes are always there and are fatal to
human health. So that by and by humanity would be turned into cancer
ridden freaks. No remedy has hitherto been found for the perils of
radioactivity.

**ATOMIC EXPLOSION**

Atomic explosion : a fire which leaps up over the hearts and a point
which presents a very interesting study:-

THE HEAT FLASH

The heat flash as stated before appears within a fraction of a second
on detonation. It lasts for about two seconds, it travels with the speed
of light, it strikes the body of exposed persons within its effective
range; and while within a particular zone nearer to the site of
explosion it kills its victims on the spot; at greater distances it
leaves its victims with serious to minor skin burns. We know that it
does not penetrate beneath the skin. How does it then kill on the spot?
It kills by the heat which has entered the lungs and has choked the
heart to death. The terrible shock also plays a considerable role along
with the heat, in bringing about the instantaneous death.

**NUCLEUS**

The name given to the central core of atom is most appropriately
"Nucleus". And what is the meaning of nucleus if it is not the "heart,
The Central Core, the Kernal".

**THERMONUCLEAR**

This most patent term thermonuclear is no more than the translation of
the Quran's phrase, " A fire which leaps up over the hearts". Thermo
means "heat" or "fire" and nuclear means "that which is related to
nucleus" that is "Heart".

**THE ATOMIC RADIATIONS**

These radiations, alpha, beta, gamma rays and neutrons are inherent in
the very nature of atomic explosion. These radiations entering into the
blood stream seek the bones and there attack, the Bone-marrow. The
function of bone-marrow is to generate blood. The radiations render it
incapable of generating blood, and destroy both the red and white blood
corpuscles. The supply of blood to the heart is thus stopped and the
heart thus dies of starvation and torment. All the blood-forming organs
are a very attractive target of radiations. The relation between the
blood-forming organs and blood and heart is well known.

The symptoms of radiation sickness are, leukemia; a disease of blood,
hemorrhages that is blood leaking also a disease of blood; fever, also
connected with blood, nausea and vomiting, also related with heart.

All multi-cellular organism with more perfected heart and lungs, and
more elaborated circulatory and respiratory systems are without
exception more sensible to the effects of radiations than all the
unicellular organisms that have less perfect heart and lungs and less
elaborate circulatory and respiratory systems. This also proves a
decisive affinity of the radiations for heart. The presence of oxygen
enhances the action of radiations whereas its absence retards their
action. The role of oxygen in the aeration of blood and lungs and heart
is apparent. Muscles, nerves and brain are the organs least sensible to
radioactivity, whereas, Heart and all those organs that are connected
with heart are most sensible to the effect thereof. It proves a
particular affinity of these radioactive rays for heart.

The nuclear energy is generated even on the same principle that is the
heart attack. In fission process a neutron attacks the heart of an atom
in a pile of fissile material and knocks out two neutrons. These knocked
out neutrons as if in a retaliative mood attack in turn an atom each and
knock out two neutrons from the heart of atom each. This process
continues multiplying the number of knocked out neutrons and so the
fission chain reaction is built up till the whole mass of fissile matter
becomes red hot and explodes in wrath at the hearts having been
disturbed. And so also in the fusion process the hearts (nuclei) of two
atoms are crushed together and energy is liberated.

**THE FIRE OF DISCONTENT**

Who could be unaware of the fire of discontent which is raging today in
every human heart. The cause of this heart burning is the present
materialistic age, with its peculiar slander and backbiting, excessive
engrossment in the accumulation of wealth and wealth worship the very
same characteristics which also are the cause of the emergence of
nuclear weapons.

4) The fire of Hotama according to the Quran is "a fire closed in on
them". Please bring your imagination into play and enact the scene of an
atomic explosion of say a twenty megaton bomb. There is a column ten
miles high, three miles across like the central pole of a tent. This
column is topped by a mushroom shaped lid, a hundred miles across.
Around this column imagine a hollow, transparent cylinder eighty miles
in diameter, ten miles high and covered with the hundred miles mushroom
lid of the column.

This imaginary enclosure is actually the effective range of the bomb in
question. The interior of this eighty miles wide cylinder comprises,
heat-flash, blast waves inter-woven with radiation invisible rays,
interspersed with colossal fires and flying incandescent debris amidst
shattering buildings, toppling spires of lofty churches, all enveloped
in whirling clouds of a shridden smoke and choking fumes, and indeed
unwholesome odour of burning bodies of men, women, children in an
atmosphere of wails, unheard, groans uncarved and cries unresponded in
an enclosure eighty miles around and ten miles high. But the description
of the enclosure is not yet complete.

There is yet another story above this awe-inspiring edifice. Raise up
your head and see, the central three miles wide column has shot upward
from the mushroom lid towards the higher regions above the troposphere
into the stratosphere another ten miles. There the head of the column
has spread itself into a thin layer of radioactive fallout, to be driven
by the prevailing streams of wind around the earth like satellites for
about ten years, gradually settling out on the earth, and contaminating
vegetation and sources of water, and turning human beings into chimeras
and monsters begetting monsters. And thus we see that even the whole
earth has been enclosed by the fire of Hotama.

Also, that the action of atomic explosion starts with heat-flash within
a fraction of a second, then comes the blast and lastly the ionizing
radiations. All this takes place at the most in ten seconds. Who could,
therefore get out of the effective range of the explosion which may be
as far as eighty miles, a fraction of a second or even ten seconds.
Judging from the number of affected persons which may run into millions
the evacuation of such huge masses of people as might have survived the
heat-flash and the blast and are affected by radioactive fallout, seems
an impossibility even for the most industrialized countries, for the
people affected by fallout have to be removed to safer places within a
day or two, if serious hazard is to be avoided. Again, whereto they are
to be evacuated, where is a safer place to be found in case of war?. In
short it is a fire closed in on them.

**5) OUTSTRETCHED COLUMNS**

An outstretched column and the mushroom top is a characteristic feature
of atomic explosion. One such column twenty miles high and three miles
across we have already mentioned, but the most spectacular view is
presented by the column of water raised in case of a shallow under
water.

**THE COMMENTATORS OF THE QURAN**

The earliest commentators who have quoted the Sahabah (the companion
disciples of the Holy Prophet peace be upon them) have described
Al-Hotama, that is the atomic hell, in the clearest of terms and have
left nothing ambiguous. Space would not permit us to quote all that,
from "Tafsir Ibn Abbas", and "Tafsir-e-Kabir" by Imam Fakhruddin Razi,
and "Al-Jallaalain", and "Tabri", and "Tafsir-Ul-Quran-Il-Azam" by Imam
Ismail Ibn Katheer". These are all the most authentic resources, but in
the following we give a few specimens that will provide the reader with
a glimpse. All the commentators however, had the next eternal atomic
hell in the external world in view. It is we, the unfortunate that were
destined to see its worldly replica.

IBN-ABBAS

(a) "Wail", (English translation is woe) implies extreme severity of
torment. It also means a "pit", a dungeon, a cell in hell. It also means
"a valley of pus and suppuration". Now please read this description in
the light of the symptoms of radiation sickness already mentioned,
i.e.

leukemia, hemorrhages, nausea, vomiting and severe heart-burning, in a
post atomic assault area. (b) "Amadim-Mumaddadah" (English translation
is outstretched columns). "Columns of fire having considerable depth".
AL-JALALAIN Innaha Alaihim Musadah Fi Amadim Mummaddadah, (English
translation is, a fire closed in on them in outstretched columns. "The
victims having been put therein, the cylinders are to be closed".

Please read this and recall to your mind the process of atomic
explosion from detonation to its full development to the mushroom top.
(b) "Al-Hotama is a fire which is never extinguished". The worthy
commentator here had in view the atomic hell in the next world. Yet the
fire of atomic explosion in this world is also a fire which
characteristically cannot be extinguished until it has completed the
whole explosion process. Once an atom bomb is detonated, its action will
only cease after the heat-flash has appeared, the blast has taken place
and the ionizing radiations have been liberated. All this might take
about ten seconds. This, however, a transient world and its atomic hell
also ought to show this characteristic as against the next eternal
world, wherein the atomic hell shall for ever and incessantly burn.


