


Introduction
Nasr's work on science is discomforting for many. His defense of
traditional sciences is seen by his critiques as a nostalgic appeal to
tradition with no real consequences for the current problems surrounding
modern science. His unflinching attack on the philosophical foundations
of modern science makes the modernists uneasy both in the East and the
West. Furthermore, the evolutionary historians of science consider his
notion of Islamic science too religious and metaphysical, suggesting
instead a linear course of scientific evolution as if science without
suppositions were to be possible. Part of this perturbed situation comes
from Nasr's rigorous assertion of the religious view of the cosmos at a
time when religion as a valid source of knowledge is no longer taken
seriously even by its sincere adherents. Sailing against the grain, Nasr
offers no apologies for his resolute stance and insists on questioning
the received meaning of science. Consequently, Nasr's approach to
science from a religious point of view suggests a new way of looking at
the vexed question of religion and science. This essay, however, will
confine itself to a critical analysis of Nasr's concept of science both
in its traditional sense and modern form.

A quick look at Nasr's wide-ranging works shows that the question of
science occupies a central place in his thought. Following a two-fold
strategy, Nasr does not remain content with the critique of modern
Western science, and presents his alternative view of science on the
basis of traditional doctrines. The heavy emphasis put on the
distinction between the traditional and the modern, or the sacred and
the profane, runs through Nasr's work which comprises many facets of
traditional and modern sciences. A considerable number of his works are
thus devoted to the exposition of traditional sciences, the metaphysical
and cosmological principles on which they are based, and their meaning
for a day and age that tends to see them as no more than superstitions
and old wives' tales. The second part of Nasr's work is focused on
modern science, its historical formation, its philosophical premises and
claims, and the catastrophic events brought about by the unquestioned
acceptance of modern science and technology. In both of these fields,
Nasr stands out as a rigorous practitioner of the traditional school,
and presents a profound evaluation of the traditional and modern natural
sciences from the point of view of traditional doctrines. This can best
be seen in his insistence on the necessity of*scientia sacra* and the
revival of pre-modern cosmologies that the traditional civilizations
have produced over the centuries. Being the application of a number of
metaphysical principles expounded by the traditional school and
especially by Rene Guenon, Nasr's critique of modern science is
accordingly motivated neither by a purely utilitarian impulse nor by a
mere academic and historical interest. Rather, his uncompromising
defense of traditional sciences on the one hand, and relentless attack
on the philosophical claims of modern science on the other, is to be
seen as an encounter between the traditional and the modern at the
metaphysical level as it pertains to the domain of natural sciences.

It is, therefore, important to note at the outset that Nasr's critique
of modern science is marked off from the current criticisms leveled
against modern Western science by its metaphysical and religious stance.
According to Nasr, modern science is an anomaly not simply because we
have to pay a high price by destroying the natural environment but
because it operates within a seriously misguided framework in which
everything is reduced to pure quantity and by which the modern man is
made to think that all of his problems from transportation to spiritual
salvation can ultimately be solved by further progress in science. The
high cost of the scientistic fallacy is to make spiritual realities
appear as unreal and redundant, or at least not relevant to the
world-picture presented by modern science. In sharp contrast to this
naïve belief in science and progress which has come under severe attack
especially after World War II, Nasr aims at analyzing and questioning
the very foundations upon which modern science as the pseudo-religion of
the modern age is based. In this regard, one may argue that Nasr's work
is not so much concerned with the philosophy of science in the current
sense of the term as with the metaphysics of science, viz. the
metaphysical framework in which science, be it modern or pre-modern, is
to be understood and given its due place in the hierarchy of knowledge.
For Nasr, it is the availability or absence of such a metaphysics that
makes science modern or traditional.

Thus, Nasr's highly critical stance towards modern science can best be
understood in the light of his notion of sacred science which might be
described, very briefly, as an application of the One and the Absolute
to the plane of relative existence. In fact, Nasr's central claim that
the rise of modern Western science is not the result of some
ground-breaking advancements in scientific measurement but rather a
direct consequence of the rise of a certain philosophy which underlies
the formation of modern science from the 17th century onward can also be
read as an extension of his view of sacred and traditional sciences
which share a metaphysical outlook entirely different from that of
modern science. To use a familiar distinction from the contemporary
philosophy of science, Nasr concentrates his criticisms on the context
of justification rather than on the context of experiment. In other
words, Nasr's work on modern science is not so much concerned with the
actual conditions of scientific experiment and measurement, a subject
dear to many scientists and philosophers of science, as with the larger
framework of meaning in which the findings and the philosophical
foundations of modern natural sciences are to be examined.

In what follows, I shall give first a brief description of Nasr's
defense of what he calls sacred science. By focusing on the concept
of*scientia sacra* , we will be able to gain insight into the
metaphysical framework in which traditional sciences, whether Hindu,
Chinese or Islamic, were constructed and transmitted. The relevance of
metaphysical doctrines of world religions for traditional sciences will
thus form an important part of our discussion. The second part of the
essay will focus on Nasr's criticism of modern Western science which, in
the eyes of Nasr, is the primary cause of the secularization and
desacralization of the order of nature. It is, however, extremely
important not to lose sight of the fact that Nasr is not opposed to
science itself but to its philosophical claims that apparently exceed
its legitimate boundaries. Keeping this in mind, our analysis will also
provide us with a chance to distinguish between the philosophy and
metaphysics of science with which Nasr's work is primarily concerned.

Scientia Sacra Defined and Defended
Nasr defines*scientia sacra* as 'that sacred knowledge which lies at the
heart of every revelation and is the center of that circle which
encompasses and defines tradition'.[^1] *Scientia sacra* , whose Latin
form Nasr insists on keeping, denotes the supreme science of metaphysics
which comprises the principial knowledge of things whereas sacred
science refers to the application of sacred knowledge to various domains
of reality, physical and spiritual. Any science, be it natural,
mathematical or intellectual, that places the sacred at the center of
its structure is sacred to the extent that it is an application of the
immutable principles of metaphysics to the world of change and
relativity.[^2] In this regard, all sacred sciences are also traditional
sciences in the sense that they apply the principles of traditional
metaphysics to the scientific study of nature and thus can be called
different versions of applied metaphysics.[^3] Grounded in this view,
all sacred sciences from cosmology to medicine share a number of
cardinal principles which Nasr outlines as follows: the sacred sciences
construe the world through the prism of a hierarchy of being and
knowledge. The physical world is not denied as an illusion, as*maya* ,
or as a shadow to be degraded in face of the Absolute. Nor is it taken
to be an ultimate reality in and of itself. It is rather placed within a
larger framework of meaning and significance that does not confine
existence to any particular scientific construction. The traditional
civilizations in which the sacred sciences were cultivated insist on the
Divine origin of the world, and this view leads to a clear-cut
relationship of hierarchy between the absolute and the relative, the
eternal and the temporal, the necessary and the contingent. Since
hierarchy implies, by definition, a multi-layered structure, the
traditional sciences are essentially anti-reductionist. This explains,
to a large extent, the persistence of the idea of the 'great chain of
being' across the traditional civilizations which do not allow the
reduction of reality into a pure idea or pure matter as these terms are
currently understood.[^4] Instead of relegating reality to a lower plane
of existence, namely to matter, the sacred sciences analyze each domain
of reality in its own level, thus resting on a metaphysical framework
within which it is possible to maintain the vision of the One and the
many without confounding the two.

In this view, nature, the very subject matter of science, is regarded as
a sacred being, as*vestigia Dei* , or as*ayat Allah* , e.g., as the
signs of God which point to the 'symbolic significance' of the world of
nature. In sharp contrast to the modern view of nature which reduces the
order of nature to everlasting change and impermanence, the traditional
sciences look upon nature as the abode of both change and permanence.
Although the common-sense experience tends to see nature as a
perennially changing structure, the world of nature displays also a
remarkable continuity, perseverance and harmony as we see it in the
preservation of the species and the endurance of natural forms. For
Nasr, this double-aspect of nature proves beyond any doubt the Divine
quality in nature: the world of nature has not been left to the infinite
succession of haphazard and senseless changes which admit no*telos* in
the cosmos. On the contrary, nature contains in itself the principles of
change and permanence simultaneously and points to a 'big picture' in
which all of its parts are recognized as forming a meaningful unity and
harmony. As Titus Burckhardt reminds us, 'the Greek word*cosmos* means
'order', implying the ideas of unity and totality. Cosmology is thus the
science of the world inasmuch as this reflects its unique cause,
Being.'[^5] Defined as such, the order of nature or the cosmos cannot be
other than the reflection of a higher principle on the level of relative
existence.[^6]

Cosmos as a self-disclosure of the Divine can be grasped, according to
Nasr, only by what F. Schuon calls the 'symbolist spirit' which has been
lost in the modern world. The symbolist outlook shared by all the
traditional sciences is based on the epistemological premise that the
reality of things is more than how it appears to us.[^7] Just as the
reality of God is not limited to His creation, the reality of the
natural world is also not confined to the analysis and classification of
natural sciences. In fact, the meaning of the cosmos can be made
explicit only when one sees it as more than its quantitative sum. A
crucial implication of this premise is obviously the rejection of modern
empiricism: since reality is not exhausted by its experimental analysis,
there has to be an 'intellectual' principle that organizes and guides
what is experienced by the five senses. Left unto itself, the sum total
of experimental data, however 'thick' and informative it might be, does
not constitute a whole or unity by which we can understand and describe
the world. In fact, pure empiricism as a way of dealing with the world
of nature is not a possibility because there is always an element of
intellectual knowledge involved in any scientific enterprise
undertaken.[^8] In other words, the choice of the scientist to deal with
a particular domain of reality by using certain scientific instruments
is not a theory- and value-free endeavor. The context of experiment,
despite its operational nature, is always the context of a number of
choices, judgements and evaluations that the scientist has in the
background of his work. The task of the metaphysics of science, as we
observe it in the work of Nasr, is precisely to provide and clarify
these principal ideas and judgements through which all natural sciences,
whether traditional or modern, function. As a result of the presence of
such a metaphysics, the traditional notion of experiment in the natural
sciences has a field of meaning completely different from and
incommensurable with its modern counterpart. That is why the traditional
sciences which Nasr, together with the other members of the traditional
school, defends against modern science have never allowed the rise of
reductionist empiricism despite the epoch-making achievements of
traditional sciences in such experimental fields as medicine, astronomy,
mechanics and alchemy.[^9]

Modern empiricism or what Guenon calls 'l'experimentalisme moderne'
differs completely from the traditional notion of experiment since it is
not only reductionist but also flawed in its most essential assumption
that theory has to be checked against the backdrop of a number of
experimental conditions. Guenon puts into question this very assumption
and claims that to give priority to experiment detached from the
theoretical setting in which it is constructed is to reverse the
relation between theory and experiment. For Guenon, it is the illusion
of modern experimentalism to believe that 'a theory can be proved by
facts whereas in reality the same facts can always be explained equally
well by a number of different theories, and it would not be possible, as
some of the defenders of the experimental method like Claude Bernard
have recognized, to interpret these facts without the help of some
'preconceived ideas' without which these facts remain as 'brute facts',
devoid of any significance and scientific value.'[^10] Set against this
background, the traditional sciences that employ the experimental method
always function within a framework of metaphysical principles the most
important of which is, for Nasr and the traditional school, the
hierarchy of being and knowledge.[^11] It is the recognition of this
hierarchy that exists objectively and independently of the knowing
subject that prevents the traditional sciences of nature from falling
into the trap of reductionist empiricism.

The traditional notion of scientific experiment brings us to another
fundamental issue in the natural sciences, which is the question of
scientific realism. Although neither Nasr nor the other exponents of the
traditional school speak about realism in terms similar to the ongoing
discussion in contemporary philosophy of science, it is possible to
argue that Nasr takes a realist position on the meaning and function of
natural sciences. The common-sense definition of realism as the
acceptance of an objective world not dependent on our perceptions is,
one may claim, uninteresting and even boring[^12] , and it would not be
wrong to say that it does not yield any substantial knowledge about the
structure of the world around us. Yet, this seemingly simple truism
entails a far-reaching thesis concerning our consciousness of the world.

Putting aside the conflicting views on the subject, we may characterize
this assertion along the following lines. According to a fundamental
axiom expounded by the traditional school, man is in principle capable
of knowing God and the world through his intellect which is a God-given
faculty. In sharp contrast to Kantianism and other forms of rationalism,
the possibility of metaphysics as an all-inclusive science stems from
the faculty of the intellect whose function is to integrate and know the
higher levels of reality. Whereas reason by its nature analyzes and
dissects the world around it into fragments in order to function
properly, the intellect synthesizes and integrates what has been
fragmented by the reason. The same principle applies, one may argue, to
the natural sciences in the sense that the quantitative study of the
cosmos is complemented by the qualitative and 'symbolist' perception of
the intellect.[^13]

Nasr's realist position comes to the fore with his depiction of science
as an organized body of knowledge that is in principle capable of
describing the world to us as it is. Guided primarily by the supreme
knowledge of metaphysics, science can and does investigate the reality
of physical entities as they exist objectively in the extra-mental
world. This suggests that scientific theories are not mere instruments
of operation by which the scientist constructs a picture of the world
without having an actual grasp of it.[^14] On the contrary, what science
presents to us as a world-picture is in fact a true picture of the world
provided that it is substantiated by sound evidence and that it does not
lose sight of the hierarchic vision of the universe. As in the case of
scientific experimentalism, this minimal or common-sense view of
scientific realism is supplemented by what one may call a 'metaphysical
realism' in that the scientific realism in question is gained not
through the operation of the senses and reason alone but primarily
through the intellect which is the locus of metaphysical knowledge for
intellectual as well as natural sciences. The fact that science can
present to us a true picture of the world is to be seen not as an
exclusive brilliance of scientific theories or experimental devices but
as a possibility of the intellect because it is through the intellect
that we make sense of the world with which the sciences are concerned.
Said differently, what makes the quantitative study of the universe
possible is the intellect's ability to understand the reality of things
as they are, namely as the plane of relative existence in face of the
Absolute, to the extent possible within the confines of human
ability.[^15] It is this metaphysical component that separates realism,
as it is defined here, from both positivism and physicalism.[^16]

Nasr's ground-breaking work on Islamic science can be taken as an
example to illustrate the foregoing points.[^17] The Islamic natural
sciences cultivated in Islamic civilization by Muslim scientists were
based on a careful and analytic study of nature within the matrix of the
Islamic revelation. The essence of this revelation is*al-tawhid* , the
principle of unity professed by every member of the Islamic community,
which underlies, as Nasr repeatedly states, the unity and
interrelatedness of the world of nature. Although*al-tawhid* in its
ordinary sense refers to the theological dictum that there is no
divinity but God, its ontological and metaphysical meanings enter the
picture as a corollary of it by construing the world of nature as
issuing forth from a single source, e.g., from the Divine. For Nasr, the
primary goal of Islamic sciences from medicine to geometry is to
disclose this underlying unity and to show 'the unity and
interrelatedness of all that exists'.[^18] Seen from this point of view,
reality presents itself to us as a well-knit unity in which the
individual objects as the subject matter of science are located.[^19] A
supposedly 'pure' analysis of the natural world into its constituent
parts does not help us understand these discrete parts because each
analysis, whether scientific or philosophical, is carried out within a
context in which the terms of the analysis are given. Furthermore, each
part by definition requires a whole or unity in relation to which alone
it can be called 'part'. The distinct characteristic of Islamic
sciences, claims Nasr, is to admit this pre-conceptual and relational
unity as a given fact and reveal the balance between the whole and the
part, and between the one and the many. This is also one of the
fundamental differences between the metaphysical framework of Islamic
science and its modern counterpart.[^20]

Following the same line of argument, it is possible to contend that the
'facts' of science are not derivable from an analysis which is thought
to be detached and isolated from the multi-layered contexts of meaning.
In fact, as Nasr insists on the necessity of an all-inclusive
metaphysical matrix in which any scientific activity is to be conducted,
science, be it traditional or modern, represents a prime example of what
Ryle calls 'thick description', viz. the analysis of the layers of
meaning within which an activity is carried out. Now, one of the merits
of Islamic science is to unveil the persistence of such layers of
meaning that run through the various levels of scientific activity while
at the same time explicating the tacit unity and interrelatedness of
natural phenomena. The 'unifying perspective of Islam'[^21] in which the
Islamic sciences are deeply rooted defines the 'facts' of science not as
atomistic quanta but as relational entities that tie the entire cosmos
together.[^22] A crucial implication of this 'metaphysics of
relationality', if I may use such a term, is the denial of pure and
simple ideas which the empiricists such as Hume have conceived of as the
constitutive elements of human thought. The so-called pure and simple
ideas of human mind always assume a 'thick' setting in which they are
formed and expressed. The same holds true for the sense-data and/or
sense-perception which is always embedded in a context of
intelligibility larger than mere sensation. In fact, according to the
idea of*asalat al-wujud* , the primacy of being over essence (*mahiyyah*
), which Nasr expounds in many of his writings, Being is the standing
condition of all knowledge. In other words, every act of knowing,
whether based on the senses or the intellect, presumes a larger context
of intelligibility provided by the all-inclusive reality of Being. It is
on the basis of this 'existential' ground rather than some physical or
ether-like element that we can talk about the cosmos as an interrelated
unity.

This substantive unity, however, becomes comprehensible only through the
aid of the intellect which integrates various domains of reality as
opposed to quantitative analysis which remains at the steps of
fragmentation and dissection. For Nasr, the remarkable achievements of
Islamic sciences were made possible by the availability of such a
comprehensive outlook that has determined both the context of experiment
and of justification of the traditional natural sciences.[^23] This is
also the demarcation line between the sacred and modern science that has
adopted an entirely different perspective, to which we now turn.

Modern Science: the Triumph of the Secular
It is now common wisdom that the rise of modern science was not a
natural result of some technological advancements that took place in
Western Europe in the 16th and 17th centuries. The formation of modern
science was rather the end-result of a number of philosophical and
metaphysical changes that have altered humanity's view of nature and
science in an unprecedented way. In this sense, modern science
represents a radical shift from the traditional notion of*scientia* -- a
shift from the sacred evaluation of nature to a secular and profane
framework in which pure quantity is taken to be*the* reality. With this
new outlook, nature is divested of its symbolic and sacred meaning, and
the scientist becomes the sole arbiter of truth. For Nasr, the
legitimation crisis of modern science stems from this new and 'alien'
perspective that has led, among other things, to such global calamities
as the environmental crisis and nuclear warfare. Accordingly, Nasr's
relentless attack on modern science is focused on the analysis and
critique of the errors of this philosophical purview rather than being a
sentimental attack on modern science itself as it is commonly and
mistakenly assumed. In this regard, Nasr's encounter with the
intellectual premises of secular Western science can be interpreted as
an archeology of modern science whose roots go back to the 17th century
scientific revolution.

Five main traits of modern science come to the fore in Nasr's critical
analysis. The first is the secular view of the universe that sees no
traces of the Divine in the natural order. Nature is no longer
the*vestigia Dei* of Christian cosmology but a self-subsistent entity
that can be encapsulated exhaustively in the quantitative formulae of
natural sciences.[^24] The second feature is the mechanization of the
world-picture upon the model of machines and clocks. Once couched in
terms of mechanistic relations, nature becomes something absolutely
determinable and predictable -- a much needed safety zone for the rise
of modern industrial society and capitalism. The third aspect of modern
science is rationalism and empiricism as we have alluded to before. The
fourth trait is the legacy of Cartesian dualism that presupposes a
complete separation between*res cogitans* and*res extensa* , viz.,
between the knowing subject and the object to be known. With this
cleavage, the epistemological alienation of man from nature comes to
completion by leaving behind a torrent of pseudo-problems of modern
philosophy, the notorious mind-body problem being a special case in
point.[^25] The last important aspect of modern science is in a sense a
culmination of the foregoing features, and it is the exploitation of
nature as a source of power and domination -- a fact not unknown to
modern capitalist society. Now we can see, in a brief manner, how these
aspects of modern science figure in Nasr's critical analysis.

What came into being with the Scientific Revolution was a new way of
looking at the world in the deepest sense of the term. Nature was no
longer conceived as a being of sacred significance with its own life
cycle and unity not to be destroyed by man's desire to establish a fake
paradise here on earth. The humanist ideal of bringing down heaven to
the terrestrial domain was deemed possible only by turning nature into a
stage in which the destiny of mankind was to be decided in isolation
from the Divine dictums of Christianity or any other religion. The
historic break away from the religious view of the universe marks the
incubation of modern secularism that claims to account for all the
dimensions of nature by reducing it to pure quantity and a soul-less
machine. For Nasr, this secular view of the universe underlies the most
essential characteristics of modern science. Once translated into the
language of pure quantities, nature becomes devoid of any intrinsic
meaning and intelligibility whereby all the qualitative aspects
associated with the natural phenomena such as beauty, harmony,*telos*
and intelligibility turn into what Galileo called the 'secondary
qualities', namely the subjective feelings of humans with no
corresponding reality in the extra-mental world.[^26] Galileo's
distinction between the primary and secondary qualities has also laid
the foundations of modern empiricism: reality is what can be measured
quantitatively, and it is only through the channel of empirical science
that access to 'reality' defined as such can be gained.[^27] Hence,
science deals with a domain of reality with no meaning and value in and
of itself. As Collingwood rightly points out, this view excludes God as
well as man from the world of nature in that both God and man are seen
as conferring meaning upon nature*ex post facto* , thus rendering nature
into inert matter.[^28] Consequently, this leads to the glorification of
the human mind as the sole locus of meaning and value, and thus slips
into a gross subjectivism. Nasr rejects this subjectivism, insists on
the intrinsic qualities of nature, and makes the bold epistemological
claim that the world of nature, or the external world, displays certain
qualities intrinsic to itself, which cannot be confined to the feelings
or the cognition of the knowing subject. Said differently, the qualities
that we associate with the natural phenomena are not simply the results
of some psychological states but rather to be seen as constitutive of
what we experience.[^29] Placed within this framework, the world of
nature appears to be of sacred quality in and of itself and not
necessarily dependent on our perceptions of it.

This view has important implications for the so-called 'bare facts', the
temple of all the positivists, that supposedly replace the metaphysical
and philosophical suppositions of pre-modern sciences with the 'facts'
of natural phenomena. As I have stated earlier, the myth of neutral fact
free from any context of meaning and value has to be abandoned as
inadequate. This, then, puts into question one of the fundamental
premises of the secular view of nature that the 'bare facts' of science
leave no space for religious or artistic truth and that what is out
there in the world of nature is no more than aggregates of chemical and
biological elements upon which the human mind antecedently confers
meaning. As Nasr repeatedly states, the projection of nature as
pure*materia* is a reflection of the secular outlook of modern science
in which a 'suppositionless' encounter with the world is pushed to the
limits of relegating nature into a structure of brute facts with no
meaning and even practical use.

It is not a difficult step to take from a nature conceived as inert and
essentially devoid of meaning to a nature constructed upon the model of
machine and, later with Newton, of clock. The purpose of this analogy,
as we all know, was to prove the precision of modern natural sciences
and to substantiate man's claim for absolute domination over nature. The
myth of the determinate and predictable state of things was a necessary
assumption for the operation of natural sciences -- a myth shattered by
the rise of quantum mechanics and sub-atomic studies.[^30] In any case,
nature had to be construed as a machine in the full sense of the term so
that the rise of industrial society could go ahead without any serious
objection from religion or society, both of which were already made
submissive to the undisputed authority of science. Interestingly enough,
the very model through which the bare facts of nature were to be
discovered proved to be a clear indication of the philosophical outlook
adopted by modern science: 'machine' or 'clock' is certainly not a
phenomenon to be found in nature but rather an invention of modern
industrial society. Nasr sees the disastrous effects of the mechanistic
view of the cosmos in this misconceived belief in science that has led
to the eclipse of traditional ideas and values on the one hand, and to a
number of modern disasters on the other. In addition to that, Nasr also
insists that thinking about nature in terms of machines is not the best
way to deal with natural phenomena. As the history of pre-modern
sciences shows, it is possible to study and make use of nature without
subscribing to a mechanistic world-view in which the intrinsic value of
nature and everything in it is deemed inconsequential for the progress
of human society.

The third important trait of modern science is, for Nasr, rationalism
and empiricism which, in spite of their historical rivalry, complement
each other in a number of surprising ways. First of all, both
rationalism and empiricism as the two progenies of the Enlightenment
reject the great chain of Being, namely the hierarchic view of the
universe which lies at the heart of traditional sciences. Instead,
modern rationalism constructs a world-picture within the limits of
reason alone while empiricism takes a similar position by reducing
reality to the least common denominator, i.e., the sense experience. The
philosophical roots of Enlightenment humanism can thus be traced back to
this epistemological strait-jacket imposed upon our perception of the
world by rationalism and empiricism. Secondly, both of these schools
take the knowing subject, the*cogito* of Descartes, to be the sole
possessor of meaning and intelligibility thus paving the way for a
subjectivist epistemology. Although the cosmology of modern science at
the hands of Galileo supposedly invalidated the Christian view of the
universe that regarded the world as the center of the cosmos, modern
epistemology put the modern man back at the center by assigning to him
the role of being the Promethean 'creator' of the world.[^31] Thirdly,
both rationalism and empiricism adopt what E. Nagel calls the 'view from
nowhere' standpoint according to which man is disengaged from the world
in which he is ineluctably included and able to see the world by himself
from a God-like vantage point.[^32] As I have mentioned earlier, modern
rationalism, according to Nasr and the traditional school, rests on a
serious misunderstanding of the notion of 'reason' when it relegates the
intellect to calculation and analysis. Modern empiricism, on its part,
falls into a similar predicament by repudiating any principle higher
than sense perception.

The fourth distinguishing characteristics of modern science is closely
related to both rationalism and empiricism, and this is the legacy of
Cartesian bifurcation which draws an ontological and epistemological
abyss between the knowing subject and the object to be known. With this
rupture, the knowing subject is veiled ontologically from the world
surrounding it and bound to look at everything as an 'other' including
nature and 'other minds'. Historically, the epistemology of 'othering',
the inevitable offshoot of Cartesian dualism, has been one of the key
factors for the alienation of man from nature and the destruction of the
natural environment. It is not surprising to see that the decimation of
natural resources coincides with the rise of colonialism and
Orientalism, both of which are grounded in the creation of 'others' as
the unavoidable costs of Western domination. Nasr sees the roots of this
modern predicament in the Cartesian heritage and argues very strongly
for what we may call an 'epistemology of unity', according to which the
unity between the intellect and the intelligible is to be reasserted in
order to have a genuine relationship with the world of nature as well as
with other human beings.[^33]

The last but by no means the least important aspect of modern science
might be described as an ineluctable outcome of the preceding factors
that we have just outlined. This pertains to the very context in which
modern science is pursued and supported by governments, institutions and
corporations. At this point, one of the most apparent leitmotifs of
modern science is its connection with power and domination that has
received a global prevalence with the consolidation of world capitalist
economy. Science as a way of gaining power and control over nature and
other human beings is certainly a very strong impulse that lies at the
heart of modern scientific enterprise. An important outcome of this new
spirit has been the wedding between science and technology to the extent
that one can hardly speak of 'pure science' anymore that will not be
succumbed to the demands and conditions of consumerist economy. Putting
aside the extremely limited number of scientists who still see their
vocation as a pursuit of truth and knowledge, nearly the entire body of
modern science is driven by a will to power which manifests itself in
the never-ending technological novelties financed by government funds
and international corporations. Many critiques of modern science have
warned against the dangers of rapid technological change that creates a
state of unbounded dependency on the one hand, and an irremediable sense
of dislocation on the other.[^34] Nasr sees the roots of this
predicament in the very assumptions of modern science and its stance
towards nature that has led to its desecration and decimation.
Accordingly, any plausible solution for the persisting problems caused
by modern science and technology can be achieved not by better
engineering or further progress but by reconsidering the entire
perspective of the modern world-view over nature, human life and its
meaning.[^35]

By way of conclusion, I would like to state two points on the
implications of Nasr's view of science. Nasr's critique of modern
secular science is based, as we have seen, on his conviction that the
philosophical foundations of modern physical sciences are marred in a
serious way and that their misdeeds can be countered only by
rediscovering the sacred view of the cosmos. Obviously, this inference
has a number of interesting consequences for the current relationship
between religion and science, into which we cannot go within the limits
of this study. One important result, however, is that modern science,
because of the secular framework it adopts, cannot be regarded as a
continuation of traditional or pre-modern sciences as it is assumed by
many historians of science.[^36] As I have pointed out earlier, the main
difference between traditional and modern sciences is one of perspective
and perception, not technical advancement. This being the case, the
attempts to dovetail the findings of modern science with the spiritual
teachings of traditional religions, as it has become a widespread
fashion in the recent decades, are destined to fail unless we set out to
redefine the metaphysical underpinnings of science as a way of coming to
terms with the world of nature. Without undertaking this colossal task,
our efforts will do no good than elevating science to a semi-religious
truth or turning religion into a scientific trope.[^37] Keeping this in
mind, Nasr's critical work, as it may seem too radical and
uncompromising to some, is likely to be a secure starting point for a
more comprehensive and plausible discourse on the relation between
religion and science.

With his unyielding stance, Nasr also opens up a new avenue for facing
up to the challenge of modern science without sacrificing the
traditional ideas and values, and for rejecting the totalizing claims of
modern secular worldview which continues ever increasingly to dominate
every facet of human life. Considering the current positions taken on
science, which has been either total submission in the case of modernism
or an inchoate rejection in the case of postmodernism and its
associates, Nasr's critical approach offers a veritable alternative to
both extremes, inviting us to a serious deliberation over the very terms
of the question of science. In this sense, the reassertion of the
religious view of the universe and its meaning for natural sciences is
indubitably of prime importance not only for the followers of any
particular religion but for the whole of society. Yet, it is to be hoped
that the necessary steps in this direction are taken carefully before we
lose the very ground on which we stand.


