


Endnotes

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1] Knowledge and the Sacred (Albany: SUNY Press, 1989), p. [^130]:

[^2] The Need for a Sacred Science (Albany: SUNY Press, 1993), pp.
1-[^2]:

[^3] Not all traditional sciences are, however, sacred. There is always
a human element attached to the formulation of traditional sciences
which cannot be taken to be sacred in the strict sense of the term. For
Nasr's distinction between the two, see The Need for a Sacred Science,
p. [^96]:

[^4] The best historical account of the great chain of being is A.
Lovejoy's The Great Chain of Being: A Study of the History of and Idea
(New York: Harper Torchbooks, 1960).

[^5] Titus Burckhardt, The Mirror of the Intellect: Essays on
Traditional Science and Sacred Art, tr. by William Stoddart (Cambridge:
Quinta Essentia, 1987), p. [^17]:

[^6] Nasr gives a detailed analysis of this point in his works on
Islamic science. Especially his Introduction to Islamic Cosmological
Doctrines has been devoted to the concept of nature and the methods used
for its study by Ikhwan al-Safa, al-Biruni and Ibn Sina.

[^7] This epistemological claim has far-reaching consequences for our
relationship with the world and with other human beings. Unfortunately,
there is no space here to delve into this important subject. One may,
however, refer to Huston Smith's concise discussion in his Forgotten
Truth: The Primordial Tradition (New York: Harper and Row, 1967), pp.
96-[^117]:

[^8] In contemporary philosophy of science, this issue has been
discussed around the question of whether we can have observation without
theory. As the realists and the instrumentalists alike agree on,
scientific observation is always theory-laden and this does not
necessarily undermine the scientific validity of observation within a
particular science.

[^9] For an illustration of this point, see Nasr's Islamic Science An
Illustrated Study (Kent: World of Islam Festival Publishing Company
Ltd., 1976), and Science and Civilization in Islam (Cambridge, 1987).

[^10] Rene Guenon, La Crise du Monde Moderne, (Gallimard, 1946), pp.
76-[^77]:

[^11] Although one may cite tens of classical books and treatises on the
hierarchy of being and knowledge, two contemporary works are
worth-mentioning here: E. F. Schumacher, A Guide for the Perplexed (New
York: Harper and Row, 1977), especially, pp. 15-25; and Huston Smith,
Forgotten Truth: The Primordial Tradition (New York: Harper and Row,
1967), especially, pp. 34-[^59]:

[^12] Michael Devitt, Realism and Truth, (New Jersey: Princeton
University Press, 1997), [^2]:nd edition, pp. 13-14.

[^13] The distinction between reason and intellect on the one hand, and
their unity at a higher level of consciousness on the other, are the two
fundamental tenets of the traditional school. For Nasr's exposition of
these terms, see his Knowledge and the Sacred, chapter [^1]:

[^14] For Nasr's critique of scientific instrumentalism which is a
version of anti-realism, see Man and Nature: The Spiritual Crisis in
Modern Man (ABC International Group, Inc., 1997), pp. 25-[^27]: At this
point, it should be mentioned that Glyn Ford's defense of Islamic
science, which is based on his interpretation of Nasr, appears to rest
on a misreading of Nasr. Ford defines science as a social construction
of natural phenomena mediated by the scientific community and society
with no claim to objectivity -- a thesis promulgated, inter alia, by
Kuhn and Feyerabend. In this sense, every scientific tradition, modern
Western, Islamic or Chinese, is entitled to be science notwithstanding
their conflicting claims of truth and validity. It is not difficult to
see the anti-realist component in this assertion: Islamic science is a
valid science not because it is based on the scientific study of nature
but because it is one of such social constructions that we collectively
agree to call 'science'. As I have tried to show here, Nasr does not
subscribe to such an anti-realist interpretation of science. For Ford's
argument, see his 'A Framework for a New View of Islamic Science' in
'Adiyat Halab An Annual Devoted to the Study of Arabic Science and
Civilization, (Aleppo: The University of Aleppo, 1978-1979), vols. VI-V,
pp. 68-74.

[^15] In a famous prayer, the Prophet of Islam asks God to 'show him the
reality of things as they are in themselves' (arini haqaiq al-ashya kama
hiya). This prayer which has been elaborated upon by many Muslim
scholars and philosophers suggests that the ultimate reality and meaning
of things can be attained only through the aid of Divine guidance.
Placed within a larger context, the same principle applies to the proper
understanding of the order of nature.

[^16] There is no intrinsic or necessary connection between realism in
science and belief in progress. Nevertheless, historically, the majority
of those who take the realist position have allowed some kind of a
belief in progress which accounts for the linear development of natural
sciences. By contrast, most of the anti-realists and instrumentalists,
notably Kuhn, Feyerabend and Van Fraassen, have rejected the idea of
progress by replacing cumulative development in science with paradigm
shifts that alter the very definition of science. Interestingly enough,
both Guenon and Nasr reject the idea of progress as an intrinsic quality
of natural sciences. In this regard, Guenon goes even further and
describes the development of chemistry from alchemy and astronomy from
astrology as 'degeneration' rather progress and evolution --
degeneration in the principles that make alchemy, astrology or the
science of the soul (ilm al-nafs) traditional sciences. The denial of
progress in natural sciences as this term is understood currently is
obviously the logical result of the metaphysical outlook that Nasr
expounds and defends as a prominent member of the traditional school.
For Guenon's remarks, see La Crise, pp. 79-[^81]:

[^17] Nasr has authored a number of important works on Islamic science.
See his Islamic Science - An Illustrated Study (Kent: World of Islam
Festival Publishing Company Ltd., 1976), An Annotated Bibliography of
Islamic Science (Lahore: Suhail Academy, 1985) 3 vols, Science and
Civilization in Islam (Cambridge, 1987), An Introduction to Islamic
Cosmological Doctrines (Cambridge, 1964). Nasr has also written many
articles on the meaning of Islamic science and its relation to modern
Western science.

[^18] Science and Civilization in Islam, p. [^22]:

[^19] Ibid., p. [^25]:

[^20] In addition to Nasr's aforementioned works on Islamic science, see
also his brief treatment in A Young Muslim's Guide to the Modern World
(Cambridge: The Islamic Texts Society, 1993), pp. 85-[^102]:

[^21] Islamic Science, p. [^4]:

[^22] Sadr al-Din Shirazi, one of the greatest metaphysicians of the
post-Avicennan Islamic philosophy, on whom Nasr has written extensively,
depicts the natural phenomena as 'pure relations' (idafa mahda) when
seen in relation to the absolute (al-mutlaq) and the necessary Being
(al-wajib), which is God.

[^23] A thorough survey of Islamic sciences ranging from geography and
natural history to physics and astronomy is to be found in Science and
Civilization in Islam.

[^24] In a famous anecdote of the history of science, Laplace,
explaining his model of the universe to Napoleon, declares God as a
'redundant hypothesis'. For Laplace’s famous reply that ‘I had no need
of that hypothesis’ see, Roger Hahn, ‘Laplace and the Mechanistic
Universe’ in God and Nature, ed. David Lindberg and Ronald Numbers,
(Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1986).

[^25] Rorty goes so far as to attribute the 'invention of the mind' to
Descartes and his cogito which has come to be the source of modern
theories of knowledge and the ill-formulated mind-body problem. See his
Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature, (New Jersey: Princeton University
Press, 1979), p. 17ff.

[^26] The distinction between the primary and secondary qualities made
by Galileo is one of the foundations of the Scientific Revolution. This
issue was later taken up in philosophy by Hume and became one of the
pillars of modern empiricism. For the importance of this distinction,
one may refer, among others, to the following: R. G. Collingwood, The
Idea of Nature, (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1945), pp. 102-105;
Wolfgang Smith, Cosmos and Transcendence Breaking Through the Barrier of
Scientistic Belief, (Illinois: Sherwood Sugden & Company, 1984), pp.
15-16; Alexander Koyre, From the Closed World to the Infinite Universe,
(Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1957), pp. 88-109; S. H.
Nasr, Religion and the Order of Nature, (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1996), pp. 136-138; Ian Barbour, Religion and Science Historical
and Contemporary Issues, (San Francisco: Harper SanFrancisco, 1997), pp.
9-17; E. Burtt, The Metaphysical Foundations of Modern Physical Science
(New York: Doubleday Anchor Books, 1932), pp. 83-[^91]:

[^27] For an account of Galileo's distinction from this point of view,
see Herbert Butterfield, The Origins of Modern Science 1300-1800, (New
York: The Free Press, 1968), pp. 99-[^102]:

<sup><sup>[^28]</sup></sup> Collingwood, ibid., p. [^103]:

<sup><sup>[^29]</sup></sup> On the traditional school's view of quality
and quantity as two philosophical categories, see Rene Guenon, The Reign
of Quantity and the Signs of the Time, tr. by Lord Nortbourne, (Luzac
and Company Ltd)., 1953, pp., 19-[^32]:

<sup><sup>[^30]</sup></sup> The idea of determinism and prediction has
been influential not only in the natural sciences but also, and more
perniciously, in the social sciences. The best example of this is social
Darwinism and behaviorism as evidenced in the work of Pavlov in the
former Soviet Union and that of B. F. Skinner in the United States. Set
against the background of their ideological assumptions, both the
experiments of Pavlov and Skinner's Beyond Freedom and Dignity present
an interesting example of will to power and domination: both claim to
have discovered the 'technology of behavior' -- a much-needed device for
any oppressive political system. For William Barrett's analysis of this
anomaly, see his The Illusion of Technique: A Search for Meaning in a
Technological Civilization, (New York: Anchor Books, 1979), pp. xi-xv.

<sup><sup>[^31]</sup></sup> The tragic consequences of Promethean
humanism have been noticed by many philosophers of the West as well as
the East. Nasr has written on the subject extensively, employing a
rigorously critical language. Among others, Heidegger, in his celebrated
attack on humanism in Letter on Humanism, offers a scathing criticism of
Western humanism which has turned man, according to him, into a slave of
his own inventions.

<sup><sup>[^32]</sup></sup> 'The attempt is made to view the world not
from a place within it, or from the vantage point of a special kind of
life or awareness, but from nowhere in particular and no form of life in
particular at all.' Thomas Nagel, Mortal Questions, (Cambridge, 1979),
p. [^208]:

<sup><sup>[^33]</sup></sup> The idea of the unity of the intellect and
the intelligible is one of the fundamental teachings of traditional
philosophy and plays an important role in Nasr's writings on knowledge.
For Nasr's treatment of the subject, see the first chapter of Knowledge
and the Sacred, pp. 1-[^64]: In the De Anima (430a), Aristotle refers to
this idea by saying that 'in the case of objects without matter, that
which thinks and that which is being thought are the same, for
theoretical knowledge and its knowable object are the same.' See De
Anima, translated by H. G. Apostle as Aristotle on the Soul (The
Peripatetic Press, 1981), p. 51. The main inspiration of Islamic
philosopher, however, comes from the Enneads V where Plotinus gives a
detailed explanation of the subject. Although Ibn Sina rejects,
curiously enough, the unity of the intellect and the intelligible, later
mystics and philosophers such as Suhrawardi, Ibn al-Arabi and Sadr
al-Din Shirazi have continued to elaborate on the subject. Sadr al-Din
Shirazi has even written a treatise called Ittihad al-'aqil wa'l-ma'qul
([On] the Unity of the Intellect and the Intelligible) published in
Majmua-yi rasail-i falsafi-i Sadr al-Muta'allihin, ed. by Hamid Naji
Isfahani (Tehran: Intisharat-i Hikmet, 1996), pp. 64-103. Some scholars
have claimed that the idea of the unity of the intellect and the
intelligible can be traced back to various passages in Phedon, Timaeus
and the Republic where a 'solidarite d'existence' is established between
the Ideas and the soul. For a well-informed essay on this subject see,
J. Pepin, 'Elements pour une histoire de la relation entre
l'intelligence et l'intelligible chez Plato et dans le neoplatonisme',
Revue Philosophique 81, (1956), pp. 39-64. For a recent statement of the
problem in a comparative way, see M. Hairi Yazdi, The Principles of
Epistemology in Islamic Philosophy: Knowledge by Presence, (Albany, SUNY
Press, 1992).

<sup><sup>[^34]</sup></sup> There is a considerable literature on the
consequences of living in a technology-bound society. Among others, one
may refer to Philip Sherrard, The Rape of Man and Nature: An Enquiry
into the Origins and Consequences of Modern Science, (Golgoonoza Press,
1987); Jacques Ellul, The Technological Society, tr. by John Wilkinson,
(New York: Vintage Books, 1964); William Barrett, The Illusion of
Technique.

<sup><sup>[^35]</sup></sup> Nasr has devoted two separate books on the
analysis of this crucial subject. See his Man and Nature: The Spiritual
Crisis in Modern Man and Religion and the Order of Nature, especially
the last chapter. See also A Young Muslim's Guide to the Modern World,
pp. 190-192, for the difference between science and technology.

<sup><sup>[^36]</sup></sup> Religion and the Order of Nature, p. 127ff;
and A Young Muslim's Guide to the Modern World, pp. 181-[^2]:

<sup><sup>[^37]</sup></sup> Darwinism is probably the best example to
illustrate this point. Although Nasr gives credit to the scientific
evidence against the theory of evolution, his main critique is
metaphysical and philosophical throughout. See his Knowledge and the
Sacred, chapter [^7]: For a similar line of argument, see Titus
Burckhardt, The Mirror of the Intellect: Essays on Traditional Science
and Sacred Art, tr. by William Stoddart (Cambridge: Quinta Essentia,
1987), pp. 32-45; and Osman Bakar (ed.), Critiques of the Theory of
Evolution (Kuala Lumpur: The Islamic Academy of Science, 1987).
