


Sulayaman b. Surad and the Shi'a Revival in Kufa
Soon after the death of al‑Husayn, the Shi'a in Kufa began to revive but
it appears that their revival was very secretive and not on a unified
basis. Five groups of Shi'a are reported by Abu Mikhnaf under five
separate leaders1 .

First there wasa group led by Sulayaman b. Surad al‑Khuza'i who was a
com­panion of the Prophet. Wellhausen casts doubt on this because of the
name Sulayaman2 .

But Ibn Sa'd explains that the name was given to him by the Prophet and
he was originally called Yassar3 .

His Shiite sympathies were well‑known. He had fought at Siffin and in
the time when al‑Mughira was governor of Kufa, he was made to attend the
mosque to hear the denuncia­tion of 'Ali4 .

It was also at his house that the group met that sent the first letter
to al‑Husayn summoning him to Kufa.

There were two other groups led by Musayyib b. Najaba al‑Fazari and
Rifa'a b. Shaddad al‑Bajali. Both of these men elonged to the group that
wrote the first letter to Husayn asking him to come to Kufa5 and Rifa'a
b. Shaddad had been a member of the Shi'a at the time of Hujr b. 'Adi6 .

There are two new names: 'Abd Allah b. Sa'd b. Nufayl al‑Azdi and 'Abd
Allah b. Wal(in) al‑Taymi of Bakr b. Wail of Rabi'a. However, at a
meeting in 64 A.H. it is mentioned that all five leaders were over sixty
years of age7 .

They carried on their activities in secret spreading their propaganda
among the Shi'a and others. It is reported that many people answered
their call.

At some time, probably before the death of Yazid in 64, five leaders and
a hundred members of their groups met in the house of Sulayman b. Surad,
whom they chose to be the general leader of the Shi'a in Kufa. Their
main programme at this stage seems to have been to take vengeance for
the murder of Husayn on his killers or for themselves to be killed in
atonement for their desertion of him8 .

They named no Imam but they probably felt that after what had happened
to Husayh, no surviving member of the family of 'Ali would accept
leadership until they had actually secured power.

After Sulayman b. Surad had made a speech accepting leadership, Khalid
b. Sa'd b. Nufayl (probably the brother of one of the five leaders, 'Abd
Allah b. Sa'd b. Nufayl al‑Azdi) offered to give up his property to the
Shi'a. Abu Mu'tamir,

Hanash b. Rabi'a al‑Kinani9 offered the same. So Sulayman b. Surad
appointed 'Abd Allah b. Wal(in) al‑Taymi to be the treasurer. His task
was to collect the offerings of the Shi'a and use the money to help in
the preparation of those who were poor and needy10 .

The two eye‑witness reporters of this meeting are 'Abd Allah b. Awf b.
al ­Ahmar al‑Azdi11 and Humayd b. Muslim al‑Azdi.12

Humayd b. Muslim was in the ranks of 'Umar b. Sa'd's army which
massacred al‑Husayn and is one of the principal reporters of that
affair. It seems that the event had affected his conscience and he had
now become an ardent Shi'a supporter.

With the death of Yazid, three years after the death of al‑Husayn,
accord­ing to a report from 'Abd Allah b. Sa'd b. Nufayl al‑Azdi, one of
the Shi'a leaders, many of the Shi'a came to Sulayman and suggested that
they should drive out 'Amr b. Hurayth, 'Ubayd Allah's deputy in Kufa.
('Ubayd Allah was governor of both Basra and Kufa.)

They wanted to demand vengeance publicly, pursue al‑Husayn's killers,
and call the people to ahl al‑bayt. But Sulayaman told them not to be in
a hurry. He pointed out that the murderers of al‑Husayn were the nobles
of Kufa and they would be the ones who were being asked to pay for his
blood. They would become very oppressive towards the Shi'a, if they knew
what the Shi'a intended and a revolt against them would achieve nothing
but the slaughter of the Shi'a themselves. He ordered them to carry out
a propaganda campaign among their own Shi'a and others throughout Kufa,
adding that now that Yazid was dead the people would join them more
quickly. 'Abd Allah b. Sa'd b. Nufayl adds that many more people did
answer the call than before13 .

Abu Mikhnaf has preserved for us an account of a speech of one of these
Shi'a dais, 'Ubayd Allah b. Abd Allah al‑Murri. It is related by a man
of Muzayna, who said that he heard it so many times that he knew it by
heart. The da'i was very eloquent and whenever he came on a group of
people he would preach to them. He would begin by praising God and
praying for His Apostle. Then he would say:

"God chose Muhammad as His creature for His prophethood. He singled him
out for all His benefit. He strength­ened you by making you his
followers and bestowed on you faith in him. Through him, He prevented
the shedding of your blood.

By him He made safe your dangerous paths.

***You were on the edge of the pit of fire and He saved you from it.
Thus God makes clear His signs to you. Perhaps you will be guided.*** 14

Has God created from the first to the last anyone with a greater right
over this umma than its Prophets? Has the offspring of one of the
Prophets or Messengers of anyone else more right over this umma than the
offspring of one of its own Prophet? No, by God this was never the case,
nor will it ever be. You belong to God. Don't you see ‑ don't you
understand what crime you have committed against the son of the daughter
of your Prophet?

Don't you see the people's violation of his sacredness, their seeking
out weakness in his oneness, their staining him with blood. His things
they spread out. They did not see their master in him, nor his
relationship to the Messenger. By God, Husayn b. 'Ali, what trust and
for­bearance they betrayed ‑ what courage, what resolution!

The son of the first Muslim in Islam, the son of the daughter of the
Apostle of the Lord of the worlds. His defenders were few, his attackers
were many. His enemy attacked him while his friend deserted him. Woe to

the killer and reproach to the deserter. God will accept no excuse from
his killer. Nor any excuse from his deserter except he sincerely repent
to God and make war on the killers and thwart the corrupters.

Perhaps then God will accept repentance and remove the guilt. We call
you to the Book of God and the sunna of the Prophet, to vengeance for
the blood of the family of his house, and to war on the heretics and
deviators from the true religion. If we are killed, it is better for the
pious to be with God. If we are successful, we will restore power to the
ahl al‑bayt of the Prophet.15 "

In this speech the main emphasis on al‑Husayn's position is his
relationship to the Prophet through Fatima. Only twice is 'Ali
mentioned: the first time in al‑Husayn's name al‑Husayn b. 'Ali, the
second time when al‑Husayn is called the son of the first Muslim.

Clearly the Shi'a of Sulayman b. Surad place far more stress on the idea
of succession to the Prophet by blood, than suc­cession to 'Ali by
blood. No Imam is named but from the whole tenor of the speech it must
be presumed that if and when the Shi'a succeeded they would call upon
the young 'Ali b. al‑Husayn to take over the leadership.

In terms of policy there are three main points: to kill the murderers of
al‑Husayn in order to avenge his blood; to make war on the heretics and
deviators from the true religion, which we can assume are the Umayyads
and their support­ers; and thirdly, a call to the Book of God and the
sunna of the Prophet, which is an implicit rejection of the practice of
Abu Bakr, 'Umar and 'Uthman, giving the Imam a great deal of scope for
re‑interpretation.

Probably soon after the death of al‑Husayn, Sulayman b. Surad decided on
what action to take. We have already seen that he was averse to coming
out in open revolution against the nobles of Kufa, fearing that the
result would be another catastrophe for the Shi'a. He now decided that
an outright attack on the Syrians by all the 'Iraqi Shi'a would probably
have more chance of success. He fixed the blame for the death of
al‑Husayn on the Umayyad government and their agents. He probably
thought that if he was able to conduct a successful military campaign
against the Syrians,the nobles of Kufa would reject their past ways and
fall in with him.

This policy was influenced by the political circumstances prevailing at
the time. The Syrians were in some disarray.

Trouble had broken out over the succession after Mu'awiya, the young
sickly son of Yazid, had died. This had developed in Syria into a tribal
conflict between Kalb and Qays. Qays were severely defeated at the end
of 64 A.H. and one of their leaders, Zufar b. Harith, had taken refuge
in Qarqisiyya and was still in open rebellion against the Umayyad
government16 .

In the Hijaz, 'Abd Allah b. al‑Zubayr had put forward claims to the
caliphate and assumed the title of Amir al­Muininin.

When Yazid had died, 'Ubayd Allah b. Ziyad had had homage paid to
Yazid's son in Basra. When he had tried to do the same in Kufa, his
delegates had been driven off. Then the Kufan nobles had driven away

'Ubayd Allah's deputy 'Amr b. Hurayth and pledged allegiance to Ibn
al­Zubayr17 .

Ibn al‑Zubayr had sent 'Abd Allah b. Yazid al‑Ansari as his governor in
charge of the military and Ibrahim b. Muhammad b. Talha in charge of
kharaj to Kufa18 .

In these circumstances, Sulayman b. Surad's decision does not seem
wholly unreasonable. His aim was not to disturb the tribal leaders and
still be able to get the most massive army possible. To this effect it
was about this time that he probably made contact with Shi'a leaders in
Mada'in and Basra. In his letters he called on them to avenge the blood
of al‑Husayn and to put right affairs which had become unjust. He
arranged that they should meet at Nukhayla outside Kufa on the first of
Rabi' al‑Akhir, the next year 65 A.H19 .

The Shi'a leader in Mada'in, Sa'd b. Hudhayfa b. al‑Yaman called in the
Shi'a members from the outlying country ‑ apparently they were people
who used to come to al‑Kufa for their 'ata' (pay) and rizq (rations) and
then go back to their homes. He read them the letter and they all
accepted the call?20

The Shi'a leader in Basra, al‑Muthanna b. Mukharraba al‑'Abdi also
accepted the call21 .

The letter to Basra was‑ taken by Zubyan b. 'Umara al‑Tam imi22 , while
there are two names of messengers for Mada'in, 'Abd Allah b. Malik
al‑Taq23 and Husayn b. Yazid b. 'Abd Allah b. Sa'd b. Nufayl24 ,
probably the grandson of one of the five Kufan Shi'a leaders, 'Abd Allah
b. Sa'd b. Nufayl.


