


The Alternative Policy of al‑Mukhtar
Al‑Mukhtar b. Abi 'Ubayda had already become well‑known in Kufa for his
support forthe Shi'a. Muslim b. 'Aqil had at first stayed in his house.
Later al‑Mukhtar had taken part in Muslim's rising in Kufa and had been
imprisoned by 'Ubayd Allah. During these four years following the death
of al‑Husayn, al‑Mukhtar had not been unoccupied. He had remained in
prison until after al‑Husayn's death at Karbala'.

He then called Za'ida b. Qudama, who had earlier helped him escape worse
punishment, and asked him to go to his brother‑in‑law 'Abd Allah b.
'Umar b. al‑Khattab to get him to write and ask Yazid to free him. As a
result of tearful persuasion from al‑Mukhtar's sister, 'Abd Allah b.
'Umar b. al‑Khattab agreed. Za'ida then took 'Abd Allah's letter to
Yazid.

Yazid gave Za'ida a message for 'Ubayd Allah in­structing him to free
al‑Mukhtar.

'Ubayd Allah was very angry but resolved that anyway he would free
himself of trouble from al‑Mukhtar. He gave him three days to leave
al‑Kufa and warned him that death would be await­ing him if he returned.
Za'ida too had to escape 'Ubayd Allah's wrath for his part in the affair
and finally got a guarantee of security from 'Ubayd Allah through the
good offices of some of the tribal leaders25 .

Al‑Mukhtar left Kufa and made for the Hijaz. It is now that the sources
make a real effort to discredit al‑Mukhtar. It is alleged that on the
road to the Hijaz he met a mawla of Thaqif named Ibn 'Irq. He asked this
man about the situation in Hijaz, particularly of Ibn al‑Zubayr, and
stated that he would never succeed unless he came out in open revolt.
When asked about his eye, which 'Ubayd Allah had disfigured, he
prophesised revenge in wild language, rather like that of a
pre‑Islamic*kahin* . The whole incident is rounded off by some rude
remarks made much later by al‑Hajjaj b. Yusuf about al‑Mukhtar's
prophetic language26 .

According to a report from a supporter of Ibn al‑Zubayr, 'Abbas b. Sahl
b. Sa'd27 , when al‑Mukhtar arrived in Mecca, he publicly incited lbn
al‑Zubayr to come out in open revolt and take the Hijaz, and offered to
pledge allegi­ance to him. When he got no answer from Ibn al‑Zubayr, he
went away and was not seen for another year28 .

'Abbas b. Sahl then reported that people said that he had gone to
al‑Ta'if, and was claiming there that he was an avenger of tyrants. When
al‑Mukhtar did return to Mecca, he ignored Ibn al‑Zubayr. He was
approached by Ibn al‑Zubayr through 'Abbas b. Sahl. When he heard that
many people were pledging support to Ibn al‑Zubayr, he agreed to go and
see him at night. When they met, al‑Mukhtar offered to pledge allegiance
on condition that he should be his closest adviser. At first Ibn
al‑Zubayr refused but when prompted by 'Abbas b. Sahl he accepted29 .

While he was with Ibn al‑Zubayr he fought bravely for him against the
Syrians in the defence of Mecca, on one occasion with a contingent of
the

Khawarij of*ahl al* *‑* *Yaman* . But, so 'Abbas b. Sahl tells us, five
months after the death of Yazid, when the Kufans had sent their
allegiance to Ibn al­Zubayr, he left of his own accord for Kufa30 .

There follows a brief report from Sa'id b. 'Amr b. Sa'id al‑'As which
re­cords that Ibn al‑Zubayr described al‑Mukhtar as more dangerous than
a wolf. It adds that when al‑Mukhtar saw that he was not being given any
position he started enquiring about conditions in Kufa from anyone who
came there31 .

The next report comes from a Hamdani, Abu Warq, who alleges that when
Hani b. Abi Hiya al‑Wadi'i of Harridan came on a pilgrimage to Mecca,
al-Mukhtar asked him about conditions in Kufa. Hani'b. Abi Hiya told him
that there was a large group of people there who were ripe for
revolution, if they had a leader. Al‑Mukhtar said he was that leader.
When it was pointed out that this would be sowing discord, al‑Mukhtar
replied that his call would be to guidance and unity. Soon after he left
for Kufa32 .

The above reports are all from Abu Mikhnaf as recorded by al‑Tabari.
However Ibn Sad in his life of Muhammad b. Hanafiyya gives us something
a little bit different. Ibn Sa'd reports that al‑Mukhtar was a supporter
of Ibn al‑Zubayr and Ibn al‑Zubayr refused to listen to anything against
him; but at the same time he used to pay visits to Ibn al‑Hanafiyya.

However, Ibn al‑Hanafiyya doubted his loyalty. When al‑Mukhtar asked
permission to go to 'Iraq, he granted it but at the same time sent to
'Abd Allah b. Kamil al‑Hamdani telling him to be cautious because
al‑Mukhtar was not trust­worthy. Al‑Mukhtar also asked permission from
Ibn al‑Zubayr to go to 'Iraq and Ibn al‑Zubayr trusted him although
al‑Mukhtar cheated him33 .

These reports all succeed in building up al‑Mukhtar as an ambitious
deceitful character whose only thought was personal power. The attacks
on al‑Mukhtar come from three main sources. The first and perhaps most
reasonable is that of 'Abbas b. Sahl. In this at least al‑Mukhtar's
bravery was recognized. However, much emphasis was laid on al‑Mukhtar
wanting personal power. His pledge of allegiance to Ibn al‑Zubayr was
only made on condition that he was his closest adviser. This Ibn
al‑Zubayr accepted but later went back on his word.

However, this is absolutely impossible. Al‑Mukhtar had neither the power
or influence to exert such pressure, nor would such a pledge have been
accepted. What comes out clearly is that al‑Mukhtar's pledge to Ibn
al‑Zubayr was conditional and at some time that condition was broken.
What the condition was, is impossible to say. But with the background of
events that had taken place, certain facts emerge: al‑Mukhtar was
violently anti‑Umayyad; he had suffered considerably at the hands of
'Ubayd Allah, the Umayyad governor of Kufa.

Secondly, al‑Mukhtar was pro‑Shi'a. The condition could well have been
the demand for a vigorous anti‑Umayyad policy and al‑Mukhtar felt

that Ibn al‑Zubayr's policy after the siege of Mecca had not been strong
enough. It could be that al‑Mukhtar had pledged allegiance on condition
that there was no 'Alid claimant.

The second fact that emerges from all the accounts is that al‑Mukhtar
was very interested in the situation in Kufa and eagerly sought
information about it. This is hardly surprising as al‑Mukhtar owned
property there and had considerable interests in the town. However, the
information given by Hani'b. Abi Hiya is thoroughly unreliable. It is
hardly likely that al‑Mukhtar would give away his plans to a Kufan noble
with a thoroughly anti‑Shi'a record. He had signed the testimony against
Hujr b. 'Adi and had helped in the arrest of al‑Mukhtar34 .

The account from Ibn Sa'd describes al‑Mukhtar as a man cheating both
Ibn al‑Hanafiyya and Ibn al‑Zubayr. Muhammad b. al‑Hanafiyya was the
eldest surviving son of 'Ali. His mother was a woman of the tribe
Hanifa, who had been taken prisoner in the ridda wars35 .

Although not descended from 'Ali through Fatima, he was regarded by some
as having strong claims to lead the family of 'Ali at that time as
Husayn's surviving son, 'Ali, was still young. The informant seems more
aware of al‑Mukhtar's relationship with Ibn ak Hanafiyya than his
relationship with Ibn al‑Zubayr.

That al‑Mukhtar was given "permission" seems to imply that he was given
authority to undertake a task. In other words our informant is saying
that al‑Mukhtar was given authority to represent Ibn al‑Hanafiyya in
Kufa. This is the claim al‑Mukhtar did put forward when he arrived in
Kufa36 .

'Abd Allah b. Kamil, who was sent to watch him, was a leading member of
the Shi'a in al‑Kufa and became a loyal supporter of al‑Mukhtar37 .

This is our only source for contacts existing between Ibn al‑Hanafiyya
and al‑Mukhtar in Mecca. Although confused about the relationship, of
al‑Mukhtar and Ibn al‑Zubayr, who, it appears, certainly did not trust
al‑Mukhtar and who did not give him any authority in 'Iraq, the report
may well be true. Al‑Mukhtar's claims on behalf of Ibn al‑Hanafiyya were
never denied by Ibn al‑Hanafiyya during al‑Mukhtar's life.

It seems probable that before approaching Ibn al‑Hanafiyya, al‑Mukhtar
had approached 'Ali b. al‑Husayn but had been met with a firm refusal.
Although Ibn al‑Ibn al‑Hanafiyya did not refuse, he was not going to
embark on a similar course as al‑Husayn had. It was up to his Shi'a to
win the power for him. When that power was won, then he would take
control of affairs.

Al‑Mukhtar's journey to Kufa gets the same hostile treatment. On the
road he met a man whom he asked about Kufa. The man described the Kufans
as sheep without a shepherd. Of course, al‑Mukhtar said he was the
shepherd38 .

Ibn Sa'd makes the man say that Kufa was like a ship without a captain
and al‑Mukhtar then became the captain39 .

There is a description of al‑Mukhtar's elaborate preparations before he
enered Kufa.40 . Al‑Mukhtar entered Kufa by way of the Jabbanat
al‑Kinda. He greeted the people he met, calling out that he brought news
of victory and success. The first man he met was 'Ubayada b. Amr
al‑Baddi, a Shi'a supporter. Al‑Mukhtar told him to bring his friends in
the night to hear what he had to say. Another man he approached was
Isma'il b. Kathir of the Bani Hind of Kinda. He reported the meeting in
the evening41 .

When the group gathered, al‑Mukhtar asked them about the affairs of the
Shi'a and they told him that the Shi'a had gathered around Sulayman b.
Surad and would soon come out in revolt. Al‑Mukhtar then told them:
"Al‑mahdi (the rightly guided), son of al‑wasi (the one bequeathed to),
Muhammad b. 'Ali has sent me to you as an amin, wazir, muntakhib (chosen
one), and an amir. He ordered me to fight against the heretics, to
demand vengeance for the blood of al‑Husayn and to defend the weak.42 "

Then al‑Mukhtar began to approach the Shi'a who had gathered around
Sulayman b. Surad. His main line of persuasion was the assertion of his
own position with regard to Ibn al‑Hanafiyya, coupled with strongly
worded des­criptions of lbn al‑Hanafiyya43 .

This was followed by an attack on Sulayman b. Surad, who was described
as "dried up, an empty sack, a man with no experience of affairs and
knowledge of wars; he only wants to kill himself and you.44 "

With this propaganda, al‑Mukhtar managed to get a group away from
Sulayman b. Surad. One report says that 2,000 pledged allegiance to
him45 but the main body of the Shi'a and all the leaders remained loyal
to Sulayman b. Surad.

The conflicts in policy appear quite clearly; Sulayman b. Surad and his
Shi'a had declared for ahl al‑bayt without naming which member they
regarded as Imam. From the general tone of Sulayman's propaganda, it
seems clear that the family of al‑Husayn was the one to which they paid
the most special regard. This means that they believed that the Imam was
'Ali b. al‑Husayn, the surviving son of al‑Husayn.

However, 'Ali's refusal to make public claim or allow any claims to be
made on his behalf, meant that they could not put his name forward as
their Imam until they had been successful. On the other hand, al‑Mukhtar
was actually naming his Imam, and although not a descendant of the
Prophet, he was a son of 'Ali. Apparently Sulayman and many of his
supporters could not accept Ibn al‑Hanafiyya as Imam. They made no
effort to discredit al‑Mukhtar's claim by contacting Ibn al‑Hanafiyya,
or if they did, then it was unsuccessful. Obviously their leadership
could not accept Ibn al‑Hanafiyya as Imam.

The conflict over tactics is secondary to the conflict over the Imam.
Al-­Mukhtar felt that Kufa should be a firmly established Shi'a base
before expeditions were embarked on. Sulayman b. Surad wanted to win
over Kufa by a successful expedition.

Al‑Mukhtar has presented one more policy that has strongly politicial
tones: "The defence of the weak" seems like an appeal to the
underprivileged, prob­ably the*mawali* and poorer Arabs. .


